

===== BOOK: sfs.txt =====


    
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

  

SIXTY FOLK-TALES

  

FROM

  

EXCLUSIVELY SLAVONIC SOURCES.

  

Translated,
 with Brief Introduction and Notes,

  

BY

  

A. H. WRATISLAW, M.A.,

Sometime Fellow and Tutor of Christ's College, Cambridge;
 Late Head Master of Felsted and Bury St. Edmund's Schools;
 Corresponding Member of the Royal Bohemian Society of Sciences.

  

BOSTON:

  

HOUGHTON, MIFFLIN AND COMPANY.

  

New York: 11, East Seventeenth Street,

  

The Riverside Press, Cambridge.

  

[1890]

 

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, January, 2006, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the United States because it was published prior to 1923.

 

Click to enlarge
Cover

Click to enlarge
Title Page. NOTE: Blank Verso

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. iii]

  

PREFACE.

So much interest has lately been awakened in, and centred round, Folk-lore, that it needs no apology to lay before the British reader additional information upon the subject. Interesting enough in itself, it has been rendered doubly interesting by the rise and progress of the new science of Comparative Mythology, which has already yielded considerable results, and promises to yield results of still greater magnitude, when all the data requisite for a full and complete induction have been brought under the ken of the inquirer. The stories of most European races have been laid under contribution, but those of the Slavonians have, as yet, been only partially examined. Circumstances have enabled me to make a considerable addition to what is as yet known of Slavonic Folk-lore, although I cannot make any pretence to having exhausted the mine, or, rather, the many mines, which the various Slavonic races and tribes possess, and which still, more or less, await the advent of competent explorers.

In offering to the public a selection of sixty folk-lore stories translated from exclusively Slavonic sources, it is but

[p. iv]

fitting to give some account of the work from which I have derived them. In 1865, the late K. J. Erben, the celebrated Archivarius of the old town of Prague, published a 'Citanka,' or reading-book, intended to enable Bohemians to commence the study of all the numerous Slavonic dialects, containing 'one hundred simple national tales and stories, in their original dialects.' To this he appended a vocabulary, with explanations of words and forms strange to, or divergent from, the Bohemian, briefly given in the Bohemian language. This vocabulary is divided into two parts, one illustrating the tales of those Slavonians who make use of the Cyrillic characters, and belong to the Orthodox Greek Church; and the other, those of the Catholic and Protestant Slavonians, who employ alphabets founded on the Latin characters of the West of Europe. Pan Erben paid special attention to the preservation of the simple national forms of speech, as taken down from the lips of the people; and, besides laying printed collections under contribution, obtained several previously unpublished stories.

Beginning with his native tongue, the Bohemian language, he passes on to the closely-allied Moravian and Hungarian-Slovenish (Slovak) dialects, and then takes the Upper and Lower Lusatian, the former of which is related to the old Bohemian, while the latter inclines rather to the Polish language. He next goes on to the Kashubian, a rapidly-perishing sub-dialect of Polish, and then to the Polish tongue itself.

Next comes the White Russian, forming a transition from Polish to Great Russian, whereas the Little Russian in Galicia,

[p. v]

the Ukraine, and South Russia, is more nearly allied to the Bohemian than to the White Russian. The ancient Russian language, which was also much allied to the Old Bohemian, is the basis of the present written Russian, and presents a transition to the Bulgarian, which, in the north-west, melts into the Serbian, which again, in its Croatian branch, near Varazdin, approaches most nearly to the Bohemian. The Illyrian-Slovenish of Carinthia, though, in locality, least distant from Bohemia, exhibits forms most removed from the Bohemian language, just as the Upper Lusatian is less allied to the Bohemian than is the locally-distant Kashubian.

I took up the book, originally, for the purpose for which it was compiled, viz., that of obtaining an acquaintance with the main features of all the Slavonic dialects, but found myself tempted, by the extreme beauty of some of the stories, to translate the major portion of them. That I do not present a still larger selection to the reader is due to the fact that so many of the Great Russian skazkas have been so admirably translated, edited, and illustrated by my friend--alas! that I must now term him my late friend--Mr. W. R. S. Ralston, that I have scarcely considered them as coming within the sphere of the present work.

For an essay on the singular mythical being, Kurent, occurring only in the Serbian tales from Carniola, and as yet unnoticed in any work on Slavonic mythology, I am indebted to Professor Gregor Krek, of Gratz, in Styria. This will be found prefixed to the stories which it illustrates.

[p. vi]

I have also prefixed a short introduction, containing various matters of interest, to each set of tales, as they follow each other, according to their different languages, dialects, or sub-dialects.

The table of contents immediately following will give a general view of the stories and their respective sources, arranged under the three heads of: (a) The Western Slavonians, (b) the Eastern Slavonians, and (c) the Southern Slavonians.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. vii]

  

CONTENTS.

(N.B.--Ch as ch in church.)

          
   A.--WESTERN SLAVONIANS.

        

     
      
   BOHEMIAN STORIES

       PAGE

     
          I.   LONG, BROAD, AND SHARPSIGHT (Dlouhy,   Siroky, Bystrozyakr). K. J. Erben

       <page 4>

     
          II.   'THE THREE GOLDEN HAIRS OF GRANDFATHER ALLKNOW' (Tri zlate vlasy Deda-Vsheveda). K. J. Erben

       <page 16>

     
          III.   GOLDENHAIR (Zlatovlaska). K.   J. Erben

       <page 25>

     
          IV.   INTELLIGENCE AND LUCK (Rozum a Stesti).   K. J. Erben

       <page 33>

     
          V.   THE JEZINKAS (Jezinky). K. J. Erben

       <page 36>

     
          VI.   THE WOOD-LADY (Lesni zenka).   Bozena Nemcova

       <page 40>

     
          VII.   GEORGE WITH THE GOAT (Jirka s kozu).   K. J. Erben

       <page 46>

     
      
   MORAVIAN STORIES

       <page 51>

     
          VIII.   GODMOTHER DEATH (Smrt kmotrenka).   B. M. Kulda, Moravian National Stories,' p. 573

       <page 52>

     
          IX.   THE FOUR BROTHERS (Ctvero bratri).   B. M. Kulda, Moravian National Stories,' p. 758

       <page 55>

     
      [p. viii]

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      
   HUNGARIAN-SLOVENISH STORIES

       <page 62>

     
          X.   THE THREE LEMONS (Tri citroni). J.   Rimavski, 'Slovenish Stories,' i. 37

       <page 63>

     
          XI.   THE SUN-HORSE (Slncovi kuon). J. Rimavski, Slovenish Stories,' i. 27

       <page 75>

     
          XII.   THE GOLDEN SPINSTER (Zlata   priadka). A. H. Skultety and P. Dobshinsky, 'Slovenish Stories,' i. 350

       <page 82>

     
          XIII.   ARE YOU ANGRY? (Ci se hnevace?). A.   H. Skultety and P. Dobshinsky, 'Slovenish Stories,' i. 279

       <page 89>

     
      
   UPPER AND LOWER LUSATIAN STORIES

       <page 92>

     
          XIV.   RIGHT ALWAYS REMAINS RIGHT (Prawo   predco prawn vostanje). K. Smoler

       <page 92>

     
          XV.   LITTLE RED HOOD (Cerwjenawka). H.   Kopf, the 'Luzican,' 1863, p. 42

       <page 97>

     
      
   KASHUBIAN STORY

       <page 101>

     
      XVI. CUDGEL,   BESTIR YOURSELF! (Kjiku resze se).   Dr. Florian Cenova

       <page 101>

     
      
   POLISH STORIES

       <page 107>

     
          XVII.   PRINCE UNEXPECTED (O Krolewiczu Niespodzianku).   A. J. Glinski, 'Polish Story-Teller,' i. 121

       <page 108>

     
          XVIII.   THE SPIRIT OF A BURIED MAN (Duch   pogrzebanego). K. W. Woycicki, 'Popular Tales' (Klechdy), ii. 66

       <page 121>

     
          XIX.   THE PALE MAIDEN (Blada panna). K.   Balinski, 'Tales of the People,' p. 72

       <page 125>

     
          XX.   THE PLAGUE-SWARM (Homen). K. W.   Woycicki, Popular Tales,' i. 130

       <page 127>

     
      [p. ix]

        

     
      
   B.--EASTERN SLAVONIANS.

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      
   WHITE RUSSIAN STORIES

       <page 131>

     
          XXI.   THE FROST, THE SUN, AND THE WIND (Moraz,   Solntse i Vyeter). A. Afanasief, 'National Russian Stories,' i. 1

       <page 132>

     
          XXII.   LITTLE ROLLING-PEA (Pakatsigaroshak).   A. Afanasief, 'National Russian Stories,' iii. 2, 7

       <page 132>

     
          XXIII,   THE WONDROUS LADS (Chudetsnye Malchiki).   A. Afanasief, 'National Russian Stories,' iii. 25

       <page 138>

     
      
   LITTLE RUSSIAN STORIES FROM GALICIA

       <page 142>

     
      XXIV. GOD KNOWS   HOW TO PUNISH MAN (Bog znae, chim   cholovyeka karati mae). M. Tyemyak in the 'Vyenok,' ii. 332

       <page 143>

     
          XXV.   THE GOOD CHILDREN (Dobri dyeti).   Ja. Balagur, in the 'Vyenok,' ii. 338

       <page 146>

     
          XXVI.   THE DEVIL AND THE GIPSY (Chore i Tsigan).   Ja. Balagur, in the 'Vyenok,' ii. 370

       <page 150>

     
          XXVII.   GOD AND THE DEVIL (Bog i Chort).   P. A. Lavrovski

       <page 153>

     
      
   LITTLE RUSSIAN STORIES FROM SOUTH RUSSIA

       <page 156>

     
          XXVIII.   THE BEAUTIFUL DAMSEL AND THE WICKED OLD WOMAN (O Krasavitsye i o zloi babye). P. Kulish, Memoirs of Southern   Russia,' ii. 10

       <page 157>

     
          XXIX.   THE SNAKE AND THE PRINCESS (Uzh i   Tsarevna). P. Kulish, 'Memoirs of Southern Russia,' ii. 14

       <page 159>

     
          XXX.   TRANSFORMATION INTO A NIGHTINGALE AND A CUCKOO (Prevrastenye v Solovya i kukushku). P. Kulish, 'Memoirs of   Southern Russia,' ii. 33

       <page 160>

     
          XXXI.   TRANSMIGRATION OF THE SOUL. (Peresedenye   dushi). P. Kulish, 'Memoirs about Southern Russia,' ii. 34

       <page 161>

     
          XXXII.   THE WIZARD (Znakhor). P. Kulish,   'Memoirs of Southern Russia,' ii.

       <page 162>

     
      [p. x]

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      
   GREAT RUSSIAN STORIES

       <page 164>

     
          XXXIII.   THE LIME-TREE (Lipa). J. A.   Kuljakof, 'Great Russian Stories,' i. 132

       <page 164>

     
          XXXIV.   ILYA OF MUROM AND NIGHTINGALE THE ROBBER (Ilya   Muromets i Solovei-razboinik). A. Afanasief, 'National Russian Stories,'   i. 53

       <page 167>

     
      
   C.--SOUTHERN SLAVONIANS.

        

     
      
   BULGARIAN STORIES

       <page 175>

     
          XXXV.   THE LORD GOD AS AN OLD MAN (Dyedo-Gospod).   G. S. Rakovski, the 'Pokazalets,' Odessa, 1859, i. 137

       <page 176>

     
          XXXVI.   BULGARIAN HOSPITALITY (Blugarsko   Gostopriyemstvo). Konstantin Pavlof

       <page 179>

     
          XXXVII.   CINDERELLA (Pepelezhka). Konstantin   Pavlof

       <page 181>

     
          XXXVIII.   THE GOLDEN APPLES AND THE NINE PEAHENS (Zlata   yabluka i devat paunky). Konstantin Pavlof

       <page 186>

     
          XXXIX.   THE LANGUAGE OF ANIMALS (Gadinski yazyk).   Konstantin Pavlof

       <page 199>

     
      
   SERBIAN STORIES

       <page 204>

     
          XL.   THE LAME Fox (Shantava Lisitsa).   The 'Podunavka,' 1848, Nos. 48, 49

       <page 205>

     
          XLI.   THE SONS' OATH TO THEIR DYING FATHER (Ochina   Zakletva). Vuk St. Karadsich, 'Serbian National Tales,' p. 109

       <page 217>

     
          XLII.   THE WONDERFUL HAIR (Chudovata Dlaka).   Vuk St. Karadsich, 'Serbian National Tales,' p. 154

       <page 221>

     
      [p. xi]

        

     
      SERBIAN   STORIES--continued.

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
          XLIII.   THE DRAGON AND THE PRINCE (Azhdaya i   Tsarev Sin). Vuk St. Karadsich, 'Serbian National Tales,' p. 54

       <page 224>

     
          XLIV.   FATE (Usud). Vuk St. Karadsich,   'Serbian National Tales,' p. 89

       <page 231>

     
      
   SERBIAN STORIES FROM BOSNIA

       <page 219>

     
          XLV.   THE BIRDCATCHER (Ptichar). J. F.   Jukih, in the 'Bosnian Friend,' i. 114

       <page 239>

     
          XLVI.   THE TWO BROTHERS (Bratya). J. F.   Jukih, in the 'Bosnian Friend,' i. 171

       <page 246>

     
      
   SERBIAN STORIES FROM CARNIOLA

       <page 252>

     
          XLVII.   THE ORIGIN OF MAN (Odkuda chovyek).   'The Neven,' 1858, p. 60

       <page 254>

     
          XLVIII.   GOD'S COCK (Bozhji Kokot). The   'Neven,' 1858, p.61

       <page 254>

     
          XLIX.   KURENT THE PRESERVER (Kurent Spasitelj).   The 'Neven,' 1858, p. 94

       <page 256>

     
          L.   KURENT AND MAN (Kurent i chovyek).   The 'Neven,' 1858, p. 75

       <page 257>

     
          LI.   THE HUNDRED-LEAVED ROSE (Ruzha   Steperitsa). The 'Neven,' 1858, p. 105

       <page 261>

     
      
   CROATIAN STORIES

       <page 265>

     
          LII.   KRALJEVICH MARKO (Kraljevich Marko).   M. Krachmanov Valjavets, 'National Stories,' p. 64

       <page 266>

     
          LIII.   THE DAUGHTER OF THE KING OF THE VILAS (Vilinskoga   kralya kcher). M. Krachmanov Valjavets, 'National Stories,' p. 273

       <page 278>

     
          LIV.   THE MIRACULOUS LOCK (Chudotvorni Lokot).   M. Krachmanov Valjavets, 'National Stories,' p.186

       <page 284>

     
      [p. xii]

        

     
      CROATIAN   STORIES--continued..

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
          LV.   THE SHE-WOLF (Vuchitsa). M.   Krachmanov Valjavets, 'National Stories,' p. 240

       <page 290>

     
          LVI.   MILUTIN (Milutin). M. Krachmanov   Valjavets, 'National Stories,' p. 131

       <page 291>

     
      
   ILLYRIAN-SLOVENISH STORIES

       <page 297>

     
          LVII.   A VILA AS A FRIEND AND THE MONTHS AS FRIENDS (Vila priyatlitsa in mestsi priyatli). The 'Novice,' 1854, No. 6

       <page 298>

     
          LVIII.   THE FISHERMAN'S SON (Ribchev Sin).   The 'Slovenia,' 1848, Nos. 46, 47; L. Pintar

       <page 301>

     
          LIX.   THE WHITE SNAKE (Bela kacha). The   'Slovenska behela' (Slavonic Bee), 1850, p. 4

       <page 312>

     
          LX.   THE VILA (Vila). The 'Novice,'   1853, No. 76

       <page 314>

     
    

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1] [p. 2]

  

WESTERN SLAVONIANS.

[p. 3]

  

BOHEMIAN STORIES.

THESE stories are translated from the language of the Slavonic inhabitants of nearly three-fourths of Bohemia, the 'Czechs,' as the Poles write the word, or 'Chekhs,' if we adopt the nearest orthographical approximation to it that the English alphabet allows us to make. This nation had an early literary development, commencing before the foundation of the University of Prague (Praha) by the Emperor Charles IV. in 1348. For a long time after that epoch the Bohemians could justly claim the title of the best educated nation in Europe. They produced a prose writer--Thomas of Stitny, whose first original work was published in 1377--whose equal is not to be found in English literature till the age of Queen Elizabeth. In the Thirty Years' War (1620) the people and literature of Bohemia were crushed for more than two centuries, the population being reduced during that terrible war from over four millions to eight hundred thousand.

The Bohemian language itself is a very remarkable one. It possesses both accent and quantity independent of each other, like Latin and Greek. Thus it is difficult for a foreigner to read aloud or to speak, for, if he attends carefully to the accent, he is liable to neglect quantity, and if he attends to quantity, he is likely to slur over the proper

[p. 4]

accentuation of words. It, as well as Polish, employs a sibillated r, which in many words is difficult to pronounce. It also writes semi-vowels, especially r, without a vowel; so that many syllables appear as if there were no vowel in them. But this it is sufficient to notice once for all, as it causes no real difficulty in pronunciation.

The fairy-tales relating to the kindly or malevolent superhuman inhabitants of the woods are peculiar and striking. In [*No. 5] these imaginary beings are represented under the latter, and in [*No. 6] under the former aspect.

Two waters, one of death and the other of life, are found in the Bohemian stories, just as in the Russian ones--a point wherein the Slavonic tales regularly differ from those of Western Europe, which only acknowledge the water of life. As Mr. Ralston remarks ('Songs of the Russian People,' p. 97) 'When the "dead water" is applied to the wounds of a corpse, it heals them, but before the dead body can be brought to life, it is necessary to sprinkle it with the "living water."'

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[01]

  

I.--LONG, BROAD, AND SHARPSIGHT.

THERE was a king, who was already old, and had but one son. Once upon a time he called this son to him, and said to him, 'My dear son! you know that old fruit falls to make room for other fruit. My head is already ripening, and maybe the sun will soon no longer shine upon it; but before you bury me, I should like to see your wife, my future daughter. My son, marry!' The prince said, 'I would gladly, father, do as you wish; but I have no bride, and don't know any.' The old king put his hand into his pocket, took out a golden key and showed it to his son, with the words, 'Go up into the tower, to the top story,

[p. 5]

look round there, and then tell me which you fancy.' The prince went without delay. Nobody within the memory of man had been up there, or had ever heard what was up there.

When he got up to the last story, he saw in the ceiling a little iron door like a trap-door. It was closed. He opened it with the golden key, lifted it, and went up above it. There there was a large circular room. The ceiling was blue like the sky on a clear night, and silver stars glittered on it; the floor was a carpet of green silk, and around in the wall were twelve high windows in golden frames, and in each window on crystal glass was a damsel painted with the colours of the rainbow, with a royal crown on her head, in each window a different one in a different dress, each handsomer than the other, and it was a wonder that the prince did not let his eyes dwell upon them. When he had gazed at them with astonishment, the damsels began to move as if they were alive, looked down upon him, smiled, and did everything but speak.

Now the prince observed that one of the twelve windows was covered with a white curtain; he drew the curtain to see what was behind it. There there was a damsel in a white dress, girt with a silver girdle, with a crown of pearls on her head; she was the most beautiful of all, but was sad and pale, as if she had risen from the grave. The prince stood long before the picture, as if he had made a discovery, and as he thus gazed, his heart pained him, and he cried, 'This one will I have, and no other.' As he said the words the damsel bowed her head, blushed like a rose, and that instant all the pictures disappeared.

When he went down and related to his father what he had seen and which damsel he had selected, the old king became sad, bethought himself, and said, 'You have done ill, my son, in uncovering what was curtained over, and

[p. 6]

have placed yourself in great danger on account of those words. That damsel is in the power of a wicked wizard, and kept captive in an iron castle; of all who have attempted to set her free, not one has hitherto returned. But what's done cannot be undone; the plighted word is a law. Go! try your luck, and return home safe and sound!'

The prince took leave of his father, mounted his horse, and rode away in search of his bride. It came to pass that he rode through a vast forest, and through the forest he rode on and on till he lost the road. And as he was wandering with his horse in thickets and amongst rocks and morasses, not knowing which way to turn, he heard somebody shout behind him, 'Hi! stop!' The prince looked round, and saw a tall man hastening after him. 'Stop and take me with you, and take me into your service, and you won't regret it!' 'Who are you,' said the prince, 'and what can you do?' 'My name is Long, and I can extend myself. Do you see a bird's nest in that pine yonder? I will bring you the nest down without having to climb up.'

Long then began to extend himself; his body grew rapidly till it was as tall as the pine; he then reached the nest, and in a moment contracted himself again and gave it to the prince. 'You know your business well, but what's the use of birds' nests to me, if you can't conduct me out of this forest?' 'Ahem! that's an easy matter,' said Long, and began to extend himself till he was thrice as high as the highest fir in the forest, looked round, and said: 'Here on this side we have the nearest way out of the forest.' He then contracted himself, took the horse by the bridle, and before the prince had any idea of it, they were beyond the forest. Before them was a long and wide plain, and beyond the plain tall gray rocks, like the walls of a large town, and mountains overgrown with forest trees.

[p. 7]

'Yonder, sir, goes my comrade!' said Long, and pointed suddenly to the plain; 'you should take him also into your service; I believe he would serve you well.' 'Shout to him, and call him hither, that I may see what he is good for.' 'It is a little too far, sir,' said Long; 'he would hardly hear me, and it would take a long time before he came, because he has a great deal to carry. I'll jump after him instead.' Then Long again extended himself to such a height that his head plunged into the clouds, made two or three steps, took his comrade by the arm, and placed him before the prince. He was a short, thick-set fellow, with a paunch like a sixty-four gallon cask. 'Who are you?' demanded the prince, 'and what can you do?' 'My name, sir, is Broad; I can widen myself.' 'Give me a specimen.' 'Ride quick, sir, quick, back into the forest!' cried Broad, as he began to blow himself out.

The prince didn't understand why he was to ride away; but seeing that Long made all haste to get into the forest, he spurred his horse, and rode full gallop after him. It was high time that he did ride away, or else Broad would have squashed him, horse and all, as his paunch rapidly grew in all directions; it filled everything everywhere, just as if a mountain had rolled up. Broad then ceased to blow himself out, and took himself in again, raising such a wind that the trees in the forest bowed and bent, and became what he was at first. 'You've played me a nice trick,' said the prince, 'but I shan't find such a fellow every day; come with me.'

They proceeded further. When they approached the rocks, they met a man who had his eyes bandaged with a handkerchief. 'Sir, this is our third comrade,' said Long, 'you ought to take him also into your service. I'm sure he won't eat his victuals for naught.' 'Who are you?' the prince asked him, 'and why are your eyes bandaged? You

[p. 8]

don't see your way!' 'No, sir, quite the contrary! It is just because I see too well that I am obliged to bandage my eyes; I see with bandaged eyes just as well as others with unbandaged eyes; and if I unbandage them I look everything through and through, and when I gaze sharply at anything, it catches fire and bursts into flame, and what can't burn splits into pieces. For this reason my name is Sharpsight.' He then turned to a rock opposite, removed the bandage, and fixed his flaming eyes upon it; the rock began to crackle, pieces flew on every side, and in a very short time nothing of it remained but a heap of sand, on which something glittered like fire. Sharpsight went to fetch it, and brought it to the prince. It was pure gold.

'Heigho! you're a fellow that money can't purchase!' said the prince. 'He is a fool who wouldn't make use of your services, and if you have such good sight, look and tell me whether it is far to the iron castle, and what is now going on there?' 'If you rode by yourself, sir,' answered Sharpsight, 'maybe you wouldn't get there within a year; but with us you'll arrive to-day--they're just getting supper ready for us.' 'And what is my bride doing?'

An iron lattice is before her,
 In a tower that's high
 She doth sit and sigh,
 A wizard watch and ward keeps o'er her.'

The prince cried, 'Whoever is well disposed, help me to set her free!' They all promised to help him. They guided him among the gray rocks through the breach that Sharpsight had made in them with his eyes, and further and further on through rocks, through high mountains and deep forests, and wherever there was any obstacle in the road, forthwith it was removed by the three comrades. And when the sun was declining towards the west, the mountains began to become lower, the forests less dense, and the

[p. 9]

rocks concealed themselves amongst the heath; and when it was almost on the point of setting, the prince saw not far before him an iron castle; and when it was actually setting, he rode by an iron bridge to the gate, and as soon as it had set, up rose the iron bridge of itself, the gate closed with a single movement, and the prince and his companions were captives in the iron castle.

When they had looked round in the court, the prince put his horse up in the stable, where everything was ready for it, and then they went into the castle. In the court, in the stable, in the castle hall, and in the rooms, they saw in the twilight many richly-dressed people, gentlemen and servants, but not one of them stirred--they were all turned to stone. They went through several rooms, and came into the supper-room. This was brilliantly lighted up, and in the midst was a table, and on it plenty of good meats and drinks, and covers were laid for four persons. They waited and waited, thinking that someone would come; but when nobody came for a long time, they sat down and ate and drank what the palate fancied.

When they had done eating, they looked about to find where to sleep. Thereupon the door flew open unexpectedly all at once, and into the room came the wizard; a bent old man in a long black garb, with a bald head, a gray beard down to his knees, and three iron hoops instead of a girdle. By the hand he led a beautiful, very beautiful damsel, dressed in white; she had a silver girdle round her waist, and a crown of pearls on her head, but was pale and sad, as if she had risen from the grave. The prince recognised her at once, sprang forward, and went to meet her; but before he could utter a word the wizard addressed him: 'I know for what you have come; you want to take the princess away. Well, be it so! Take her, if you can keep her in sight for three nights, so that she doesn't vanish from you.

[p. 10]

[paragraph continues] If she vanishes, you will be turned into stone as well as your three servants; like all who have come before you.' He then motioned the princess to a seat and departed.

The prince could not take his eyes off the princess, so beautiful was she. He began to talk to her, and asked her all manner of questions, but she neither answered nor smiled, nor looked at anyone any more than if she had been of marble. He sat down by her, and determined not to sleep all night long lest she should vanish from him, and, to make surer, Long extended himself like a strap, and wound himself round the whole room along the wall; Broad posted himself in the doorway, swelled himself up, and stopped it up so tight that not even a mouse could have slipped through; while Sharpsight placed himself against a pillar in the midst of the room on the look-out. But after a time they all began to nod, fell asleep, and slept the whole night, just as if the wizard had thrown them into the water.

In the morning, when it began to dawn, the prince was the first to wake, but--as if a knife had been thrust into his heart--the princess was gone! He forthwith awoke his servants, and asked what was to be done. 'Never mind, sir,' said Sharpsight, and looked sharply out through the window, 'I see her already. A hundred miles hence is a forest, in the midst of the forest an old oak, and on the top of the oak an acorn, and she is that acorn.' Long immediately took him on his shoulders, extended himself, and went ten miles at a step, while Sharpsight showed him the way.

No more time elapsed than would have been wanted to move once round a cottage before they were back again, and Long delivered the acorn to the prince. 'Sir, let it fall on the ground.' The prince let it fall, and that moment the princess stood beside him. And when the sun began to show itself beyond the mountains, the folding doors flew

[p. 11]

open with a crash, and the wizard entered the room and smiled spitefully; but when he saw the princess he frowned, growled, and hang! one of the iron hoops which he wore splintered and sprang off him. He then took the damsel by the hand and led her away.

The whole day after the prince had nothing to do but walk up and down the castle, and round about the castle, and look at the wonderful things that were there. It was everywhere as if life had been lost in a single moment. In one hall he saw a prince, who held in both hands a brandished sword, as if he intended to cleave somebody in twain; but the blow never fell: he had been turned into stone. In one chamber was a knight turned into stone, just as if he had been fleeing from some one in terror, and, stumbling on the threshold, had taken a downward direction, but not fallen. Under the chimney sat a servant, who held in one hand a piece of roast meat, and with the other lifted a mouthful towards his mouth, which never reached it; when it was just in front of his mouth, he had also been turned to stone. Many others he saw there turned to stone, each in the position in which he was when the wizard said, 'Be turned into stone.' He likewise saw many fine horses turned to stone, and in the castle and round the castle all was desolate and dead; there were trees, but without leaves; there were meadows, but without grass; there was a river, but it did not flow; nowhere was there even a singing bird, or a flower, the offspring of the ground, or a white fish in the water.

Morning, noon, and evening the prince and his companions found good and abundant entertainment in the castle; the viands came of themselves, the wine poured itself out. After supper the folding doors opened again, and the wizard brought in the princess for the prince to guard. And although they all determined to exert themselves

[p. 12]

with all their might not to fall asleep, yet it was of no use, fall asleep again they did. And when the prince awoke at dawn and saw the princess had vanished, he jumped up and pulled Sharpsight by the arm, 'Hey! get up, Sharpsight, do you know where the princess is?' He rubbed his eyes. looked, and said, 'I see her. There's a mountain 200 miles off; and in the mountain a rock, and in the rock a precious stone, and she's that precious stone. If Long carries me thither, we shall obtain her.'

Long took him at once on his shoulders, extended himself, and went twenty miles at a step. Sharpsight fixed his flaming eyes on the mountain, the mountain crumbled, and the rock in it split into a thousand pieces, and amongst them glittered the precious stone. They took it up and brought it to the prince, and when he let it fall on the ground, the princess again stood there. When afterwards the wizard came and saw her there, his eyes flashed with spite, and bang! again an iron hoop cracked upon him and flew off. He growled and led the princess out of the room.

That day all was again as it had been the day before. After supper the wizard brought the princess in again, looked the prince keenly in the face, and scornfully uttered the words, 'It will be seen who's a match for whom; whether you are victorious or I,' and with that he departed. This day they all exerted themselves still more to avoid going to sleep. They wouldn't even sit down, they wanted to walk about all night long, but all in vain; they were bewitched; one fell asleep after the other as he walked, and the princess vanished away from them.

In the morning the prince again awoke earliest, and when he didn't see the princess, woke Sharpsight. 'Hey! get up, Sharpsight! look where the princess is!' Sharpsight looked out for a long time. 'Oh sir,' says he, 'she is a long way off, a long way off! Three hundred miles off is a black sea,

[p. 13]

and in the midst of the sea a shell on the bottom, and in the shell is a gold ring, and she's the ring. But never mind! we shall obtain her, but to-day Long must take Broad with him as well; we shall want him.' Long took Sharpsight on one shoulder, and Broad on the other, and went thirty miles at a step. When they came to the black sea, Sharpsight showed him where he must reach into the water for the shell. Long extended his hand as far as he could, but could not reach the bottom.

'Wait, comrades! wait only a little and I'll help you,' said Broad, and swelled himself out as far as his paunch would stretch; he then lay down on the shore and drank. In a very short time the water fell so low that Long easily reached the bottom and took the shell out of the sea. Out of it he extracted the ring, took his comrades on his shoulders, and hastened back. But on the way he found it a little difficult to run with Broad, who had half a sea of water inside him, so he cast him from his shoulder on to the ground in a wide valley. Thump he went like a sack let fall from a tower, and in a moment the whole valley was under water like a vast lake. Broad himself barely crawled out of it.

Meanwhile the prince was in great trouble in the castle. The dawn began to display itself over the mountains, and his servants had not returned; the more brilliantly the rays ascended, the greater was his anxiety; a deadly perspiration came out upon his forehead. Soon the sun showed itself in the east like a thin strip of flame--and then with a loud crash the door flew open, and on the threshold stood the wizard. He looked round the room, and seeing the princess was not there, laughed a hateful laugh and entered the room. But just at that moment, pop! the window flew in pieces, the gold ring fell on the floor, and in an instant there stood the princess again. Sharpsight, seeing what was

[p. 14]

going on in the castle, and in what danger his master was, told Long. Long made a step, and threw the ring through the window into the room. The wizard roared with rage, till the castle quaked, and then bang! went the third iron hoop that was round his waist, and sprang off him the wizard turned into a raven, and flew out and away through the shattered window.

Then, and not till then, did the beautiful damsel speak and thank the prince for setting her free, and blushed like a rose. In the castle and round the castle everything became alive again at once. He who was holding in the hall the outstretched sword, swung it into the air, which whistled again, and then returned it to its sheath; he who was stumbling on the threshold, fell on the ground, but immediately got up again and felt his nose to see whether it was still entire; he who was sitting under the chimney put the piece of meat into his mouth and went on eating; and thus everybody completed what he had begun doing, and at the point where he had left off. In the stables the horses merrily stamped and snorted, the trees round the castle became green like periwinkles, the meadows were full of variegated flowers, high in the air warbled the skylark, and abundance of small fishes appeared in the clear river. Everywhere was life, everywhere enjoyment.

Meanwhile a number of gentlemen assembled in the room where the prince was, and all thanked him for their liberation. But he said, 'You have nothing to thank me for; if it had not been for my trusty servants Long, Broad, and Sharpsight, I too should have been what you were.' He then immediately started on his way home to the old king, his father, with his bride and servants. On the way they met Broad and took him with them.

The old king wept for joy at the success of his son; he had thought he would return no more. Soon afterwards

[p. 15]

there was a grand wedding, the festivities of which lasted three weeks; all the gentlemen that the prince had liberated were invited. After the wedding Long, Broad, and Sharpsight announced to the young king that they were going again into the world to look for work. The young king tried to persuade them to stay with him. 'I will give you everything you want, as long as you live,' said he; 'you needn't work at all.' But they didn't like such an idle life, took leave of him, went away and have been ever since knocking about somewhere or other in the world.

___________

This story appears to me to be the perfection of 'Natural Science in Allegory.' It is not a mere 'Natur-myth,' exhibiting the contests, victories, and defeats of the forces of Nature. In interpreting it we must distinguish between the mere machinery and the essential actors. The king's son does nothing himself, and the whole work is performed by the three men, whom he takes into his service. I understand by the king's son Man, who wishes to cultivate the earth, who is the princess imprisoned by the enchanter, the drought. She is released by the agency of the three phenomena that usher in the rainy season, the rainbow (Long), the cloud (Broad), and the lightning (Sharpsight). Man, by the aid of these three phenomena, is enabled to cultivate the earth. Such a story could only originate in a country of periodic rains. The rapid recovery of vegetation and almost instantaneous reappearance of fish in dried-up brooks in India are well known. The common story of the Sleeping Beauty is evidently a fragment from the myth which exhibits figuratively the speedy wake up of all things when released from the bondage of the drought.

It is possible also to consider the prince as the sun, who cannot marry the drought-enslaved earth, until he has taken

[p. 16]

into his service and obtained the aid of the same three phenomena. Those who had previously attempted to set the princess free would then be the suns immediately preceding the rainy season, which had not had the aid of Long, Broad, and Sharpsight.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[02]

  

II.--'THE THREE GOLDEN HAIRS OF GRANDFATHER ALLKNOW.'

THERE was once upon a time a king who delighted in hunting wild animals in forests. One day he chased a stag to a great distance and lost his way. He was all alone; night came on, and the king was only too glad to find a cottage in a clearing. A charcoal-burner lived there. The king asked him whether he would guide him out of the forest to the road, promising to pay him well for it. 'I would gladly go with you,' said the charcoal-burner, 'but, you see, my wife is expecting; I cannot go away. And whither would you go at this time of night? Lie down on some hay on the garret floor, and to-morrow morning I will be your guide.' Soon afterwards a baby boy was born to the charcoal-burner. The king was lying on the floor and couldn't sleep. At midnight he observed a kind of light in the keeping-room below. He peeped through a chink in the boarding and saw the charcoal-burner asleep, his wife lying in a dead faint, and three old hags, all in white, standing by the baby, each with a lighted taper in her hand. The first said: 'My gift to this boy is, that he shall come into great dangers.' The second said: 'My gift to him is, that he shall escape from them all and live long.' And the third said: 'And I give him to wife the baby daughter who has this day been born to that king who is lying upstairs on the hay.' Thereupon the hags put out their tapers, and all was still again. They were the Fates.

[p. 17]

The king felt as if a sword had been thrust into his breast. He didn't sleep till morning, thinking over what to do, and how to do it, to prevent that coming to pass which he had heard. When day dawned the child began to cry. The charcoal-burner got up and saw that his wife had gone to sleep for ever. 'Oh, my poor little orphan!' whimpered he; 'what shall I do with you now?' 'Give me the baby,' said the king; 'I'll take care that it shall be well with it, and will give you so much money that you needn't burn char-coal as long as you live.' The charcoal-burner was delighted at this, and the king promised to send for the baby. When he arrived at his palace they told him, with great joy, that a beautiful baby-daughter had been born to him on such and such a night. It was the very night on which he saw the three Fates. The king frowned, called one of his servants, and told him: 'Go to such a place in the forest; a charcoal-burner lives there in a cottage. Give him this money, and he will give you a little child. Take the child and drown it on your way back. If you don't drown it, you shall drink water yourself.' The servant went, took the baby and put it into a basket, and when he came to a narrow foot-bridge, under which flowed a deep and broad river, he threw the basket and all into the water. 'Good-night, uninvited son-in-law!' said the king, when the servant told him what he had done.

The king thought that the baby was drowned, but it wasn't. It floated in the water in the basket as if it had been its cradle, and slept as if the river were singing to it, till it floated down to a fisherman's cottage. The fisherman was sitting by the bank mending his net. He saw something floating down the river, jumped into his boat, and went to catch it, and out of the water he drew the baby in the basket. He carried it to his wife, and said: 'You've always wanted a little son, and here you have one. The

[p. 18]

water has brought him to us.' The fisherman's wife was delighted, and brought up the child as her own. They named him 'Floatling' (Plavaczek), because he had floated to them on the water.

The river flowed on and years passed on, and from a boy he became a handsome youth, the like of whom was not to be found far and wide. One day in the summer it came to pass that the king rode that way all alone. It was hot, and he was thirsty, and beckoned to the fisherman to give him a little fresh water. When Floatling brought it to him, the king looked at him with astonishment. 'You've a fine lad, fisherman!' said he; 'is he your son?" 'He is and he isn't,' replied the fisherman; 'just twenty years ago he floated, as a little baby, down the river in a basket, and we brought him up.' A mist came before the king's eyes; he became as pale as a whitewashed wall, perceiving that it was the child he had ordered to be drowned. But he soon recollected himself, sprang from his horse, and said: 'I want a messenger to my palace, and have nobody with me: can this youth go thither for me?' 'Your majesty has but to command and the lad will go,' said the fisherman. The king sat down and wrote a letter to his queen: 'Cause this young man whom I send you to be run through with a sword at once; he is a dangerous enemy of mine. Let it be done before I return. Such is my will.' He then folded the letter, fastened and sealed it with his signet.

Floatling started at once with the letter. He had to go through a great forest, but missed the road and lost his way. He went from thicket to thicket till it began to grow dark. Then he met an old hag, who said to him: 'Whither are you going, Floatling?' 'I am going with a letter to the king's palace, and have lost my way. Can't you tell me, mother, how to get into the right road?" 'Anyhow, you won't get there to-day,' said the hag; 'it's dark. Stay the

[p. 19]

night with me. You won't be with a stranger. I am your godmother.' The young man allowed himself to be persuaded, and they hadn't gone many paces when they saw before them a pretty little house, just as if it had grown all at once out of the ground. In the night, when the lad was asleep, the hag took the letter out of his pocket and put another in its place, in which it was written thus: 'Cause this young man whom I send you to be married to our daughter at once; he is my destined son-in-law. Let it be done before I return. Such is my will.'

When the queen read the letter, she immediately ordered arrangements to be made for the wedding, and neither she nor the young princess could gaze enough at the bridegroom, so delighted were they with him; and Floatling was similarly delighted with his royal bride. Some days after, the king came home, and when he found what had happened, he was violently enraged at his queen for what she had done. 'Anyhow, you ordered me yourself to have him married to our daughter before you returned,' answered the queen, and gave him the letter. The king took the letter and looked it through--writing, seal, paper, everything was his own. He had his son-in-law called, and questioned him about what had happened on his way to the palace.

Floatling related how he had started and had lost his way in the forest, and stayed the night with his old godmother. 'What did she look like?' 'So and so.' The king perceived from his statement that it was the same person that had, twenty years before, assigned his daughter to the charcoal-burner's son. He thought and thought, and then he said: 'What's done can't be altered; still, you can't be my son-in-law for nothing. If you want to have my daughter, you must bring me for a dowry three golden hairs of Grand-father Allknow.' He thought to himself that he should thus be quit of his distasteful son-in-law.

[p. 20]

Floatling took leave of his bride and went--which way, and whither? I don't know; but, as a Fate was his god-mother, it was easy for him to find the right road. He went far and wide, over hills and dales, over fords and rivers, till he came to a black sea. There he saw a boat, and in it a ferryman. 'God bless you, old ferryman!' 'God grant it, young pilgrim! Whither are you travelling?' 'To Grand-father Allknow, for three golden hairs.' 'Ho, ho! I have long been waiting for such a messenger. For twenty years I've been ferrying here, and nobody's come to set me free. If you promise me to ask Grandfather Allknow when the end of my work will be, I will ferry you over.' Floatling promised, and the ferryman ferried him across.

After this he came to a great city, but it was decayed and sad. In front of the city he met an old man, who had a staff in his hand, and could scarcely crawl. 'God bless you, aged grandfather!' 'God grant it, handsome youth! Whither are you going?' 'To Grandfather Allknow, for three golden hairs.' 'Ah! ah! we've long been waiting for some such messenger; I must at once conduct you to our lord the king.' When they got there the king said: 'I hear that you are going on an errand to Grandfather Allknow. We had an apple-tree here that bore youth-producing apples. If anybody ate one, though he were on the brink of the grave, he got young again, and became like a young man. But for the last twenty years our apple-tree has produced no fruit. If you promise me to ask Grandfather Allknow whether there is any help for us, I will requite you royally.' Float-ling promised, and the king dismissed him graciously.

After that he came again to another great city, which was half ruined. Not far from the city a son was burying his deceased father, and tears, like peas, were rolling down his cheek. 'God bless you, mournful grave-digger!' said Floatling. 'God grant it, good pilgrim! Whither are you

[p. 21]

going?' 'I am going to Grandfather Allknow, for three golden hairs.' 'To Grandfather Allknow? It's a pity you didn't come sooner! But our king has long been waiting for some such messenger; I must conduct you to him.' When they got there, the king said: 'I hear that you are going on an errand to Grandfather Allknow. We had a well here, out of which sprang living water; if anybody drank it, even were he at the point of death, he would get well at once; nay, were he already a corpse, if this water were sprinkled upon him, he would immediately rise up and walk. But for the last twenty years the water has ceased to flow. If you promise me to ask Grandfather Allknow whether there is any help for us, I will give you a royal reward.' Floatling promised, and the king dismissed him graciously.

After this he went far and wide through a black forest, and in the midst of that forest espied a large green meadow, full of beautiful flowers, and in it a golden palace. This was Grandfather Allknow's palace; it glittered as if on fire. Floatling went into the palace, but found nobody there but an old hag sitting and spinning in a corner. 'Welcome, Floatling said she; 'I am delighted to see you again.' It was his godmother, at whose house he had spent the night when he was carrying the letter. 'What has brought you here?' 'The king would not allow me to be his son-in-law for nothing, so he sent me for three golden hairs of Grand-father Allknow.' The hag smiled, and said: 'Grandfather Allknow is my son, the bright Sun; in the morning he is a little lad, at noon a grown man, and in the evening an old grandfather. I will provide you with the three golden hairs from his golden head, that I too mayn't be your godmother for nothing. But, my boy! you can't remain as you are. My son is certainly a good soul, but when he comes home hungry in the evening, it might easily happen that he might

[p. 22]

roast and eat you for his supper. Yonder is an empty tub; I will cover you over with it.' Floatling begged her also to question Grandfather Allknow about the three things concerning which he had promised on the road to bring answers. 'I will,' said the hag, 'and do you give heed to what he says.'

All at once a wind arose outside and in flew the Sun, an old grandfather with a golden head, by the west window into the room. 'A smell, a smell of human flesh!' says he; have you anybody here, mother?' 'Star of the day! whom could I have here without your seeing him? But so it is; you're all day long flying over God's world, and your nose is filled with the scent of human flesh; so it's no wonder that you still smell it when you come home in the evening.' The old man said nothing in reply, and sat down to his supper.

After supper he laid his golden head on the hag's lap and began to slumber. As soon as she saw that he was sound asleep, she pulled out a golden hair and threw it on the ground. It rang like a harp-string. 'What do you want, mother?' said the old man. 'Nothing, sonny, nothing! I was asleep, and had a marvellous dream.' 'What did you dream about?' 'I dreamt about a city, where they had a spring of living water; when anybody was ill and drank of it, he got well again; and if he died and was sprinkled with this water, he came to life again. But for the last twenty years the water has ceased to flow; is there any help that it may flow again?' 'Quite easy; there's a toad sitting on the spring in the well that won't let the water flow. Let them kill the toad and clean out the well; the water will flow as before.' When the old man fell asleep again, the hag pulled out a second golden hair and threw it on the ground. 'What ails you again, mother?' 'Nothing, sonny, nothing; I was asleep, and again had a marvellous dream. I dreamt of a

[p. 23]

city where they had an apple-tree which bore youth-restoring apples; when anybody grew old and ate one he became young again. But for the last twenty years the apple-tree has borne no fruit; is there any help?' 'Quite easy; under the tree there lies a snake that exhausts its powers; let them kill the snake and transplant the apple-tree; it will bear fruit as before.' The old man then fell asleep again, and the hag pulled out a third golden hair. 'Why won't you let me sleep, mother?' said the old man crossly, and wanted to get up. 'Lie still, sonny, lie still! Don't be angry, I didn't want to wake you. But a heavy sleep fell upon me, and I had another marvellous dream. I dreamt of a ferryman on a black sea; for twenty years he has been ferrying across it, and no one has come to set him free. When will his work have an end?' 'He's the son of a stupid mother. Let him give the oar into another person's hand and jump ashore himself; the other will be ferryman in his stead. But let me be quiet now; I must get up early to-morrow and go to dry the tears which the king's daughter sheds every night for her husband, the charcoal-burner's son, whom the king has sent for three golden hairs of mine.'

In the morning a wind again arose outside, and on the lap of its old mother awoke, instead of the old man, a beautiful golden-haired child, the divine Sun, who bade farewell to his mother and flew out by the east window. The hag turned up the tub and said to Floatling: 'There are the three golden hairs for you, and you also know what Grandfather Allknow has answered to those three things. Go; and good-bye! You will see me no more; there is no need of it.' Floatling thanked the hag gratefully, and departed.

When he came to the first city, the king asked him what news he brought him. 'Good news,' said Floatling. 'Have the well cleaned out, and kill the toad which sits on the spring, and the water will flow again as aforetime.' The

[p. 24]

king had this done without delay, and when he saw the water bubbling up with a full stream, he presented Floatling with twelve horses white as swans, and on them as much gold and silver as they could carry.

When he came to the second city the king asked him again what news he brought. 'Good news!' said Floatling. 'Have the apple-tree dug up; you will find a snake under the roots; kill it; then plant the apple-tree again, and it will bear fruit as aforetime.' The king had this done at once, and during the night the apple-tree was clothed with bloom, just as if it had been bestrewn with roses. The king was delighted, and presented Floatling with twelve horses as black as ravens, and on them as much riches as they could carry.

Floatling travelled on, and when he came to the black sea, the ferryman asked him whether he had learnt when he would be liberated. 'I have,' said Floatling. 'But ferry me over first, and then I will tell you.' The ferryman objected, but when he saw that there was nothing else to be done, he ferried him over with his four-and-twenty horses. 'Before you ferry anybody over again,' said Floatling, 'put the oar into his hand and jump ashore, and he will be ferryman in your stead.'

The king didn't believe his eyes when Floatling brought him the three golden hairs of Grandfather Allknow; and his daughter wept, not from sorrow, but from joy at his return. 'But where did you get these beautiful horses and this great wealth?' asked the king. 'I earned it,' said Floatling; and related how he had helped one king again to the youth-restoring apples, which make young people out of old ones; and another to the living water, which makes sick

people well and dead people living. 'Youth-restoring apples! living water!' repeated the king quietly to himself. 'If I ate one I should become young again; and if I died I should be restored to life by that water.' Without delay he

[p. 25]

started on the road for the youth-restoring apples and the living water--and hasn't returned yet.

Thus the charcoal-burner's son became the king's son-in-law, as the Fate decreed; and as for the king, maybe he is still ferrying across the black sea.

________

This story is a variant of Grimm's 'Giant with the Three Golden Hairs.' But, whereas in Grimm there is nothing to indicate who the giant is, or whether he has three golden hairs and three only, in the Bohemian tale it is plain that 'Grandfather Allknow' is the Sun, and that the three golden hairs are three sunbeams.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[03]

  

III.--GOLDENHAIR.

THERE was a king who was so clever that he understood all animals, and knew what they said to each other. Hear how he learnt it. Once upon a time there came to him a little old woman, who brought him a snake in a basket, and told him to have it cooked for him; if he dined off it, he would understand what any animal in the air, on the earth, or in the water said. The king liked the idea of understanding what nobody else understood, paid the old woman well, and forth-with ordered his servant to cook the fish for dinner. 'But,' said he, 'be sure you don't take a morsel of it even on your tongue, else you shall pay for it with your head.'

George, the servant, thought it odd that the king forbade him so energetically to do this. 'In my life I never saw such a fish,' said he to himself; 'it looks just like a snake! And what sort of cook would that be who didn't take a taste of what he was cooking?' When it was cooked, he took a morsel on his tongue, and tasted it. Thereupon he heard something buzzing round his ears: 'Some for us, too!

[p. 26]

some for us, too!' George looked round, and saw nothing but some flies that were flying about in the kitchen. Again somebody called with a hissing voice in the street outside: 'Where are you going? where are you going?' And shriller voices answered: 'To the miller's barley! to the miller's barley!' George peeped through the window, and saw a gander and a flock of geese. 'Aha!' said he; 'that's the kind of fish it is.' Now he knew what it was. He hastily thrust one more morsel into his month, and carried the snake to the king as if nothing had happened.

After dinner the king ordered George to saddle the horses and accompany him, as he wished to take a ride. The king rode in front and George behind. As they were riding over a green meadow, George's horse bounded and began to neigh. 'Ho! ho! brother. I feel so light that I should like to jump over mountains!' 'As for that,' said the other, 'I should like to jump about, too, but there's an old man on my back; if I were to skip, he'd tumble on the ground like a sack and break his neck.' 'Let him break it--what matter?' said George's horse; 'instead of an old man you'll carry a young one.' George laughed heartily at this conversation, but so quietly that the king knew nothing about it. But the king also understood perfectly well what the horses were saying to each other, looked round, and seeing a smile on George's face, asked him what he was laughing at. Nothing, your illustrious majesty,' said George in excuse; 'only something occurred to my mind.' Nevertheless, the old king already suspected him, neither did he feel confidence in the horses, so he turned and rode back home.

When they arrived at the palace, the king ordered George to pour him out a glass of wine. 'But your head for it,' said he, 'if you don't pour it full, or if you pour it so that it runs over.' George took the decanter and poured. Just then in flew two birds through the window; one was chasing

[p. 27]

the other, and the one that was trying to get away carried three golden hairs in its beak. 'Give them to me said the first; 'they are mine.' 'I shan't; they're mine; I took them up.' 'But I saw them fall, when the golden-haired maiden was combing her hair. At any rate, give me two.' 'Not one!' Hereupon the other bird made a rush, and seized the golden hairs. As they struggled for them on the wing, one remained in each bird's beak, and the third golden hair fell on the ground, where it rang again. At this moment George looked round at it, and then poured the wine over. 'You've forfeited your life!' shouted the king; 'but I'll deal mercifully with you if you obtain the golden-haired maiden, and bring her me to wife.'

What was George to do? If he wanted to save his life, he must go in search of the maiden, though he did not know where to look for her. He saddled his horse, and rode at random. He came to a black forest, and there, under the forest by the roadside, a bush was burning; some cowherd had set it on fire. Under the bush was an ant-hill; sparks were falling on it, and the ants were fleeing in all directions with their little white eggs. 'Help, George, help!' cried they mournfully; 'we're being burnt to death, as well as our young ones in the eggs.' He got down from his horse at once, cut away the bush, and put out the fire. 'When you are in trouble think of us, and we'll help you.'

He rode on through the forest, and came to a lofty pine. On the top of this pine was a raven's nest, and below, on the ground, were two young ravens crying and complaining: 'Our father and mother have flown away; we've got to seek food for ourselves, and we poor little birds can't fly yet. Help us, George, help us! Feed us, or we shall die of hunger!' George did not stop long to consider, but jumped down from his horse, and thrust his sword into its side, that the young ravens might have something to

[p. 28]

eat. 'When you are in need think of us, and we'll help you.'

After this, George had to go on on foot. He walked a long, long way through the forest, and when he at last got out of it, he saw before him a long and broad sea. On the shore of this sea two fishermen were quarrelling. They had caught a large golden fish in their net, and each wanted to have it for himself, 'The net is mine, and mine's the fish.' The other replied: 'Much good would your net have been, if it hadn't been for my boat and my help.' 'If we catch such another fish again, it will be yours.' 'Not so; wait you for the next, and give me this.' I'll set you at one,' said George. 'Sell me the fish--I'll pay you well for it--and you divide the money between you, share and share alike.' He gave them all the money that the king had given him for his journey, leaving nothing at all for himself. The fishermen were delighted, and George let the fish go again into the sea. It splashed merrily through the water, dived, and then, not far from the shore, put out its head: 'When you want me, George, think of me, and I'll requite you.' It then disappeared. 'Where are you going?' the fishermen asked George. 'I'm going for the golden-haired maiden to be the bride of the old king, my lord, and I don't even know where to look for her.' 'We can tell you all about her,' said the fisher-men. 'It's Goldenhair, the king's daughter, of the Crystal Palace, on the island yonder. Every day at dawn she combs her golden hair, and the bright gleam therefrom goes over sky and over sea. If you wish it, we'll take you over to the island ourselves, as you set us at one again so nicely. But take care to bring away the right maiden; there are twelve maidens--the king's daughters--but only one has golden hair.'

When George was on the island, he went into the Crystal

[p. 29]

[paragraph continues] Palace to entreat the king to give the king, his lord, his golden-haired daughter to wife. 'I will,' said the king, 'but you must earn her; you must in three days perform three tasks, which I shall impose upon you, each day one. Meanwhile, you can rest till, to-morrow.' Next day, early, the king said to him: 'My Goldenhair had a necklace of costly pearls; the necklace broke, and the pearls were scattered in the long grass in the green meadow. You must collect all these pearls, without one being wanting.' George went into the meadow; it was long and broad; he knelt on the grass, and began to seek. He sought and sought from morn to noon, but never saw a pearl. 'Ah! if my ants were here, they might help me.' 'Here we are to help you,' said the ants, running in every direction, but always crowding round him. 'What do you want?' 'I have to collect pearls in this meadow, but I don't see one.' 'Only wait a bit, we'll collect them for you.' Before long they brought him a multitude of pearls out of the grass, and he had nothing to do but string them on the necklace. Afterwards, when he was going to fasten up the necklace, one more ant limped up--it was lame, its foot had been scorched when the fire was at the ant-hill--and cried out: 'Stop, George, don't fasten it up; I'm bringing you one more pearl.'

When George brought the pearls to the king, the king counted them over; not one was wanting. 'You have done your business well,' said he; 'to-morrow I shall give you another piece of work.' In the morning George came, and the king said to him: 'My Goldenhair was bathing in the sea, and lost there a gold ring; you must find and bring it.' George went to the sea, and walked sorrowfully along the shore. The sea was clear, but so deep that he couldn't even see the bottom, much less could he seek and find the ring there. 'Oh that my golden fish were

[p. 30]

here; it might be able to help me.' Whereupon something glittered in the sea, and up swam the golden fish from the deep to the surface of the water: 'Here I am to help you; what do you want?' 'I've got to find a gold ring in the sea, and I can't even see the bottom.' 'I just met a pike which was carrying a gold ring in its mouth. Only wait a bit, I'll bring it to you.' Ere long it returned from the deep water, and brought him the pike, ring and all.

The king commended George for doing his business well, and then next morning laid upon him the third task: 'If you wish me to give your king my Goldenhair to wife, you must bring her the waters of death and of life--she will require them.' George did not know whither to betake himself for these waters, and went at haphazard hither and thither, whither his feet carried him, till he came to a black forest: 'Ah, if my young ravens were here, perhaps they would help me.' Now there was a rustling over his head, and two young ravens appeared above him: 'Here we are to help you; what do you wish?' 'I've got to bring the waters of death and of life, and I don't know where to look for them.' 'Oh, we know them well; only wait a bit, we'll bring them to you.' After a short time they each brought George a bottle-gourd full of water; in the one gourd was the water of life, in the other the water of death. George was delighted with his good fortune, and hastened to the castle. At the edge of the forest he saw a cobweb extending from one pine-tree to another; in the midst of the cobweb sat a large spider sucking a fly. George took the bottle with the water of death, sprinkled the spider, and the spider dropped to the ground like a ripe cherry--he was dead. He then sprinkled the fly with the water of life out of the other bottle, and the fly began to move, extricated itself from the cobweb, and off into the

[p. 31]

air. 'Lucky for you, George, that you've brought me to life again,' it buzzed round his ears; 'without me you'd scarcely guess aright which of the twelve is Goldenhair.'

When the king saw that George had completed this matter also, he said he would give him his golden-haired daughter. 'But,' said he, 'you must select her yourself.' He then led him into a great hall, in the midst of which was a round table, and round the table sat twelve beautiful maidens, one like the other; but each had on her head a long kerchief reaching down to the ground, white as snow, so that it couldn't be seen what manner of hair any of them had. 'Here are my daughters,' said the king; 'if you guess which of them is Goldenhair, you have won her, and can take her away at once; but if you don't guess right, she is not adjudged to you, you must depart without her.' George was in the greatest anxiety; he didn't know what to do. Whereupon something whispered into his ear: 'Buzz! buzz! go round the table, I'll tell you which is the one.' It was the fly that George had restored to life with the water of life. 'It isn't this maiden--nor this--nor this; this is Goldenhair!' 'Give me this one of your daughters,' cried George; 'I have earned her for my lord.' 'You have guessed right,' said the king; and the maiden at once rose from the table, threw off her kerchief, and her golden hair flowed in streams from her head to the ground, and such a brightness came from them, even as when the sun rises in the morning, that George's eyes were dazzled.

Then the king gave his daughter all that was fitting for her journey, and George took her away to be his lord's bride. The old king's eyes sparkled, and he jumped for joy, when he saw Goldenhair, and gave orders at once for preparations to be made for the wedding. I intended to have you hanged for your disobedience, that the ravens might devour you,' said he to George; 'but you have served

[p. 32]

me so well, that I shall only have your head cut off with an axe, and then I shall have you honourably buried.' When George had been executed, Goldenhair begged the old king to grant her the body of his dead servant, and the king couldn't deny his golden-haired bride anything. She then fitted George's head to his body, and sprinkled him with the water of death, and the body and head grew together so that no mark of the wound remained. Then she sprinkled him with the water of life, and George rose up again, as if he had been born anew, as fresh as a stag, and youth beamed from his countenance. 'Oh, how heavily I have slept!' said George, and rubbed his eyes. 'Yes, indeed, you have slept heavily,' said Goldenhair; 'and if it hadn't been for me, you wouldn't have waked for ever and ever.' When the old king saw that George had come to life again, and that he was younger and handsomer than before, he wanted to be made young again also. He gave orders at once that his head should be cut off, and that he should be sprinkled with the water. They cut his head off and sprinkled him with the water of life, till they'd sprinkled it all away; but his head wouldn't grow on to the body. Then, and not till then, did they begin to sprinkle him with the water of death, and in an instant the head grew on to the body; but the king was dead all the same, because they had no more of the water of life to bring him to life again. And since the kingdom couldn't be without a king, and they'd no one so intelligent as to understand all animals like George, they made George king and Goldenhair queen.

________

This story is a variant, and a very beautiful variant, of Grimm's 'White Snake.' The two kinds of water, that of death and that of life, appear here, showing that it is a true Slavonic, and not a Teutonic story.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 33] [04]

  

IV.--INTELLIGENCE AND LUCK.

ONCE upon a time Luck met Intelligence on a garden-seat. 'Make room for me!' said Luck. Intelligence was then as yet inexperienced, and didn't know who ought to make room for whom. He said: 'Why should I make room for you? you're no better than I am.' 'He's the better man,' answered Luck, 'who performs most. See you there yon peasant's son who's ploughing in the field? Enter into him, and if he gets on better through you than through me, I'll always submissively make way for you, whensoever and wheresoever we meet.' Intelligence agreed, and entered at once into the ploughboy's head. As soon as the ploughboy felt that he had intelligence in his head, he began to think: 'Why must I follow the plough to the day of my death? I can go somewhere else and make my fortune more easily.' He left off ploughing, put up the plough, and drove home. 'Daddy,' says he, 'I don't like this peasant's life; I'd rather learn to be a gardener.' His father said: 'What ails you, Vanek? have you lost your wits?' However, he bethought himself; and said: 'Well, if you will, learn, and God be with you! Your brother will he heir to the cottage after me.' Vanek lost the cottage, but he didn't care for that, but went and put himself apprentice to the king's gardener. For every little that the gardener showed him, Vanek comprehended ever so much more. Ere long he didn't even obey the gardener's orders as to how he ought to do anything, but did everything his own way. At first the gardener was angry, but, seeing everything thus getting on better, he was content. 'I see that you've more intelligence than I,' said he, and henceforth let Vanek garden as he thought fit. In no long space of time Vanek made the garden so beautiful that the king took great delight in it, and frequently walked in it with the queen and with his only daughter.

[p. 34]

The princess was a very beautiful damsel, but ever since she was twelve years old she had ceased speaking, and no one ever heard a single word from her. The king was much grieved, and caused proclamation to be made, that whoever should bring it to pass that she should speak again, should be her husband. Many young kings, princes and other great lords announced themselves one after the other, but all went away as they had come; no one succeeded in causing her to speak. 'Why shouldn't I too try my luck?' thought Vanek; 'who knows whether I mayn't succeed in bringing her to answer when I ask her a question?' He at once caused himself to be announced at the palace, and the king and his councillors conducted him into the room where the princess was. The king's daughter had a pretty little dog, and was very fond of him because he was so clever, understanding everything that she wanted. When Vanek went into the room with the king and his councillors, he made as if he didn't even see the princess, but turned to the dog and said: 'I have heard, doggie, that you are very clever, and I come to you for advice. We are three companions in travel, a sculptor, a tailor and myself. Once upon a time we were going through a forest and were obliged to pass the night in it. To be safe from wolves, we made a fire, and agreed to keep watch one after the other. The sculptor kept watch first, and for amusement to kill time took a log and carved a damsel out of it. When it was finished he woke the tailor to keep watch in his turn. The tailor, seeing the wooden damsel, asked what it meant. "As you see," said the sculptor, "I was weary, and didn't know what to do with myself, so I carved a damsel out of a log; if you find time hang heavy on your hands, you can dress her." The tailor at once took out his scissors, needle and thread, cut out the clothes, stitched away, and when they were ready, dressed the damsel in them. He then called me to

[p. 35]

come and keep watch. I, too, asked him what the meaning of all this was. "As you see," said the tailor, "the sculptor found time hang heavy on his hands and carved a damsel out of a log, and I for the same reason clothed her; and if you find time hanging on your hands, you can teach her to speak." And by morning dawn I had actually taught her to speak. But in the morning when my companions woke up, each wanted to possess the damsel. The sculptor said, "I made her;" the tailor, "I clothed her." I, too, maintained my right. Tell me, therefore, doggie, to which of us the damsel belongs?' The dog said nothing, but instead of the dog the princess replied: 'To whom can she belong but to yourself? What's the good of the sculptor's damsel without life? What's the good of the tailor's dressing without speech? You gave her the best gift, life and speech, and therefore she by right belongs to you.' 'You have passed your own sentence,' said Vanek; 'I have given you speech again and a new life, and you therefore by right belong to me.' Then said one of the king's councillors: 'His Royal Grace will give you a plenteous reward for succeeding in unloosing his daughter's tongue; but you cannot have her to wife, as you are of mean lineage.' The king said: 'You are of mean lineage; I will give you a plenteous reward instead of our daughter.' But Vanek wouldn't hear of any other reward, and said: 'The king promised without any exception, that whoever caused his daughter to speak again should be her husband. A king's word is a law; and if the king wants others to observe his laws, he must first keep them himself. Therefore the king must give me his daughter.' 'Seize and bind him!' shouted the councillor. 'Whoever says the king must do anything, offers an insult to his Majesty, and is worthy of death. May it please your Majesty to order this malefactor to be executed with the sword?' The king said: 'Let him be executed.' Vanek

[p. 36]

was immediately bound and led to execution. When they came to the place of execution Luck was there waiting for him, and said secretly to Intelligence, 'See how this man has got on through you, till he has to lose his head! Make way, and let me take your place!' As soon as Luck entered Vanek, the executioner's sword broke against the scaffold, just as if someone had snapped it; and before they brought him another, up rode a trumpeter on horseback from the city, galloping as swift as a bird, trumpeted merrily, and waved a white flag, and after him came the royal carriage for Vanek. This is what had happened: The princess had told her father at home that Vanek had but spoken the truth, and the king's word ought not to be broken. If Vanek were of mean lineage the king could easily make him a prince. The king said: 'You're right; let him be a prince!' The royal carriage was immediately sent for Vanek, and the councillor who had irritated the king against him was executed in his stead. Afterwards, when Vanek and the princess were going together in a carriage from the wedding, Intelligence happened to be somewhere on the road, and seeing that he couldn't help meeting Luck, bent his head and slipped on one side, just as if cold water had been thrown upon him. And from that time forth it is said that Intelligence has always given a wide berth to Luck whenever he has had to meet him.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[05]

  

V.--THE JEZINKAS.

THERE was a poor orphan lad who had neither father nor mother, and was compelled to go out to service to get his living. He travelled a long way without being able to obtain an engagement, till one day he came to a hovel all by itself under a wood. On the threshold sat an old man, who

[p. 37]

had dark caverns in his head instead of eyes. The goats were bleating in the stall, and the old man said: 'I wish I could take you, poor goats, to pasture, but I can't, I am blind; and I have nobody to send with you.' 'Daddy, send me,' answered the lad; 'I will pasture your goats, and also be glad to wait upon you.' 'Who are you? and what is your name?' The lad told him all, and that they called him Johnny. 'Well, Johnny, I will take you; but drive out the goats for me to pasture first of all. But don't lead them to yon hill in the forest; the Jezinkas will come to you, will put you to sleep, and will then tear out your eyes, as they have mine.' 'Never fear, Daddy, answered Johnny;' the Jezinkas won't tear out nay eyes.' He then let the goats out of the stall, and drove them to pasture. The first and second day he pastured them under the forest, but the third day he said to himself: 'Why should I be afraid of the Jezinkas? I'll drive them where there is better pasture.' He then broke off three green shoots of bramble, put them into his hat, and drove the goats straight on to the hill in the forest. There the goats wandered about for pasture, and Johnny sat down on a stone in the cool. He had not sat long, when all of a sudden, how it came about he knew not, a beautiful damsel stood before him, all dressed in white, with her hair--raven-black--prettily dressed and flowing down her back, and eyes like sloes. 'God bless you, young goatherd!' said she. See what apples grow in our garden! Here's one for you; I'll give it you, that you may know how good they are.' She offered him a beautiful rosy apple. But Johnny knew that if he took the apple and ate it he would fall asleep, and she would afterwards tear out his eyes, so he said: 'I am much obliged to you, beautiful damsel! My master has an apple-tree in his garden, on which still handsomer apples grow; I have eaten my fill of them.' 'Well, if you'd rather not,' l won't compel you,' said the damsel, and went away.

[p. 38]

[paragraph continues] After a while came another, still prettier, damsel, with a beautiful red rose in her hand, and said: 'God bless you, young goatherd! See what a beautiful rose I've just plucked off the hedge. It smells so nice; smell it yourself.' 'I am much obliged to you, beautiful damsel. My master has still handsomer roses in his garden; I have smelt my fill of them.' 'Well, then, if you won't, let it alone said the damsel, quite enraged, turned round, and retired. After a while, a third damsel, the youngest and prettiest of them all, came up. 'God bless you, young goatherd!' 'Thank you, beautiful damsel!' 'Indeed, you're a fine lad,' said the damsel, 'but you'd be still handsomer if you had your hair nicely combed and dressed. Come, I'll comb it for you.' Johnny said nothing, but when the damsel came up to him to comb his hair, he took his hat from his head, drew out a bramble-shoot, and pop! struck her on both hands. The damsel screamed 'Help, help!' began to weep, but was unable to move from the place. Johnny cared naught for her weeping, and bound her hands together with the bramble. Then up ran the other two damsels, and, seeing their sister a captive, began to beg Johnny to unbind her and let her go. 'Unbind her yourselves,' said Johnny. 'Alas! we can't, we have tender hands, we should prick ourselves.' But when they saw that the lad would not do as they wished, they went to their sister and wanted to unfasten the bramble. Thereupon Johnny leapt up, and pop! pop! struck them too with a spray, and then bound both their hands together. 'See, I've got you, you wicked Jezinkas! Why did you tear out my master's eyes?' After this, he went home to his master, and said, 'Come, daddy, I've found somebody who will give you your eyes again.' When they came to the hill, he said to the first Jezinka, 'Now tell me where the old man's eyes are. If you don't tell me, I shall throw you at once

[p. 39]

into the water.' The Jezinka made excuse that she didn't know, and Johnny was going to throw her into the river, which flowed hard by under the hill. 'Don't, Johnny, don't!' entreated the Jezinka, 'and I'll give you the old man's eyes.' She conducted him into a cavern, where was a great heap of eyes, large and small, black, red, blue and green, and took two out of the heap. But when Johnny placed them in the old man's sockets, the poor man began to cry: 'Alas, alas! these are not my eyes. I see nothing but owls.' Johnny became exasperated, seized the Jezinka, and threw her into the water. He then said to the second: 'Tell me, you, where the old man's eyes are.' She, too, began to make excuses that she didn't know; but when the lad threatened to throw her, too, into the water, she led him again to the cavern, and took out two other eyes. But the old man cried again: 'Alas! these are not my eyes. I see nothing but wolves.' The same was done to the second Jezinka as to the first; the water closed over her. 'Tell me, you, where the old man's eyes are,' said Johnny to the third and youngest Jezinka. She, too, led him to the heap in the cavern, and took out two eyes for him. But when they were inserted, the old man cried out again that they were not his eyes. 'I see nothing but pike.' Johnny saw that she, too, was cheating him, and was going to drown her as well; but the Jezinka besought him with tears: 'Don't, Johnny, don't! I will give you the old man's proper eyes.' She took them from under the whole heap. And when Johnny inserted them into the old man's sockets, he cried out joyfully: 'These, these are my eyes! Praise be to God! now I see well again!' Afterwards Johnny and the old man lived together happily; Johnny pastured the goats, and the old man made cheeses at home, mad they ate them together; but the Jezinka never showed herself again on that hill.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 40] [06]

  

VI.--THE WOOD-LADY.

BETTY was a little girl; her mother was a widow, and had no more of her property left than a dilapidated cottage and two she-goats; but Betty was, nevertheless, always cheerful. From spring to autumn she pastured the goats in the birch-wood. Whenever she went from home, her mother always gave her in a basket a slice of bread and a spindle, with the injunction, 'Let it be full.' As she had no distaff, she used to twine the flax round her head. Betty took the basket, and skipped off singing merrily after the goats to the birch-wood. When she got there, the goats went after pasture, and Betty sat under a tree, drew the fibres from her head with her left hand, and let down the spindle with her right so that it just hummed over the ground, and therewith she sang till the wood echoed; the goats meanwhile pastured. When the sun indicated mid-day, she put aside her spindle, called the goats, and after giving them each a morsel of bread that they mightn't stray from her, bounded into the wood for a few strawberries or any other woodland fruit that might happen to be just then in season, that she might have dessert to her bread. When she had finished her meal, she sprang up, folded her hands, danced and sang. The sun smiled on her through the green foliage, and the goats, enjoying themselves among the grass, thought: 'What a merry shepherdess we have After her dance, she spun again industriously, and at even, when she drove the goats home, her mother never scolded her for bringing back her spindle empty.

Once, when according to custom, exactly at mid-day, after her scanty dinner, she was getting ready for a dance, all of a sudden--where she came, there she came--a very beautiful maiden stood before her. She had on a white dress as fine as gossamer, golden-coloured hair flowed from her head to her waist, and on her head she wore a garland of woodland

[p. 41]

flowers. Betty was struck dumb with astonishment. The maiden smiled at her, and said in an attractive voice, 'Betty, are you fond of dancing?' When the maiden spoke so prettily to her, Betty's terror quitted her, and she answered, 'Oh, I should like to dance all day long!' 'Come, then, let's dance together. I'll teach you!' So spoke the maiden, tucked her dress up on one side, took Betty by the waist, and began to dance with her. As they circled, such delightful music sounded over their heads, that Betty's heart skipped within her. The musicians sat on the branches of the birches in black, ash-coloured, brown, and variegated coats. It was a company of choice musicians that had come together at the beck of the beautiful maiden--nightingales, larks, linnets, goldfinches, greenfinches, thrushes, blackbirds, and a very skilful mocking-bird. Betty's cheek flamed, her eyes glittered, she forgot her task and her goats, and only gazed at her partner, who twirled before and round her with the most charming movements, and so lightly that the grass didn't even bend beneath her delicate foot. They danced from noon till eve, and Betty's feet were neither wearied nor painful. Then the beautiful maiden stopped, the music ceased, and as she came so she disappeared. Betty looked about her; the sun was setting behind the wood. She clapped her hands on the top of her head, and, feeling the unspun flax, remembered that her spindle, which was lying on the grass, was by no means full. She took the flax down from her head, and put it with the spindle into her basket, called the goats, and drove them home. She did not sing on the way, but bitterly reproached herself for letting the beautiful maiden delude her, and determined that if the maiden should come to her again, she would never listen to her any more. The goats, hearing no merry song behind them, looked round to see whether their own shepherdess was really following them. Her mother, too,

[p. 42]

wondered, and asked her daughter whether she was ill, as she didn't sing. 'No, mother dear, I'm not ill; but my throat is dry from very singing, and therefore I don't sing,' said Betty in excuse, and went to put away the spindle and the unspun flax. Knowing that her mother was not in the habit of reeling up the yarn at once, she intended to make up the next day what she had neglected to do the first day, and therefore did not say a word to her mother about the beautiful maiden.

The next day Betty again drove the goats as usual to the birch-wood, and sang to herself again merrily. On arriving at the birch-wood the goats began to pasture, and she sat under the tree and began to spin industriously, singing to herself all the time, for work comes better from the hand while one sings. The sun indicated mid-day. Betty gave each of the goats a morsel of bread, went off for strawberries, and after returning began to eat her dinner and chatter with the goats. 'Ah, my little goats, I mustn't dance to-day,' sighed she, when after dinner she collected the crumbs from her lap in her hand and placed them on a stone that the birds might take them away. 'And why mustn't you?' spoke a pleasing voice, and the beautiful maiden stood beside her, as if she had dropped from the clouds. Betty was still more frightened than the first time, and closed her eyes that she might not even see the maiden; but when the maiden repeated the question, she answered modestly: 'Excuse me, beautiful lady, I can't dance with you, because I should again fail to perform my task of spinning, and my mother would scold me. To-day, before the sun sets, I must make up what I left undone yesterday.' 'Only come and dance; before the sun sets help will be found for you,' said the maiden, tucked up her dress, took Betty round the waist, the musicians sitting on the birch branches struck up, and the two dancers began to whirl. The beautiful maiden

[p. 43]

danced still more enchantingly. Betty couldn't take her eyes off her, and forgot the goats and her task. At last the dancer stopped, the music ceased, the sun was on the verge of setting. Betty clapped her hand on the top of her head, where the unspun flax was twined, and began to cry. The beautiful maiden put her hand on her head, took off the flax, twined it round the stem of a slender birch, seized the spindle, and began to spin. The spindle just swung over the surface of the ground, grew fuller before her eyes, and before the sun set behind the wood all the yarn was spun, as well as that which Betty had not finished the day 'before. While giving the full spool into the girl's hand the beautiful maiden said: 'Reel, and grumble not--remember my words, "Reel, and grumble not!"' After these words she vanished, as if the ground had sunk in beneath her. Betty was content, and thought on her way, 'If she is so good and kind, I will dance with her again if she comes again.' She sang again that the goats might step on merrily. But her mother gave her no cheerful welcome. Wishing in the course of the day to reel the yarn, she saw that the spindle was not full, and was therefore out of humour. 'What were you doing yesterday that you didn't finish your task?' asked her mother reprovingly. 'Pardon, mother; I danced a little too long,' said Betty humbly, and, showing her mother the spindle, added: 'To-day it is more than full to make up for it.' Her mother said no more, but went to milk the goats, and Betty put the spindle away. She wished to tell her mother of her adventure, but bethought herself again, 'No, not unless she comes again, and then I will ask her what kind of person she is, and will tell my mother.' So she made up her mind and held her tongue.

The third morning, as usual, she drove the goats to the birch-wood. The goats began to pasture; Betty sat under the tree, and began to sing and spin. The sun indicated

[p. 44]

mid-day. Betty laid her spindle on the grass, gave each of the goats a morsel of bread, collected strawberries, ate her dinner, and while giving the crumbs to the birds, said: 'My little goats, I will dance to you to-day!' She jumped up, folded her hands, and was just going to try whether she could manage to dance as prettily as the beautiful maiden, when all at once she herself stood before her. 'Let's go together, together!' said she to Betty, seized her round the waist, and at the same moment the music struck up over their heads, and the maidens circled round with flying step. Betty forgot her spindle and her goats, saw nothing but the beautiful maiden, whose body bent in every direction like a willow-wand, and thought of nothing but the delightful music, in tune with which her feet bounded of their own accord. They danced from mid-day till even. Then the maiden stopped, and the music ceased. Betty looked round; the sun was behind the wood. With tears she clasped her hands on the top of her head, and turning in search of the half-empty spindle, lamented about what her mother would say to her. 'Give me your basket,' said the beautiful maiden. 'I will make up to you for what you have left undone to-day.' Betty handed her the basket, and the maiden disappeared for a moment, and afterwards handed Betty the basket again, saying, Not now; look at it at home,' and was gone, as if the wind had blown her away. Betty was afraid to peep into the basket immediately, but half-way home she couldn't restrain herself. The basket was as light as if there was just nothing in it. She couldn't help looking to see whether the maiden hadn't tricked her. And how frightened she was when she saw that the basket was full--of birch leaves! Then, and not till then, did she begin to weep and lament that she had been so credulous. In anger she threw out two handfuls of leaves, and was going to shake the basket out; but then she bethought herself,

[p. 45]

[paragraph continues] 'I will use them as litter for the goats,' and left some leaves in the basket. She was almost afraid to go home. The goats again could hardly recognise their shepherdess. Her mother was waiting for her on the threshold, full of anxiety. 'For Heaven's sake, girl! what sort of spool did you bring me home yesterday?' were her first words. 'Why?' asked Betty anxiously. 'When you went out in the morning, I went to reel; I reeled and reeled, and the spool still remained full. One skein, two, three skeins; the spool still full. "What evil spirit has spun it?" said I in a temper; and that instant the yarn vanished from the spindle, as if it were spirited away. Tell me what the meaning of this is!' Then Betty confessed, and began to tell about the beautiful maiden. 'That was a wood-lady!' cried her mother in astonishment; 'about mid-day and midnight the wood-ladies hold their dances. Lucky that you are not a boy, or you wouldn't have come out of her arms alive. She would have danced with you as long as there was breath in your body, or have tickled you to death. But they have compassion on girls, and often give them rich presents. It's a pity that you didn't tell me; if I hadn't spoken in a temper, I might have had a room full of yarn.' Then Betty bethought herself of the basket, and it occurred to her that perhaps, after all, there might have been something under those leaves. She took out the spindle and unspun flax from the top, and looked once more, and, 'See, mother!' she cried out. Her mother looked and clapped her hands. The birch-leaves were turned into gold! 'She ordered me: "Don't look now, but at home!" but I did not obey.' 'Lucky that you didn't empty out the whole basket,' thought her mother.

The next morning she went herself to look at the place where Betty had thrown out the two handfuls of leaves, but on the road there lay nothing but fresh birch-leaves. But the riches that Betty had brought home were large enough.

[p. 46]

[paragraph continues] Her mother bought a small estate; they had many cattle. Betty had handsome clothes, and was not obliged to pasture goats; but whatever she had, however cheerful and happy she was, nothing ever gave her so great delight as the dance with the wood-lady. She often went to the birch-wood; she was attracted there. She hoped for the good fortune of seeing the beautiful maiden; but she never set eyes on her more.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[07]

  

VII.--GEORGE WITH THE GOAT.

THERE was a king who had a daughter who never could be induced to laugh; she was always sad. So the king proclaimed that she should be given to anyone who could cause her to laugh. There was also a shepherd who had a son named George. He said: 'Daddy! I, too, will go to see whether I can make her laugh. I want nothing from you but the goat.' His father said, 'Well, go.' The goat was of such a nature that, when her master wished, she detained everybody, and that person was obliged to stay by her.

So he took the goat and went, and met a man who had a foot on his shoulder. George said: 'Why have you a foot on your shoulder?' He replied: 'If I take it off, I leap a hundred miles.' 'Whither are you going?' 'I am going in search of service, to see if anyone will take me.' 'Well, come with us.'

They went on, and again met a man who had a bandage on his eyes. 'Why have you a bandage on your eyes?' He answered, 'If I remove the bandage, I see a hundred miles.' 'Whither are you going?' 'I am going in search of service, if you will take me?' 'Yes, I'll take you. Come also with me.'

They went on a bit further, and met another fellow, who,

[p. 47]

had a bottle under his arm, and, instead of a stopper, held his thumb in it. 'Why do you hold your thumb there?' 'If I pull it out, I squirt a hundred miles, and besprinkle everything that I choose. If you like, take me also into your service; it may be to your advantage and ours too.' George replied: 'Well, come too!'

Afterwards they came to the town where the king lived, and bought a silken riband for the goat. They came to an inn, and orders had already been given there beforehand, that when such people came, they were to give them what they liked to eat and drink--the king would pay for all. So they tied the goat with that very riband and placed it in the innkeeper's room to be taken care of, and he put it in the side room where his daughters slept. The innkeeper had three maiden daughters, who were not yet asleep. So Manka said: 'Oh! if I, too, could have such a riband! I will go and unfasten it from that goat.' The second, Dodla, said: 'Don't; he'll find it out in the morning.' But she went notwithstanding. And when Manka did not return for a long time, the third, Kate, said: 'Go, fetch her.' So Dodla went, and gave Manka a pat on the back. 'Come, leave it alone!' And now she too was unable to withdraw herself from her. So Kate said: 'Come, don't unfasten it!' Kate went and gave Dodla a pat on the petticoat; and now she, too, couldn't get away, but was obliged to stay by her.

In the morning George made haste and went for the goat, and led the whole set away--Kate, Dodla, and Manka. The innkeeper was still asleep. They went through the village, and the judge looked out of a window and said, 'Fie, Kate! what's this? what's this?' He went and took her by the hand, wishing to pull her away, but remained also by her. After this, a cowherd drove some cows through a narrow street, and the bull came rushing round; he stuck fast, and George led him, too, in the procession.

[p. 48]

Thus they afterwards came in front of the castle, and the servants came out of doors; and when they saw such things, they went and told the king. 'O sire, we have such a spectacle here; we have already had all manner of masquerades, but this has never been here yet.' So they immediately led the king's daughter to the square in front of the castle, and she looked and laughed till the castle shook.

Now they asked him what sort of person he was. He said that he was a shepherd's son, and was named George. They said that it could not be done; for he was of mean lineage, and they could not give him the damsel; but he must accomplish something more for them. He said, 'What?' They replied that there was a spring yonder, a hundred miles off; if he brought a goblet of water from it in a minute, then he should obtain the damsel. So George said to the man who had the foot on his shoulder: 'You said that if you took the foot down, you could jump a hundred miles.' He replied: 'I'll easily do that.' He took the foot down, jumped, and was there. But after this there was only a very little time to spare, and by then he ought to have been back. So George said to the second: 'You said that if you removed the bandage from your eyes, you could see a hundred miles. Peep and see what is going on.' 'Ah, sir! Goodness gracious! he's fallen asleep!' 'That will be a bad job,' said George; 'the time will be up. You, third man, you said if you pulled your thumb out, you could squirt a hundred miles; be quick and squirt thither, that he may get up. And you, look whether he is moving, or what.' 'Oh, sir! he's getting up now; he's knocking the dust off; he's drawing the water.' He then gave a jump, and was there exactly in time.

After this they said that he must perform one task more; that yonder, in a rock, was a wild beast, a unicorn, of such a nature that he destroyed a great many of their people; if

[p. 49]

he cleared him out of the world he should obtain the damsel. So he took his people and went into the forest. They came to a firwood. There were three wild beasts, and three lairs had been formed by wallowing as they lay. Two did nothing; but the third destroyed people. So they took some stones and some pine-cones in their pockets, and climbed up into a tree; and when the beasts lay down, they dropped a stone down upon that one which was the unicorn. He said to the next: 'Be quiet; don't butt me.' It said: 'I'm not doing anything to you.' Again they let a stone fall from above upon the unicorn. 'Be quiet! you've already done it to me twice.' 'Indeed, I'm doing nothing to you.' So they attacked each other and fought together. The unicorn wanted to pierce the second beast through; but it jumped out of the way, and he rushed so violently after it, that he struck his horn into a tree, and couldn't pull it out quickly. So they sprang speedily down from the fir, and the other two beasts ran away and escaped, but they cut off the head of the third, the unicorn, took it up, and carried it to the castle.

Now those in the castle saw that George had again accomplished that task. 'What, prithee, shall we do? Perhaps we must after all give him the damsel!' 'No, sire,' said one of the attendants, 'that cannot be; he is too lowborn to obtain a king's daughter! On the contrary, we must clear him out of the world.' So the king ordered them to note his words, what he should say. There was a hired female servant there, and she said to him: 'George, it will be evil for you to-day; they're going to clear you out of the world.' He answered: 'Oh, I'm not afraid. When I was only just twelve years old, I killed twelve of them at one blow!' But this was the fact: when his mother was baking a flat-cake, a dozen flies settled upon her, and he killed them all at a single blow.

When they heard this, they said: 'Nothing else will do

[p. 50]

but we must shoot him.' So they drew up the soldiers, and said they would hold a review in his honour, for they would celebrate the wedding in the square before the castle. Then they conducted him thither, and the soldiers were already going to let fly at him. But George said to the man who held his thumb in the bottle in place of a stopper: 'You said, if you pulled your thumb out, you could besprinkle everything. Pull it out--quick!' 'Oh, sir, I'll easily perform that.' So he pulled out his thumb and gave them all such a sprinkling, that they were all blind, and not one could see.

So, when they perceived that nothing else was to he done, they told him to go, for they would give him the damsel. Then they gave him a handsome royal robe, and the wedding took place. I, too, was at the wedding; they had music there, sang, ate, and drank; there was meat, there were cheesecakes, and baskets full of everything, and buckets full of strong waters. To-day I went, yesterday I came; I found an egg among the tree-stumps; I knocked it against somebody's head, and gave him a bald place, and he's got it still.

________

This story is related to Grimm's tale of the 'Golden Goose,' but it is much more rationally constructed, and much more interesting. The man who jumps one hundred miles appears to be the rainbow, the man with bandaged eyes the lightning, and the man with the bottle the cloud. The interpretation will be very similar to that of [*No. 1], but the allegory is by no means so clear or so well constructed. As to the nonsense at the end, it is a specimen of the manner in which the narrators of stories frequently finish them in all Slavonic languages.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 51]

  

MORAVIAN STORIES

MORAVIA is so named from the river Morava (in German the river March), of which, and its affluents, it is the basin. It falls into the Danube a little above Presburg. In very early times Moravia appears to have been more civilized and powerful than Bohemia; but later, Bohemia became a considerable kingdom, and Moravia a dependency of, and eventually a margravate under the Bohemian crown.

The Moravian stories differ but little in character from those of Bohemia. The country, unlike Bohemia, abounds in dialects, although the literary language is the Bohemian. On the east the Moravian melts into the Silesian, or 'Water-Polish.'

[*No. 8], 'Godmother Death,' is an interesting variant of the Teutonic 'Godfather Death,' which is given by Grimm. The reason why Death is represented as a Godmother, rather than a Godfather, in the Moravian story, is, that Death (Smrt) is feminine in all Slavonic dialects. The story constructed on this basis is more graceful and fuller of incident than the Teutonic tale, in which Death is masculine.

[*No. 9] is another story falling under the head of 'Natural Science in Allegory,' which is clearer and simpler in construction and interpretation than any variant of it that I am acquainted with.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 52] [08]

  

VIII.--GODMOTHER DEATH.

THERE was a man, very poor in this world's goods, whose wife presented him with a baby boy. No one was willing to stand sponsor, because he was so very poor. The father said to himself: 'Dear Lord, I am so poor that no one is willing to be at my service in this matter; I'll take the baby, I'll go, and I'll ask the first person I meet to act as sponsor, and if I don't meet anybody, perhaps the sexton will help me.' He went and met Death, but didn't know what manner of person she was; she was a handsome woman, like any other woman. He asked her to be godmother. She didn't make any excuse, and immediately saluted him as parent of her godchild, took the baby in her arms, and carried him to church. The little lad was properly christened. When they came out of church, the child's father took the godmother to an inn, and wanted to give her a little treat as godmother. But she said to him, 'Gossip, [**] leave this alone, and come with me to my abode.' She took him with her to her apartment, which was very handsomely furnished. Afterwards she conducted him into great vaults, and through these vaults they went right into the underworld in the dark. There tapers were burning of three sizes--small, large, and middle-sized; and those which were not yet alight were very large. The godmother said to the godchild's father: 'Look, Gossip, here I have the duration of everybody's life.' The child's father gazed thereat, found there a tiny taper close to the very ground, and asked her: 'But, Gossip, I pray you, whose is this little taper close to the ground?' She said to him: 'That is yours! When any taper whatsoever

[p. 53]

burns down, I must go for that man.' He said to her: 'Gossip, I pray you, give me somewhat additional.' She said to him: 'Gossip, I cannot do that!' Afterwards she went and lighted a large new taper for the baby boy whom they had had christened. Meanwhile, while the godmother was not looking, the child's father took for himself a large new taper, lit it, and placed it where his tiny taper was burning down.

The godmother looked round at him and said: 'Gossip, you ought not to have done that to me; but if you have given yourself additional lifetime, you have done so and possess it. Let us go hence, and we'll go to your wife.'

She took a present, and went with the child's father and the child to the mother. She arrived, and placed the boy on his mother's bed, and asked her how she was, and whether she had any pain anywhere. The mother confided her griefs to her, and the father sent for some beer, and wanted to entertain her in his cottage, as godmother, in order to gratify her and show his gratitude. They drank and feasted together. Afterwards the godmother said to her godchild's father: 'Gossip, you are so poor that no one but myself would be at your service in this matter; but never mind, you shall bear me in memory! I will go to the houses of various respectable people and make them ill, and you shall physic and cure them. I will tell you all the remedies. I possess them all, and everybody will be glad to recompense you well, only observe this: When I stand at anyone's feet, you can be of assistance to every such person; but if I stand at anybody's head, don't attempt to aid him.' It came to pass. The child's father went from patient to patient, where the god-mother caused illness, and benefited every one. All at once he became a distinguished physician. A prince was dying--nay, he had breathed his last--nevertheless, they sent for the physician. He came, he began to anoint him with salves

[p. 54]

and give him his powders, and did him good. When he had restored him to health, they paid him well, without asking how much they were indebted. Again, a count was dying. They sent for the physician again. The physician came. Death was standing behind the bed at his head. The physician cried: 'It's a bad case, but we'll have a try.' He summoned the servants, and ordered them to turn the bed round with the patient's feet towards Death, and began to anoint him with salves and administer powders into his mouth, and did him good. The count paid him in return as much as he could carry away, without ever asking how much he was indebted; he was only too glad that he had restored him to health. When Death met the physician, she said to him: 'Gossip, if this occurs to you again, don't play me that trick any more. True, you have done him good, but only for a while; I must, none the less, take him off whither he is due.' The child's father went on in this way for some years; he was now very old. But at last he was wearied out, and asked Death herself to take him. Death was unable to take him, because he had given himself a long additional taper; she was obliged to wait till it burned out. One day he drove to a certain patient to restore him to health, and did so. Afterwards Death revealed herself to him, and rode with him in his carriage. She began to tickle and play with him, and tap him with a green twig under the throat; he threw himself into her lap, and went off into the last sleep. Death laid him in the carriage, and took herself off. They found the physician lying dead in his carriage, and conveyed him home. The whole town and all the villages lamented: 'That physician is much to be regretted. What a good doctor he was! He was of great assistance; there will never be his like again!' His son remained after him, but had not the same skill.

The son went one day into church, and his godmother met

[p. 55]

him. She asked him: 'My dear son, how are you?' He said to her: 'Not all alike; so long as I have what my dad saved up for me, it is well with me, but after that the Lord God knows how it will be with me.' His godmother said: 'Well, my son, fear nought. I am your christening mamma; I helped your father to what he had, and will give you, too, a livelihood. You shall go to a physician as a pupil, and you shall be more skilful than he, only behave nicely.' After this she anointed him with salve over the ears, and conducted him to a physician. The physician didn't know what manner of lady it was, and what sort of son she brought him for instruction. The lady enjoined her son to behave nicely, and requested the physician to instruct him well, and bring him into a good position. Then she took leave of him and departed. The physician and the lad went together to gather herbs, and each herb cried out to the pupil what remedial virtue it had, and the pupil gathered it. The physician also gathered herbs, but knew not, with regard to any herb, what remedial virtue it possessed. The pupil's herbs were beneficial in every disease. The physician said to the pupil: 'You are cleverer than I, for I diagnose no one that comes to me; but you know herbs counter to every disease. Do you know what? Let us join partnership. I will give my doctor's diploma up to you, and will be your assistant, and am willing to be with you till death.' The lad was successful in doctoring and curing till his taper burned out in limbo.

Footnotes

^52:* The Slavonians are rich in terms, both masculine and feminine, expressing the various relationships between godparents and godchildren and their parents. We have only one form, 'gossip,' which thus has to do duty for both the godmother and the father of the godchild.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[09]

  

IX.--THE FOUR BROTHERS.

THERE was, once upon a time, a huntsman who had four sons, and these sons wanted to go to gain experience in the world. When they were all over sixteen years old, they said to their father: 'We are going into the world, father; we pray you give us money for our journey.' The father gave

[p. 56]

them 100 florins and a horse apiece. They mounted their horses and rode to the mountains. On a mountain were four roads, and between them stood a beech-tree. At this beech-tree they halted, and the eldest said to the rest, 'Brothers, let us separate here, and go each by a different road to seek his fortune in the world. Let us each stick his knife into this beech-tree, and in a year and a day let us all meet together here. These knives will be tokens for us; if any one of the knives is rusty, the one of us to whom it belongs will be dead; and he whose knife is free from rust will be alive and well.' They separated, and went each his way, and when they came to suitable places they each learned a handicraft. The eldest learned to be a cobbler, the second to be a thief, the third to be an astrologer, and the fourth to be a huntsman. When the year and day arrived, they started on their return. The eldest came first to the beech-tree, pulled out his own knife and looked at the other knives. Seeing that they were all free from rust, he rejoiced, and said, 'Praise be to God! we are all alive and well.' He went home. When he came to his father, his father asked him, 'What manner of handicraft have you learnt?' The son replied, 'Daddy, it's no use telling you stories; I'm a cobbler.' The father said, 'Well, you've learned a nice gainful handicraft.' The son answered, 'But, daddy, I'm not a cobbler like other cobblers, but I'm this kind of cobbler: if anything is worn out, I only say, "Let it be mended up," and it is so at once.' The father had a coat worn out at the elbows, and told him to cobble it up. The son gave the command, 'Let it be mended up,' and in a moment the coat was mended up as if it were brand new, nor was it possible to know that it had been mended at all. Upon this the father said nothing more. The next day the second son came to the beech. He pulled out his own knife, and looked at the remaining two; the third was

[p. 57]

already gone. Seeing that they were both free from rust, he rejoiced, and said, 'Praise be to God! we are all alive and well; our eldest brother is at home already.' He also went home. When he came to his father, his father asked him, 'What manner of handicraft have you learned?' The son replied, 'Dear daddy, it's no use telling stories to you; I'm a thief.' The father said, 'Oh, you've learned a nice gainful trade! Shame on you!' The son said to him, 'But, daddy, I'm not a thief like a thief, but I'm such a thief that, if I think of anything, be it where it may, I have it with me at once.' Just then a hare came running on the hillside; it could be seen through the window; the father told him to fetch the hare. The son immediately said, 'Let yon hare be here,' and it was with them at once. After this the father said no more. The third day the third son came to the beech, pulled out his own knife and looked at the other knife, two not being there. Seeing that it was clear of rust, he said, 'Praise be to God! we are all alive and well; my two elder brothers are at home already.' He also went home. When he came to his father, his father asked him what manner of handicraft he had learned. The son replied, 'Dear daddy, it's no use to tell you stories; I'm an astrologer.' His father said to him that it was a nice pretty handicraft. The son answered, 'But, daddy, I am this kind of astrologer: if I look at the sky, I see at once where anything is in the whole earth.' On the fourth day the youngest son came to the beech and pulled out his knife, the other three being there no longer. He was glad, and said, 'My brothers are already all at home.' He also went home. When he came to his father, the father asked him what manner of handicraft he had learned. The son answered that he was a huntsman. The father said, 'Anyhow, you have not despised my craft; for that you're a good lad.' The son said, 'But, dear daddy, I'm not such a huntsman

[p. 58]

as you are, but one of this kind; if there is an unusually fine head of game, I say, 'Let it be shot,' and immediately shot it is.' There was a hare darting along the hillside; it was visible through the window. The father said, 'Shoot it!' The youngest son spoke the word, and the hare lay dead. The father said, 'I don't see whether it is lying dead.' The astrologer looked at the sky, and said, 'Yes, daddy, it's lying there behind the bushes.' The father said, 'Yes, it's lying there, but how are we to get it?' The brother who was a thief said, 'Let it be here,' and immediately there it was. But it had come through thorny bushes, and was all torn. The father said, 'The whole skin is torn; who'll buy it of us?' The brother who was a cobbler said, 'Let it be mended up,' and immediately mended up it was. The father said, 'Well, you'll all four maintain yourselves by your handicrafts.'

They lived for some time at home with their father, and maintained themselves well. Then a king lost the princess, his daughter, and made proclamation that whoever should find her, to that person he would give his daughter and the kingdom as well. The brothers said to one another, 'Let us go thither.' The father didn't give them leave to go, but go they did, and gave out that they were the people who would find the lost princess. The king immediately sent a carriage for them. When they came to the king, they said that they understood he had made proclamation that his daughter was lost, and that he would give her and the kingdom as well to whoever should find her. The king said that this was very truth, and immediately asked them to tell him where his daughter was. The astrologer replied that he could not tell him just then, but when evening came he would perceive in the sky where she was. About eight or nine o'clock they went out and gazed at the sky. The astrologer said that she had been taken captive by a dragon;

[p. 59]

that the dragon had seized her as she was out walking, and was keeping her on an island beyond the Red Sea; that she was obliged to fondle him for two hours every day, and that the dragon then had his head placed on her lap. When day came, they assembled and drove in the carriage to the Red Sea. Then they got into a boat and rowed to the island where the princess was. When they arrived at the island, the princess was out walking, and the dragon wasn't at home; but the princess made signs to them that they were in evil case, for the dragon was just flying home. The thief-brother called out with speed, 'Let the princess be here!' She was with them in the boat at once, but cried out that they were in evil case, and would all perish. They rowed speedily away in the boat, but the dragon, full of wrath, roared and growled and rose in the air above them. The astrologer said to the huntsman, 'Brother, shoot him.' The huntsman-brother said, 'Let him be shot.' The dragon was shot, but fell on the boat and broke a hole in it, so that the water came in. They threw the dragon into the sea, and the huntsman-brother gave the word to the cobbler-brother, 'Mend the leak.' The cobbler-brother mended the leak, so that not a drop of water came into the boat to them. Thus they arrived safely with the princess at the sea-shore, landed on the beach, took their seats in the carriage with the princess, and drove off. But as they drove along in the carriage, they disputed to which of them the princess and the kingdom belonged. The astrologer said, 'The princess is mine. If it hadn't been for me, we shouldn't have known where the princess was.' The thief said, The princess is mine. If it hadn't been for me, we shouldn't have got the princess into the boat.' The huntsman said that the princess was his; if it hadn't been for him, they wouldn't have shot the dragon. The cobbler shouted that the princess was his if it hadn't been for him,

[p. 60]

they would all have been drowned and have perished. When they came to the palace to the king, they asked him to decide to whom the princess belonged. The king said, 'Dear brothers, I will judge you righteously. It is true that you have all deserved her, but you cannot all obtain her. According to my promise, the astrologer-brother must obtain her, for I made proclamation that whoever should find the lost princess should obtain her and the kingdom with her; the astrologer found her, and told us where she was. But, that none of you may be unfairly dealt with, each shall receive a district of his own, and ye shall each be kings in your own districts.' They were all content. The astrologer, as soon as the wedding was over, sent home for his father. The father came, and was delighted that his sons had become monarchs each in his district. In the spring he lived with the cobbler, in the summer with the thief, in the autumn with the huntsman, and in winter with the astrologer, and enjoyed himself everywhere till death.

_________

I think that this story is connected with the Ceres and Proserpine cycle, only the daughter is lost by a father instead of a mother. It will be seen, also, that at the conclusion of the story the order of the brothers is not the same as in the story itself. And I think the error is in the story, and that the astrologer ought to have been the youngest brother instead of the huntsman. The brothers are the four seasons of the year, which in ancient times began with spring, the cobbler, who mends up all things, and makes them new again; next comes summer, the thief, who gathers the products of the earth; third comes autumn, the huntsman, when the wild animals that have increased and multi-plied during the year are destroyed and reduced within

[p. 61]

limits; last comes winter, the astrologer, when ploughing, sowing, and other agricultural operations that govern the whole year go on by calculation. Thus the princess herself, the earth or its fertility, is assigned to the representative of winter, while the other seasons are lords each in his own district.

This Moravian tale will bear an advantageous comparison with Grimm's tale of the 'Four Accomplished Brothers,' in which neither of the brothers is allowed to obtain the princess.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 62]

  

HUNGARIAN-SLOVENISH STORIES.

THE Slovenes or Slovaks of North Hungary speak a great number of dialects, their literary language being, however, the Bohemian. They seem to be the debris of a much larger nation or assemblage of nations, which was forced out of the plains of Pannonia into the mountains by the invasion of the Magyar or Hungarian horsemen, who, according to the Russian chronicler Nestor, marched past Kief in A.D. 898, on their way to establish themselves in their present abode.

Their stories are not very dissimilar to the Bohemian tales, although they do not resemble them so closely as the Moravian stories do. [*No. 10] is one of the tales that especially attracted my attention, and caused me to entertain the idea of translating a considerable selection out of the hundred given by Erben. [*No. 11] contains incidents which occur again in the White Russian story ([*No. 22]), and in the great Russian tale of 'Ivan Popyalof,' given by Ralston, though in other respects the stories are very different. [*No. 22] is a superior variant of the German 'Rumpelstilskin' given by Grimm, and [*No. 13] is a specimen of an entirely different kind of story, illustrating 'The biter bitten.'

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 63] [10]

  

X.--THE THREE LEMONS.

THERE was once upon a time an old king who had an only son. This son he one day summoned before him, and spoke to him thus: 'My son, you see that my head has become white; ere long I shall close my eyes, and I do not yet know in what condition I shall leave you. Take a wife, my son! Let me bless you in good time, before I close my eyes.' The son made no reply, but became lost in thought; he would gladly with all his heart have fulfilled his father's wish, but there was no damsel in whom his heart could take delight.

Once upon a time, when he was sitting in the garden, and just considering what to do, all of a sudden an old woman appeared before him--where she came, there she came.

Go to the glass hill, pluck the three lemons, and you will have a wife in whom your heart will take delight,' said she, and as she had appeared so she disappeared. Like a bright flash did these words dart through the prince's soul. At that moment he determined, come what might, to seek the glass hill and pluck the three lemons. He made known his determination to his father, and his father gave him for the journey a horse, arms and armour, and his fatherly blessing.

Through forest-covered mountains, through desert plains, went our prince on his pilgrimage, for a very, very great distance; but there was nothing to be seen, nothing to be heard of the glass hill and the three lemons. Once, quite wearied out with his long journey, he threw himself down under the cool shade of a broad lime-tree. As he threw himself down, his father's sword, which he wore at his side, clanged against the ground, and a dozen ravens began croaking at the top of the tree. Frightened by the clang of the sword, they rose on their wings, and flew into the air above the lofty tree. 'Hem! till now I haven't seen a

[p. 64]

living creature for a long while,' said the prince to himself, springing from the ground. 'I will go in the direction in which the ravens have flown maybe some hope will disclose itself to me.'

He went on--he went on anew for three whole days and three nights, till at last a lofty castle displayed itself to him at a distance. 'Praise be to God! I shall now at any rate come to human beings,' cried he, and proceeded further.

The castle was of pure lead; round it flew the twelve ravens, and in front of it stood an old woman--it was Jezibaba [**]--leaning on a long leaden staff. 'Ah, my son! whither have you come? Here there is neither bird nor insect to be seen, much less a human being,' said Jezibaba to the prince. 'Flee, if life is dear to you; for, if my son comes, he will devour you.' 'Ah! not so, old mother, not so!' entreated the prince. 'I have come to you for counsel as to whether you cannot let me have some information about the glass hill and the three lemons.' 'I have never heard of the glass hill; but stay! when my son comes home, maybe he will be able to let you have the information. But I will now conceal you somewhat; you will hide yourself under the besom, and wait there concealed till I call you.'

The mountains echoed, the castle quaked, and Jezibaba whispered to the prince that her son was coming. 'Foh! foh! there is a smell of human flesh; I am going to eat it!' shouted Jezibaba's son, while still in the doorway, and thumped on the ground with a huge leaden club, so that the whole castle quaked. 'Ah, not so, my son, not so!' said Jezibaba, soothing him. 'There has come a handsome youth who wants to consult you about something.' "Well, if he wants to consult me, let him come here.' 'Yes,

[p. 65]

indeed, my son, he shall come, but only on condition that you promise to do nothing to him.' 'Well, I'll do nothing to him, only let him come.'

The prince was trembling like an aspen under the besom, for he saw before him through the twigs an ogre, up to whose knees he didn't reach. Happily his life was safe-guarded, when Jezibaba bade him come out from under the besom. 'Well, you beetle, why are you afraid?' shouted the giant. 'Whence are you? What do you want?' 'What do I want?' replied the prince. 'I've long been wandering in these mountains, and can't find that which I am seeking. Now I've come to ask you whether you can't give me information about the glass hill and the three lemons.' Jezibaba's son wrinkled his brow, but, after a while, said in a somewhat gentler voice: 'There's nothing to be seen here of the glass hill; but go to my brother in the silver castle, maybe he'll be able to tell you something. But stay, I won't let you go away hungry. Mother, here with the dumplings!' Old Jezibaba set a large dish upon the table, and her gigantic son sat down to it. 'Come and eat!' shouted he to the prince. The prince took the first dumpling and began to eat, but two of his teeth broke, for they were dumplings of lead. 'Well, why don't you eat? maybe you don't like them?' inquired Jezibaba's son. Yes, they are good; but I don't want any just now.' Well, if you don't want any just now, pocket some, and go your way.' The good prince--would he, nould he--was obliged to put some of the leaden dumplings into his pocket. He then took leave and proceeded further.

On he went and on he went for three whole days and three nights, and the further he went, the deeper he wandered into a thickly wooded and gloomy range of mountains. Before him it was desolate, behind him it was desolate; there wasn't a single living creature to be seen. All wearied from his long journey,

[p. 66]

he threw himself on the ground. The clang of his silver-mounted sword spread far and wide. Above him four and twenty ravens, frightened by the clash of his sword, began to croak, and, rising on their wings, flew into the air. 'A good sign!' cried the prince. 'I will go in the direction in which the birds have flown.'

And on he went in that direction, on he went as fast as his feet could carry him, till all at once a lofty castle displayed itself to him! He was still far from the castle, and already its walls were glistening in his eyes, for the castle was of pure silver. In front of the castle stood an old woman bent with age, leaning on a long silver staff, and this was Jezibaba. 'Ah, my son! How is it that you have come here? Here there is neither bird nor insect, much less a human being!' cried Jezibaba to the prince; 'if life is dear to you, flee away, for if my son comes, he will devour you!' 'Nay, old mother, he will hardly eat me. I bring him a greeting from his brother in the leaden castle.'

Well, if you bring a greeting from the leaden castle, then come into the parlour, my son, and tell me what you are seeking.' 'What I am seeking, old mother? For ever so long a time I've been seeking the glass hill and the three lemons, and cannot find them; now I've come to inquire whether you can't give me information about them.' 'I know nothing about the glass hill; but stay! when my son comes, maybe he will be able to give you the information. Hide yourself under the bed, and don't make yourself known unless I call you.'

The mountains echoed with a mighty voice, the castle quaked, and the prince knew that Jezibaba's son was coming home. 'Foh! foh! there's a smell of human flesh; I'm going to eat it!' roared a horrible ogre already in the door-way, and thumped upon the ground with a silver club, so that the whole castle quaked. 'Ah! not so, my son, not

[p. 67]

so; but a handsome youth has come and has brought you a greeting from your brother in the leaden castle.' 'Well, if he's been at my brother's, and if he has done nothing to him, let him have no fear of me either; let him come out.' The prince sprang out from under the bed, and went up to him, looking beside him as if he had placed himself under a very tall pine. 'Well, beetle, have you been at my brother's?' 'Indeed, I have; and here I've still the dumplings, which he gave me for the journey.' 'Well, I believe you; now tell me what it is you want.' 'What I want? I am come to ask you whether you can't give me information about the glass hill or the three lemons.' 'Hem! I've heard formerly about it, but I don't know how to direct you. Meanwhile, do you know what? Go to my brother in the golden castle, he will direct you. But stay, I won't let you go away hungry. Mother, here with the dumplings!' Jezibaba brought the dumplings on a large silver dish, and set them on the table. 'Eat!' shouted her son. The prince, seeing that they were silver dumplings, said that he didn't want to eat just then, but would take some for his journey, if he would give him them. 'Take as many as you like, and greet my brother and aunt.' The prince took the dumplings, thanked him courteously, and proceeded further.

Three days had already passed since he quitted the silver castle, wandering continuously through densely wooded mountains, not knowing which way to go, whether to the right hand or to the left. All wearied out, he threw himself down under a wide-spreading beech, to take a little breath. His silver-mounted sword clanged on the ground, and the sound spread far and wide. 'Krr, krr, krr!' croaked a flock of ravens over the traveller, scared by the clash of his sword, and flew into the air. 'Praise be to God! the golden castle won't he far off now,' cried the prince, and proceeded, encouraged, onwards in the direction in which the ravens

[p. 68]

showed him the road. Scarcely had he come out of the valley on to a small hill, when he saw a beautiful and wide meadow, and in the midst of the meadow stood a golden castle, just as if he were gazing at the sun; and before the gate of the castle stood an old bent Jezibaba, leaning on a golden staff 'Ah! my son! what do you seek for here?' cried she to the prince. 'Here there is neither bird nor insect to be seen, much less a human being! If your life is dear to you, flee, for if my son comes, he will devour you!' Nay, old mother, he'll hardly eat me,' replied he. 'I bring him a greeting from his brother in the silver castle.' 'Well, if you bring him a greeting from the silver castle, come into the parlour and tell me what has brought you to us.' 'What has brought me to you, old mother? I have long been wandering in this mountain range, and haven't been able to find out where are the glass hill and the three lemons. I was directed to you, because haply you might be able to give me information about it.' 'Where is the glass hill? I cannot tell you that; but stay! when my son comes, he will counsel you which way you must go, and what you must do. Hide yourself under the table, and stay there till I call you.'

The mountains echoed, the castle quaked, and Jezibaba's son stepped into the parlour. 'Fob! foh! there's a smell of human flesh; I'm going to eat it!' shouted he, while still in the doorway, and thumped with a golden club upon the ground, so that the whole castle quaked. 'Gently, my son, gently!' said Jezibaba, soothing him; 'there is a handsome youth come, who brings you a greeting from your brother in the silver castle. If you will do nothing to him, I will call him at once.' 'Well, if my brother has done nothing to him, neither will I do anything to him.' The prince came out from under the table and placed himself beside him, looking, in comparison, as if he had placed

[p. 69]

himself beside a lofty tower, and showed him the silver dumplings in token that he had really been at the silver castle. 'Well, tell me, you beetle, what you want!' shouted the monstrous ogre; 'if I can counsel you, counsel you I will; don't fear!' Then the prince explained to him the aim of his long journey, and begged him to advise him which way to go to the glass hill, and what he must do to obtain the three lemons. 'Do you see that black knoll that looms yonder?' said he, pointing with his golden club; 'that is the glass hill; on the top of the hill stands a tree, and on the tree hang three lemons, whose scent spreads seven miles round. You will go up the glass hill, kneel under the tree, and hold up your hands; if the lemons are destined for you, they will fall off into your hands of themselves; but, if they are not destined for you, you will not pluck them, whatever you do. When you are on your return, and are hungry or thirsty, cut one of the lemons into halves, and you will eat and drink your fill. And now go, and God be with you! But stay, I won't let you go hungry. Mother, here with the dumplings!' Jezibaba set a large golden dish on the table. 'Eat!' said her son to the prince, 'or, if you don't want to do so now, put some into your pocket; you will eat them on the road.' The prince had no desire to eat, but put some into his pocket, saying that he would eat them on the road. He then thanked him courteously for his hospitality and counsel, and proceeded further.

Swiftly he paced from hill into dale, from dale on to a fresh hill, and never stopped till he was beneath the glass hill itself. There he stopped, as if turned to a stone. The hill was high and smooth; there wasn't a single crack in it. On the top spread the branches of a wondrous tree, and on the tree swung three lemons, whose scent was so powerful that the prince almost fainted. s God help me! Now, as it shall be, so it will be. Now that I'm once here, I will at

[p. 70]

any rate make the attempt,' thought he to himself; and began to climb up the smooth glass; but scarcely had he ascended a few fathoms when his foot slipped, and he himself, pop! down the hill, so that he didn't know where he was, or what he was, till he found himself on the ground at the bottom. Wearied out, he began to throw away the dumplings, thinking that their weight was a hindrance to him. He threw away the first, and lo! the dumpling fixed itself on the glass hill. He threw a second and a third, and saw before him three steps, on which he could stand with safety. The prince was overjoyed. He kept throwing the dumplings before him, and in every case steps formed themselves from them for him. First he threw the leaden ones, then the silver, and then the golden ones. By the steps thus constructed he ascended higher and higher till he happily attained the topmost ridge of the glass hill. Here he knelt down under the tree and held up his hands. And lo! the three beautiful lemons flew down of themselves into the palms of his hands. The tree disappeared, the glass hill crashed and vanished, and when the prince came to himself, there was no tree, no hill, but a wide plain lay extended before him.

He commenced his return homeward with delight. He neither ate nor drank, nor saw nor heard, for very joy. But when the third day came, a vacuum began to make itself felt in his stomach. He was so hungry that he would gladly have then and there betaken himself to the leaden dumplings if his pocket hadn't been empty. His pocket was empty, and all around was just as bare as the palm of his hand. Then he took a lemon out of his pocket and cut it into halves; and what came to pass? Out of the lemon sprang a beautiful damsel, who made a reverence before him, and cried out: 'Have you made ready for me to eat? Have you made ready for me to drink? Have you made

[p. 71]

pretty dresses ready for me?" 'I have nothing, beautiful creature, for you to eat, nothing for you to drink, nothing for you to put on,' said the prince, in a sorrowful voice, and the beautiful damsel clapped her white hands thrice before him, made a reverence and vanished.

'Aha! now I know what sort of lemons these are,' said the prince; 'stay! I won't cut them up so lightly.' From the cut one he ate and drank to his satisfaction, and thus refreshed, proceeded onwards.

But on the third day a hunger three times worse than the preceding, assailed him. 'God help me!' said he; I have still one remaining over. I'll cut it up.' He then took out the second lemon, cut it in halves, and lo! a damsel still more beautiful than the preceding one placed herself before him. 'Have you made ready for me to eat? Have you made ready for me to drink? Have you made pretty dresses ready for me?' 'I have not, dear soul! I have not!' and the beautiful damsel clapped her hands thrice before him, made a reverence, and vanished.

Now he had only one lemon remaining; he took it in his hand and said: 'I will not cut you open save in my father's house,' and therewith proceeded onwards. On the third day he saw, after long absence, his native town. He didn't know himself how he got there, when he found himself at once in his father's castle. Tears of joy bedewed his old father's cheeks: 'Welcome, my son! welcome a hundred times he cried, and fell upon his neck. The prince related how it had gone with him on his journey, and the members of the household how anxiously they had waited for him.

On the next day a grand entertainment was prepared; lords and ladies were invited from all quarters; and beautiful dresses, embroidered with gold and studded with pearls were got ready. The lords and ladies assembled, took their seats at the tables, and waited expectantly to see what would

[p. 72]

happen. Then the prince took out the last lemon, cut it in halves, and out of the lemon sprang a lady thrice as beautiful as had been the preceding ones. 'Have you made ready for me to eat? Have you made ready for me to drink? Have you got pretty dresses ready for me?' 'I have, my dear soul, got everything ready for you,' answered the prince, and presented the handsome dresses to her. The beautiful damsel put on the beautiful clothes, and all rejoiced at her extraordinary beauty. Ere long the betrothal took place, and after the betrothal a magnificent wedding.

Now was fulfilled the old king's wish; he blessed his son, resigned the kingdom into his hands, and ere long died.

The first thing that occurred to the new king after his father's death was a war, which a neighbouring king excited against him. Now he was constrained for the first time to part from his hard-earned wife. Lest, therefore, anything should happen to her in his absence, he caused a throne to be erected for her in a garden beside a lake, which no one could ascend, save the person to whom she let down a silken cord, and drew that person up to her.

Not far from the royal castle lived an old woman, the same that had given the prince the counsel about the three lemons. She had a servant, a gipsy, whom she was in the habit of sending to the lake for water. She knew very well that the young king had obtained a wife, and it annoyed her excessively that he had not invited her to the wedding, nay, had not even thanked her for her good advice. One day she sent her maidservant to the lake for water. She went, drew water, and saw a beautiful image in the water. Under the impression that this was her own reflection, she banged her pitcher on the ground, so that it flew into a thousand pieces. 'Are you worthy,' said she, 'that so beautiful a person as myself should carry water for an old witch like you?' As she uttered this she looked up, and

[p. 73]

lo! it wasn't her own reflection that she saw in the water, but that of the beautiful queen. Ashamed, she picked up the pieces and returned home. The old woman, who knew beforehand what had occurred, went out to meet her with a fresh pitcher, and asked her servant, for appearance' sake, what had happened to her. The servant related all as it had occurred. 'Well, that's nothing!' said the old woman. But, do you know what? Go you once more to the lake, and ask the lady to let down the silken cord and draw you up, promising to comb and dress her hair. If she draws you up, you will comb her hair, and when she falls asleep, stick this pin into her head. Then dress yourself in her clothes and sit there as queen.'

It wasn't necessary to use much persuasion to the gipsy; she took the pin, took the pitcher, and returned to the lake. She drew water and looked at the beautiful queen. 'Dear me! how beautiful you are! Ah! you are beautiful!' she screamed, and looked with coaxing gestures into her eyes. 'Yes,' said she; 'but you would be a hundred times more beautiful if you would let me comb and dress your hair; in truth, I would so twine those golden locks that your lord could not help being delighted.' And thus she jabbered, thus she coaxed, till the queen let down the silken cord and drew her up.

The nasty gipsy combed, separated, and plaited the golden hair till the beautiful queen fell sound asleep. Then the gipsy drew out the pin, and stuck it into the sleeping queen's head. At that moment a beautiful white dove flew off the golden throne, and not a vestige remained of the lovely queen save her handsome clothes, in which the gipsy speedily dressed herself, took her seat in the place where the queen sat before, and gazed into the lake; but the beautiful reflection displayed itself no more in the lake, for even in the queen's clothes the gipsy nevertheless remained a gipsy.

[p. 74]

The young king was successful in overcoming his enemies, and made peace with them. Scarcely had he returned to the town, when he went to the garden to seek his delight, and to see whether anything had happened to her. But who shall express his astonishment and horror, when, instead of his beautiful queen, he beheld a sorry gipsy. 'Ah, my dear, my very dear one, how you have altered!' sighed he, and tears bedewed his cheeks. 'I have altered, my beloved! I have altered; for anxiety for you has tortured me,' answered the gipsy, and wanted to fall upon his neck; but the king turned away from her and departed in anger. From that time forth he had no settled abode, no rest; he knew neither day nor night; but merely mourned over the lost beauty of his wife, and nothing could comfort him.

Thus agitated and melancholy, he was walking one day in the garden. Here, as he moved about at haphazard, a beautiful white dove flew on to his hand from a high tree, and looked with mournful gaze into his bloodshot eyes. 'Ah, my dove! why are you so sad? Has your mate been transformed like my beautiful wife?' said the young king, talking to it and caressingly stroking its head and back. But feeling a kind of protuberance on its head, he blew the feathers apart, and behold! the head of a pin! Touched with compassion, the king extracted the pin; that instant the beautiful mourning dove was changed into his beautiful wife. She narrated to him all that had happened to her, and how it had happened; how the gipsy had deluded her, and how she had stuck the pin into her head. The king immediately caused the gipsy and the old woman to be apprehended and burnt without further ado.

From that time forth nothing interfered with his happiness, neither the might of his enemies nor the spite of wicked people. He lived with his beautiful wife in peace and love; he reigned prosperously, and is reigning yet, if he be yet alive.

Footnotes

^64:* Jezibaba is said to represent winter.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 75] [11]

  

XI.--THE SUN-HORSE.

THERE was once upon a time a country, sad and gloomy as the grave, on which God's sun never shone. But there was a king there, and this king possessed a horse with a sun on his forehead; and this sun-horse of his the king caused to be led up and down the dark country, from one end to the other, that the people might be able to exist there; and light came from him on all sides wherever he was led, just as in the most beautiful day.

All at once the sun-horse disappeared. A darkness worse than that of night prevailed over the whole country, and nothing could disperse it. Unheard-of terror spread among the subjects; frightful misery began to afflict them, for they could neither manufacture anything nor earn anything, and such confusion arose among them that everything was turned topsy-turvy. The king, therefore, in order to liberate his realm and prevent universal destruction, made ready to seek the sun-horse with his whole army.

Through thick darkness he made his way as best he could to the frontier of his realm. Over dense mountains thousands of ages old God's light began now to break from another country, as if the sun were rising in the morning out of thick fogs. On such a mountain the king came with his army to a poor lonely cottage. He went in to inquire where he was, what it was, and how to get further. At a table sat a peasant, diligently reading in an open book. When the king bowed to him he raised his eyes, thanked him, and stood up. His whole person announced that he was not a man like another man, but a seer.

'I was just reading about you,' said he to the king, 'how that you are going to seek the sun-horse. Journey no further, for you will not obtain him; but rely on me: I will find him for you.' 'I promise you, good man, I will recompense

[p. 76]

you royally,' replied the king, 'if you bring him here to me.' 'I require no recompense; return home with your army--you're wanted there; only leave me one servant.'

The next day the seer set out with the servant. The way was far and long, for they passed through six countries, and had still further to go, till in the seventh country they stopped at the royal palace. In this seventh country ruled three own brothers, who had to wife three own sisters, whose mother was a witch. When they stopped in front of the palace, the seer said to his servant: 'Do you hear? you stay here, and I will go in to ascertain whether the kings are at home; for the horse with the sun is in their possession--the youngest rides upon him.' Therewith he transformed himself into a green bird, and, flying on the gable of the eldest queen's roof, flew up and down and pecked at it until she opened the window and let him into her chamber. And when she let him in he perched on her white hand, and the queen was as delighted with him as a little child. 'Ah, what a dear creature you are!' said she, as she played with him; 'if my husband were at home he would indeed be delighted with you; but he won't come till evening; he has gone to visit the third part of his country.'

All at once the old witch came into the room, and, seeing the bird, screamed to her daughter, 'Wring the accursed bird's neck, for it's making you bleed!' 'Well, what if it should make me bleed? it's such a dear; it's such an innocent dear!' answered the daughter. But the witch said: 'Dear innocent mischief! here with him! let me wring his neck!' and dashed at it. But the bird cunningly transformed itself into a man, and, pop! out through the door, and they didn't know whither he had betaken himself.

Afterwards he again transformed himself into a green bird, flew on the gable of the middle sister, and pecked at

[p. 77]

it till she opened the window for him. And when she let him in he flew on to her white hand, and fluttered from one hand to the other. 'Oh, what a dear creature you are!' cried the queen, smiling; 'my husband would indeed be delighted with you if he were at home; but he won't come till to-morrow evening; he has gone to visit two thirds of his kingdom.'

Thereupon the witch burst into the room. 'Wring the accursed bird's neck! wring its neck, for it's making you bleed!' cried she as soon as she espied it. 'Well, what if it should make me bleed? it's such a dear, such an innocent dear!' replied the daughter. But the witch said: 'Dear innocent mischief! here with it! let me wring its neck!' and was already trying to seize it. But at that moment the green bird changed itself into a man, ran out through the door, and disappeared, as it were, in the clap of a hand, so that they didn't know whither he had gone.

A little while afterwards he changed himself again into a green bird and flew on the gable of the youngest queen's roof, and flew up and down, and pecked at it until she opened the window to him. And when she had let him in he flew straight on to her white hand, and made himself so agreeable to her that she played with him with the delight of a child. 'Ah, what a dear creature you are!' said the queen; 'if my husband were at home he would certainly be delighted with you, but he won't come till the day after to-morrow at even; he has gone to visit all three parts of his kingdom.'

At that moment the old witch came into the room. 'Wring, wring the accursed bird's neck!' screamed she in the doorway, 'for it is making you bleed.' 'Well, what if it should make me bleed, mother? it is so beautiful, so innocent,' answered the daughter. The witch said, 'Beautiful innocent mischief! here with him! let me wring his

[p. 78]

neck!' But at that moment the bird changed itself into a man, and pop! out through the door, so that none of them saw him more.

Now the seer knew where the kings were, and when they would arrive. He went to his servant and ordered him to follow him out of the town. On they went with rapid step till they came to a bridge, over which the kings were obliged to pass.

Under this bridge they stayed waiting till the evening. When at even the sun was sinking behind the mountains, the clatter of a horse was heard near the bridge. It was the eldest king returning home. Close to the bridge his horse stumbled over a log of wood, which the seer had thrown across the bridge. 'Ha! what scoundrel was that who threw this log across the road?' exclaimed the king in anger. Thereat the seer sprang out from under the bridge and rushed upon the king for 'daring to call him a scoundrel,' and, drawing his sword, attacked him. The king, too, drew his sword to defend himself, but after a short combat fell dead from his horse. The seer bound the dead king on the horse, and gave the horse a lash with the whip to make him carry his dead master home. He then withdrew under the bridge, and they waited there till the next evening.

When day a second time declined towards evening, the middle king came to the bridge, and, seeing the ground sprinkled with blood, cried out, 'Somebody's been killed here! Who has dared to perpetrate such a crime in my kingdom?' At these words the seer sprang out from under the bridge and rushed upon the king with drawn sword, exclaiming, 'How dare you insult me? Defend yourself as best you can!' The king did defend himself, but after a brief struggle yielded up his life under the sword of the seer. The seer again fastened his corpse upon the horse, and gave the horse a lash with the whip to make him carry his dead

[p. 79]

master home. They then withdrew under the bridge and waited till the third evening came.

The third evening, at the very setting of the sun, up darted the youngest king on the sun-horse, darted up with speed, for he was somewhat late; but when he saw the red blood in front of the bridge, he stopped, and gazing at it exclaimed, 'It is an unheard-of villain who has dared to murder a man in my kingdom!' Scarcely had these words issued from his mouth when the seer placed himself before him with drawn sword, sternly bidding him defend himself, 'for he had wounded his honour.' 'I don't know how,' answered the king, 'unless it is you that are the villain.' But as his adversary attacked him with a sword, he, too, drew his, and defended himself manfully.

It had been mere play to the seer to overcome the first two kings, but it was not so with this one. Long time they fought, and broke their swords, yet victory didn't show itself either on the one side or on the other. 'We shall effect nothing with swords,' said the seer, 'but do you know what? Let us turn ourselves into wheels and start down from the hill; the wheel which breaks shall be the conquered.' 'Good!' said the king; 'I'll be a cart-wheel, and you shall be a lighter wheel.' 'Not so,' cunningly said the seer; 'you shall be the lighter wheel, and I will be the cart-wheel;' and the king agreed to it. Then they went up the hill, turned themselves into wheels, and started downwards. The cart-wheel flew to pieces, and bang! right into the lighter wheel, so that it all smashed up. Immediately the seer arose out of the cart-wheel and joyfully exclaimed, 'There you are, the victory is mine!' 'Not a bit of it, sir brother!' cried the king, placing himself in front of the seer; 'you have only broken my fingers. But do you know what? Let us make ourselves into flames, and the flame which burns up the other shall be the victor. I will make myself into a red

[p. 80]

flame, and do you make yourself into a bluish one.' 'Not so!' interrupted the seer; 'you make yourself into a bluish flame, and I will make myself into a red one.' The king agreed to this also. They went into the road to the bridge, and, changing themselves into flames, began to burn each other unmercifully. Long did they burn each other, but nothing came of it. Thereupon, by coincidence, up came an old beggar with a long gray beard, a bald head, a large scrip at his side, leaning upon a thick staff. 'Old father!' said the bluish flame, 'bring some water and quench this red flame; I'll give you a penny for it.' The red flame cunningly exclaimed, 'Old father! I'll give you a shilling if you'll pour the water on this bluish flame.' The old beggar liked the shilling better than the penny, brought water and quenched the bluish flame. Then it was all over with the king. The red flame turned itself into a man, took the sun-horse by the bridle, mounted on his back, called the servant, thanked the beggar for the service he had rendered, and went off.

In the royal palaces there was deep grief at the murder of the two kings; the entire palaces were draped with black cloth, and the people crowded into them from all quarters to gaze at the cut and slashed bodies of the two elder brothers, whose horses had brought them home. The old witch, exasperated at the death of her sons-in-law, devised a plan of vengeance on their murderer, the seer. She seated herself with speed on an iron rake, took her three daughters under her arms, and pop! off with them into the air.

The seer and his servant had already got through a good part of their journey, and were then crossing desert mountains, a treeless waste. Here a terrible hunger seized the servant, and there wasn't even a wild plum to assuage it. All of a sudden they came to an apple-tree. Apples were hanging on it; the branches were all but breaking under

[p. 81]

their weight; their scent was beautiful; they were delightfully ruddy, so that they almost offered themselves to be eaten. 'Praise be to God!' cried the delighted servant; 'I shall eat one of those apples with an excellent appetite.' 'Don't attempt to gather one of them!' cried the seer to him; 'wait, I'll gather some for you myself.' But instead of plucking an apple, he drew his sword and thrust it mightily into the apple-tree; red blood spouted out of it. 'There,' said he, 'you would have come to harm if you had eaten any of those apples, for the apple-tree was the eldest queen, whose mother placed her there to put us out of this world.'

After a time they came to a spring; water clear as crystal bubbled up in it, all but running over the brim and thus attracting wayfarers. 'Ah!' said the servant, 'if we can't get anything better, let us at any rate have a drink of this good water.' 'Don't venture to drink of it!' shouted the seer; 'but stay, I'll get you some of it.' Yet he didn't get him any water, but thrust his drawn sword into the midst of it; it was immediately discoloured with blood, which began to flow from it in mighty waves. 'That is the middle queen, whose mother placed her here to put us out of this world,' said the seer, and the servant thanked him for his warning, and went on, would he, nould he, in hunger and thirst, whithersoever the seer led him.

After a time they came to a rose-bush, which was red with delightful roses, and filled the air round about with their scent. 'Oh, what beautiful roses!' said the servant; 'I never saw such beauties in all my life. I'll go and gather a few of them; I will at any rate comfort myself with them if I can't assuage my hunger and thirst.' 'Don't venture to gather one of them!' cried the seer; 'I will gather them for you.' With that he cut into the bush with his sword; red blood spurted out, as if he had cut the vein of a human

[p. 82]

being. 'That is the youngest queen,' said the seer to his servant, 'whom her mother, the witch, placed here with the intention of taking vengeance upon us for the death of her sons-in-law.' They then went on.

When they crossed the frontier of the dark realm, flashes flew in all directions from the horse's forehead, and everything came to life again, beautiful regions rejoiced and blossomed with the flowers of spring. The king didn't know how to thank the seer sufficiently, and offered him the half of his kingdom as a reward, but he declined it. You are king,' said he; 'rule over the whole realm, and I will return to my cottage in peace.' He took leave and departed.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[12]

  

XII.--THE GOLDEN SPINSTER.

FAR away somewhere beyond the Red Sea, there was a certain young lord. When he had grown up in body and mind, he bethought himself that indeed it would not be a bad thing to look round him in the world and seek out a nice wife for himself, and a good mistress for his household. Well, as he determined, so he did. He went out into the world, but could not find such a one as he would have liked. At last he went somehow into the house of a widow, who had three daughters, all maidens. The two elder were as active as wasps for work, but the youngest, who was named Hanka, was like a leaden bird for everything that wanted doing. When the young lord came to them at spinning time he was astounded. 'How is it,' thought he, 'that Hanka can he sleeping in the chimney-corner, while the other spinsters are hard at work at their tasks?' He said to their mother: 'But, old lady, tell me, why don't you make that one, too, take a distaff? She is quite a grown-up girl, and would amuse herself by work.' 'Ah!

[p. 83]

young sir,' replied the mother, 'I would allow her to spin with all my heart; I would fill her distaff myself; but what then? She is such a spinster, that by herself she would by morning spin up not only all our spinning materials, but all the thatch from the roof, and that into golden threads; nay, at last she would betake herself to my gray hairs; I am obliged, therefore, to give her a holiday.' 'If this be so,' said the delighted suitor, 'and if it is God's will, you can give her to me to wife. You see, I have a nice establishment--flax, hemp, whole heaps of the finer and commoner kinds of tow; she could spin away to her heart's content.' At such language the old woman did not take long for consideration, and Hanka woke from her slumbers. They brought the bridegroom expectant a handsome olive-coloured handkerchief out of the clothes-chest, adorned him with periwinkles, and performed the marriage ceremony that very evening. The other spinsters were somewhat mortified at Hanka's good fortune, but finally were content at it, hoping that they, too, would get rings on their fingers, [**] now that the idle hand, as they nicknamed Hanka, had obtained a husband. The next day our young bridegroom ordered his horses to be harnessed, and when all was ready, placed the tearful bride beside him in a handsome carriage, gave his hand to his mother-in-law, called out 'Farewell!' to the bride's sisters, and they left the village at a gallop.

For better or worse! Poor Hanka sat by her youthful husband mournful and tearful, just as if the chickens had eaten up all her bread. He talked to her enough, but Hanka was as mute as a fish. 'What's the matter with you?' said he. 'Don't be frightened. At my house, indeed, there will be no going to sleep for you. I shall give you all that your heart desires. You will have flax, hemp, fine and coarse tow enough for the whole winter, and I

[p. 84]

have got in a store of apples for spittle.' But our Hanka became more sorrowful the further they went. Thus they arrived in the evening at the young lord's castle, got down from the carriage, and, after supper, the future lady was conducted into a large room, in which, from top to bottom, lay nothing but spinning materials. 'Well,' said he, 'here you have distaff, spindle, and spindle-ring, and rosy apples and a few peas for spittle--spin away! If you spin all this, by morning, into golden threads, we shall be man and wife at once if not, I shall cause you to be put to death without further ado.' Thereupon the young lord went out and left the spinster to spin. When Hanka was left alone, she didn't seat herself under the distaff, for she didn't even know how to twirl the threads, but began sorrowfully to exclaim: 'Oh God! God! here I am come out to vile disgrace! Why did not my mother teach me to work and spin like my two sisters? I might then have reposed in peace at home; but, as it is, sinful creature that I am, I must perish miserably.' As she was thus expressing her feelings, the wall suddenly opened, and a little mannikin stood before the terrified Hanka, with a red cap on his head and an apron girt round his waist; before him he pushed a little golden hand-cart. 'Why have you your eyes so tearful?' inquired he of Hanka. 'What has happened to you?' 'As if; sinful soul that I am, I should not weep,' said she; 'only think, they have ordered me to spin all these spinning materials into golden threads by morning, and if I don't do so, they will have me put to death without any ceremony. Oh God! God! what shall I do, forlorn in this strange world?' 'If that is all,' said the mannikin, 'don't be frightened. I will teach you to spin golden threads cleverly; but only on this condition, that I find you this time next year in this very place. Then, if you do not guess my honourable name, you will become my wife, and I shall

[p. 85]

convey you away in this cart. But, if you guess it, I shall leave you in peace. But this I tell you: if you choose to hide yourself anywhere this time next year, and if you fly ever so far beneath the sky, I shall find you, and will wring your neck. Well, have you agreed to this?' It was not, sooth to say, very satisfactory to Hanka; but what could the poor thing do? At length she bethought herself: 'Let it be left to God, whether I perish this way or that! I agree.' The mannikin, on hearing this, made three circuits round her with his golden cart, seated himself under the distaff, and repeating:

'Thus, Haniczka, thus!
 Thus, Haniczka, thus!
 Thus, Haniczka, thus!'

taught and instructed her to spin golden threads. After this, as he came, so he departed, and the wall closed up of itself behind him. Our damsel, from that time forth a real golden spinster, sat under the distaff, and seeing how the spinning materials decreased and the golden threads increased, spun and spun away, and by morning had not only spun up all, but had had a good sleep into the bargain. In the morning, as soon as the young lord awoke, he dressed himself and went to visit the golden spinster. When he entered the room he was all but blinded by the glitter, and wouldn't even believe his eyes, that it was all gold. But when he had satisfied himself that so it was, he began to embrace the golden spinster, and declared her his true and lawful wife. Thus they lived in the fear of God, and if our young lord had previously loved his Haniczka for the golden spinning, he then loved her a thousand times more for the beautiful son that she in the meantime bore him.

But what? There's no footpath without an end, neither could the joy of our wedded pair endure for ever. Day passed after day, till finally the appointed time approached

[p. 86]

within a span. Now our Hanka began to be more sorrowful from moment to moment; her eyes were as red as if they were baked, and she did nothing but creep like a shadow from room to room. And, indeed, it was a serious thing for a young mother to have to lose all at once her good husband and her beautiful son! Hitherto her poor husband knew nought about anything, and comforted his wife as well as he could; but she would not be comforted. When she bethought herself what a nasty dwarf she was going to obtain instead of her shapely husband, she all but dashed herself against the walls from excessive agony. At last she managed to overcome herself, and revealed everything to her husband as it had occurred to her on that first night. He became, from horror, as pale as a whitewashed wall, and caused proclamation to be made throughout the whole district that, if anyone knew of such a dwarf, and should make known his real name, he would give him a piece of gold as large as his head. 'Ah! what a windfall such a piece of gold as that would be!' whispered neighbour to neighbour, and they dispersed on all sides, examined all corners, all but looked into the mouseholes, searched and searched as for a needle, but, after all, couldn't find anything out. Nobody knew and nobody had seen the dwarf, and as for his name, no living soul could guess it. Under such circumstances the last day arrived; nothing had been seen or heard of the mannikin, and our Hanka, with her boy at her breast, was wringing her hands at the prospect of losing her husband. Her unhappy husband, whose eyes were almost exhausted from weeping, in order, at any rate, to escape from beholding the agony of his wife, took his gun on his shoulder, fastened his faithful hounds in a leash, and went out hunting. After hunting time--it was about the hour of afternoon luncheon--it began to lighten on all sides and in all directions, rain poured so that it would have been a shame to turn a dog

[p. 87]

out into the roads, and in this tempest all our young lord's servants sought shelter where they could, and got so lost that he remained with only one on a densely wooded unknown hill, and that as soaked and dripping as a rat. Where were they to seek shelter before the ever-increasing storm? where to dry themselves? where to obtain harbour for the night? The unlucky pair, master and servant, looked round on all sides to see whether they couldn't espy a shepherd's hut or a cattle-shed; but where nothing is, there is nothing. Finally, when they had almost strained their eyes out of the sockets, they saw where, out of the hole of the side shaft of a mine, puffs of smoke were rolling, as from a limekiln. 'Go, lad,' said the young lord to the servant, 'look whence this smoke issues; there must be people there. Ask them whether they will give us lodging for the night.' The servant went off and returned in a jiffy with the intelligence that neither door, nor shed, nor people were there. 'Fie, you're only a duffer!' said the lord to his servant with chattering teeth. 'I'll go myself; you, for a punishment, shall drip and freeze.' Well, the noble lord took the job in hand, but neither could he espy anything, save that in one place smoke kept continually issuing out of the side shaft. At last in disgust he said: 'Whatever devil on devil may bring, know I must whence all this smoke comes.' So he went to the hole itself, knelt beside it and peeped in. As he was thus peeping, he espied, somewhere under ground, where food was cooking in a kitchen, and covers were laid for two on a stone table. Round this table ran a little mannikin in a red cap with a golden hand-cart before him, and from time to time, after making the circuit, he sang:

'I've manufactured a golden spinster for the young lord,
 She will try to guess my name to night;
 If she guesses my name aright, I shall leave her; [p. 88]
 If she guesses it not, I shall take her:
 My name is Martynko Klyngas.'

[paragraph continues] And again he ran like mad round the table and shouted:

'I'm preparing nine dishes for supper,
 I'll place her in a silken bed;
 If she guesses,' etc.

[paragraph continues] The young lord wanted nothing more; he ran as fast as his legs could carry him to his servant, and, as it now cleared up a little, they were fortunate enough to find a path, by which they hastened home. He found his wife at home in agony, in misery, streaming with tears; for she thought she would not be able even to take leave of her husband, as he was so long away. 'Don't afflict yourself, my wife,' were the young lord's first words when he entered the room. 'I know what you require; his name is Martynko Klyngas.' And then he, without delay, recounted to her everything, where he had gone and what had happened to him. Hanka could scarcely keep on her feet for joy, embraced and kissed her husband, and betook herself joyfully into the room, in which she had spent the first night, to finish spinning the golden threads. At midnight the wall opened, and the mannikin with the red cap came in, as he had done that time last year, and running round her with the golden cart shouted with the utmost power of his lungs:

'If you guess my name, I leave you;
 If you guess it not, I take you;
      Only guess, guess away!'

[paragraph continues] 'I'll have a try to guess,' said Hanka; 'your name is Martynko Klyngas.' As soon as she had uttered this, the little dwarf seized his cart, threw his cap on the ground, and departed as he had come; the wall closed, and Hanka breathed in peace. From that time forth she spun no more gold, and, indeed, neither was it necessary for her so to do, for they were rich enough. She and her husband lived

[p. 89]

happily together, their boy grew like a young tree by the water's side; and they bought a cow, and on the cow a bell, and here's an end to the tale I tell.'

________

[This story may be compared with 'Rumpelstiltskin' in Grimm. The principle is the same; but, I think, the variation in the details is much in favour of the Slavonic tale.]

Footnotes

^83:* Literally, 'Would come under the garland.'

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[13]

  

XIII.--ARE YOU ANGRY?

WHERE it was, there it was, a certain village there was, in which lived a father with three sons. One of them was silly, and always sat in the chimney corner, [**] but the other two were considered clever. One of these went out to service in a village not far off. His mother put on his back a wallet full of cakes baked under the ashes. He went into a house and made an engagement with the master upon the terms that whichever got angry first was to have his nose cut off. The servant went to thresh. He was not called by his master either to breakfast or to dinner. His master asked him: 'Well, Mishek, are you angry?' 'What have I to be angry for?' Evening came, and supper was cooked; again they did not ask Mishek. His master asked him: 'Well, Mishek, are you angry?' 'What have I to be angry for?' He wasn't angry, for the cakes from home still held out. But during the second and third day the wallet was emptied, and again he wasn't summoned to dinner. His master asked him: 'Mishek, are you not angry?' 'Wouldn't even the devil be angry, when you are thus killing me with hunger?' Then his master pulled out a knife and cut off Mishek's nose. He hastened home noseless, and complained to his father and brothers of his wicked master. 'You

[p. 90]

simpleton!' said the next brother, Pavko. 'Stay, I'll go! Hey, mother, bake some cakes under the ashes!' Pavko started off and went straight to the same village and to the same house, and made an engagement with the same master, on the terms that whichever was the first to become angry was to have his nose cut off. They set him, too, to thresh for three days, but neither on the first, nor on the second, nor on the third day, did they call him to take a meal. 'Pavko, are you not angry?' 'Wouldn't even devils be angry with you? My belly has already grown to my backbone.' Thereupon his master pulled out a knife and cut off Pavko's nose. Pavko went home noseless, and said to his elder brother: 'That's a cruel house of entertainment; the devil's got nay nose.' Then Adam, the youngest, shouted from the chimney-corner: 'You are idiots! I'll go, and you'll see that I shall make a good job of it.' He went with cakes baked under the ashes in his wallet, and hit right upon the same village in which his brothers had been, and engaged himself with the same master upon the terms that whichever got angry first should have his nose cut off. But Adam knew how to proceed intelligently. When his master didn't call him to dinner, he went to the public-house with what he had threshed and pawned it all. His master came and didn't see a grain of corn. Adam then asked him: 'Master, are you angry?' 'Why should I be angry?' This occurred several times, and his master always said that he wasn't angry, for fear of losing his nose. Once there came a day on which the master and mistress were obliged to be from home, and they ordered Adam by their return to kill the first sheep that looked at him when he entered the stable, to dress it and boil it in a caldron, putting parsley with it. Adam went into the stable with great banging and noise, so that all the sheep looked at him at once, whereupon he slaughtered them all. One he dressed

[p. 91]

and put in the caldron, but instead of parsley he threw in a dog called by that name. His master and mistress came and asked Adam whether he had done everything properly? He said: 'I've slaughtered the sheep and thrown Parsley into the caldron till I' saw his feet. Now, master, are you angry?' 'What have I to be angry about?' he replied, for he preferred keeping his nose. On Christmas Eve, when they had to go to church, it was very dark. Adam's master said to him: 'It would be a good thing if somebody would light us as far as the church.' 'Go! go! I'll light you.' He took fire and set the roof on fire, till the whole house was in flames. The master hurried up, and Adam said to him: 'Master, are you angry?' 'Why should I be angry?' said he; for his nose was dearer to him than his house. But what was he to do without a house, without everything? They went into the world, master, mistress, and servant. They wanted to put him to death; and planned together, that when he was asleep his master should throw him into the water. But Adam was up to this; he didn't lie down on the side nearest the water, but got up in the night and threw his mistress, who was on that side, into the water. His master woke, and saw that his wife was gone; and began to cry out. But Adam asked him: 'Well, master, are you angry?' 'Wouldn't even the devil be angry, now that you've done me out of everything?' Adam took a knife and cut off his master's nose. He then took to his heels, went home, and said to his brothers: 'Now you see, you wiseacres, that I've earned the nose.'

Footnotes

^89:* Literally, 'Behind the stove.'

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 92]

  

UPPER AND LOWER LUSATIAN STORIES.

THE Upper Lusatian language is spoken in a district which may be marked by the towns of Lobau, Bautzen, and Muskau, while the Lower Lusatians dwell round the towns of Spremberg and Kottbus. Of the Upper Lusatians the larger portion live in Saxony and the smaller in Prussian territory; the Lower Lusatians are all Prussian subjects.

The [*Upper Lusatian story] illustrates, in folklore style, a moral principle of great value. The [*Lower Lusatian tale] is a variant of our own 'Little Red Ridinghood.' But it completes the story in such a manner as to explain the allegorical meaning of the narrative in the sense in which I am inclined to interpret it, as will be shown at the conclusion of the story.

But the Slavonic remnant in Lusatia is so surrounded by German territory, that most of its folklore has already been pressed into the service of the Germans.

A remarkable point in the Lusatian language is the completeness of the dual number in both nouns, adjectives, and verbs.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[14]

  

XIV.--RIGHT ALWAYS REMAINS RIGHT.

THERE was once upon a time a huntsman, who had a son, who was also a huntsman. He sent his son into a foreign

[p. 93]

land, to look about him and learn something additional. Here he went into a tavern, where he found a stranger, with whom he entered into conversation. They told each other all the news, till they also began to talk about right and wrong. The stranger asserted that the greatest wrong could be made right for money. But the huntsman opined that right always remained right, and offered to bet three hundred dollars upon it, if the stranger would do the same. [**] The stranger was content therewith, and they agreed to ask three advocates the question at once. They went to the first advocate, and he said that it was possible to make wrong right for money. They then went to another. He also asserted that wrong could be made right for money. Finally, they went to a third. He also told them that wrong could be made right for money. They then went back again, and as they had been going about the whole day, it wasn't till late in the evening that they got to their tavern. The stranger then asked the huntsman whether he still disbelieved that the greatest wrong could be made right for money, and the huntsman replied that he should soon be obliged to believe it on the assertion of the three advocates, although he was very unwilling to do so. The stranger was willing to grant him his life if he consented to pay three hundred dollars; but as they were talking about it, in came a man who overpersuaded the stranger that he must needs abide by what they had previously agreed upon. He did not, however, do this, but only, with a red-hot iron, took his eyesight from him, and told him at the same time, that he would then and then only believe that right remained right in the world, when the huntsman regained his sight.

The huntsman entreated the host of the tavern to put

[p. 94]

him on the right road to the town. He put him on the road to the gallows, and went his way. When the huntsman had gone a little further, there was the end of the road, and he heard it strike eleven. He couldn't go any further, and remained lying where he was in hope that perhaps somebody would come there in the morning. After a short time he heard a clatter, and soon somebody came up; nor was it long before a second and a third arrived. These were three evil spirits, who quitted their bodies in the night time, and perpetrated all manner of villainy in the world. They began to talk together, and one said: 'To-day it is a year and a day since we were here together and related the good deeds that we had done during the year before. A year has again elapsed, and it is therefore time that we should ascertain which of us has done the best action during the past year.' The first spoke, and said: 'I have deprived the inhabitants of the city of Ramul of their water supply; they can only be helped if somebody finds out what it is that stops up the spring.' 'What's that?' said the second; and the first replied: 'I have placed a great toad on the spring out of which the water at other times flowed; if that be removed, the water will spring up again as before.' The second said: 'I have caused the beauty of the princess of Sarahawsky to disappear, and herself to fade away to skin and bones; she cannot be helped until the silver nail, which hangs above her bed, be pulled out.' The third said: Yesterday I caused a person to be deprived of his eyesight with a red hot iron; he can only be helped by washing his eyes with the water that is in the well not far from this gallows.' It then struck twelve in the town, and the three disappeared at once, but the huntsman remembered all that he had heard, and rejoiced that it was in his power to regain his eyesight.

Early on the morrow he heard somebody passing by, and

[p. 95]

begged him to send him people from the town, to tell where the healing spring was. Then all manner of people came to him, but no one could show him the spring, save at length one old woman. He caused himself to be led thither, and as soon as he had washed his eyes in it, he immediately obtained his eyesight again.

He now asked the way to the city of Ramul, and went thither. As soon as he arrived, he told the town council that he would restore them their water. But plenty of people had been there already, and the city had spent a great deal of money upon them, yet no one had effected aught, so, as it had been all in vain, they intended to have nothing more to do with the matter. Well, he said that he would do it all for nothing, only they must give him some labourers to help him. It was done. When they had dug as far as the place where the pipes, through which the water used to flow, were laid into the spring, he sent all the work-men away and dug a little further himself, and behold! a toad, like a boiler, was sitting on the spring. He removed it, and immediately the water began to flow, and ere long all the fountains were filled with water. The citizens got up a grand banquet in his honour, and paid him a large sum of money for what he had done.

He then went on and came to Sarahawsky. Then in a short time he learnt that the princess was ill, just as he had heard, and that no physician was able to help her; moreover that the king had promised that the person who could cure her malady should obtain her to wife. He therefore equipped himself very handsomely, went to the king's palace, and there declared that he had come from a far country, and would cure the princess. The king replied to him that he had scarce any hope left, but would nevertheless make the experiment with him. The huntsman said that he would fetch his medicine. He went out and bought all manner of

[p. 96]

sweet comfits, and then went to the princess. He gave her a first dose, and looked about to see in what part of her bed's head the silver nail was sticking. Early on the second day he came again, gave her again some of his medicine, took the opportunity of laying hold of the nail, and pulled it till it began to move. In the afternoon the princess felt that she was better. The third day he came again, and while the princess was taking the medicine, pulled again at the bed's head, pulled the nail clean out, and put it secretly into his pocket. At noon the princess was so far recovered, that she wanted to have her dinner, and the king invited the huntsman to a grand banquet. They settled when the wedding was to take place, but the huntsman considered that he must first go home.

And when he had got home, he went again to the tavern where he had lost the sight of his eyes, and the stranger was there also. They began to tell each other all the news, and the huntsman related what he had heard under the gallows; how he had discovered the water, and finally how he had regained the sight of his eyes, and said that the stranger must now believe that in the world right always remained right. The stranger marvelled exceedingly, and said that he would believe it.

After this the huntsman went on and came to his princess, and they had a grand wedding festival, which lasted a whole week. The stranger bethought himself that he, too, would go under the gallows; peradventure he might also hear some such things as the huntsman had heard, and might in consequence also obtain a princess to wife. And when the year had elapsed, he also went there. He heard it strike one, and in a short time he heard a clatter; then up came somebody again, and it wasn't long before a second and third arrived. They began to talk together, and one said: 'It cannot but be, that some one overheard us

[p. 97]

last year, and through that everything that we have done is ruined. Let us, therefore, make a careful search before we again recount to each other what we have done.' They immediately began to search, and found the stranger. They tore him into three pieces and hung them up on the three corners of the gallows.

When the old king died they took the huntsman for king, and if he has not died, he is reigning still at the present day, and firmly believes that in his realm right will always remain right.

Footnotes

^93:* This surely ought, from what transpires later in the story, to have run thus: 'To stake his life against three hundred dollars to he staked by the stranger.'

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[15]

  

XV.--LITTLE RED HOOD.

ONCE upon a time, there was a little darling damsel, whom everybody loved that looked upon her, but her old granny loved her best of all, and didn't know what to give the dear child for love. Once she made her a hood of red samite, and since that became her so well, and she, too, would wear nothing else on her head, people gave her the name of 'Red Hood.' Once her mother said to Red Hood, 'Go; here is a slice of cake and a bottle of wine; carry them to old granny. She is ill and weak, and they will refresh her. But be pretty behaved, and don't peep about in all corners when you come into her room, and don't forget to say "Good-day." Walk, too, prettily, and don't go out of the road, otherwise you will fall and break the bottle, and then poor granny will have nothing.' Red Hood said, 'I will observe everything well that you have told me,' and gave her mother her hand upon it.

But granny lived out in a forest, half an hour's walk from the village. When Red Hood went into the forest, she met a wolf. But she did not know what a wicked beast he was, and was not afraid of him. 'God help you, Red Hood!' said he. 'God bless you, wolf!' replied she. 'Whither so early, Red Hood?' 'To granny.' 'What have you there

[p. 98]

under your mantle?' 'Cake and wine. We baked yesterday; old granny must have a good meal for once, and strengthen herself therewith.' 'Where does your granny live, Red Hood?' 'A good quarter of an hour's walk further in the forest, under yon three large oaks. There stands her house; further beneath are the nut-trees, which you will see there,' said Red Hood. The wolf thought within himself, 'This nice young damsel is a rich morsel. She will taste better than the old woman; but you must trick her cleverly, that you may catch both.' For a time he went by Red Hood's side. Then said he, 'Red Hood! just look! there are such pretty flowers here! Why don't you look round at them all? Methinks you don't even hear how delightfully the birds are singing! You are as dull as if you were going to school, and yet it is so cheerful in the forest!' Little Red Hood lifted up her eyes, and when she saw how the sun's rays glistened through the tops of the trees, and every place was full of flowers, she bethought herself, 'If I bring with me a sweet smelling nosegay to granny, it will cheer her. It is still so early, that I shall come to her in plenty of time,' and therewith she skipped into the forest and looked for flowers. And when she had plucked one, she fancied that another further off was nicer, and ran there, and went always deeper and deeper into the-forest. But the wolf went by the straight road to old granny's, and knocked at the door. 'Who's there?' 'Little Red Hood, who has brought cake and wine. Open!' 'Only press the latch,' cried granny; 'I am so weak that I cannot stand.' The wolf pressed the latch, walked in, and went without saying a word straight to granny's bed and ate her up. Then he took her clothes, dressed himself in them, put her cap on his head, lay down in her bed and drew the curtains.

Meanwhile little Red Hood was running after flowers, and when she had so many that she could not carry any more, she bethought her of her granny, and started on the

[p. 99]

way to her. It seemed strange to her that the door was wide open, and when she entered the room everything seemed to her so peculiar, that she thought, 'Ah! my God! how strange I feel to-day, and yet at other times I am so glad to be with granny!' She said, 'Good-day!' but received no answer. Thereupon she went to the bed and undrew the curtains. There lay granny, with her cap drawn down to her eyes, and looking so queer! 'Ah, granny! why have you such long ears?' 'The better to hear you.' 'Ah, granny! why have you such large eyes?" 'The better to see you.' 'Ah, granny! why have you such large hands?' The better to take hold of you.' 'But, granny! why have you such a terribly large mouth?' 'The better to eat you up!' And therewith the wolf sprang out of bed at once on poor little Red Hood, and ate her up.

When the wolf had satisfied his appetite, he lay down again in the bed, and began to snore tremendously. A huntsman came past, and bethought himself, 'How can an old woman snore like that? I'll just have a look to see what it is.' He went into the room, and looked into the bed; there lay the wolf. Have I found you now, old rascal?' said he. 'I've long been looking for you.' He was just going to take aim with his gun, when he bethought himself, 'Perhaps the wolf has only swallowed granny, and she may yet be released;' therefore he did not shoot, but took a knife and began to cut open the sleeping wolf's maw. When he had made several cuts, he saw a red hood gleam, and after one or two more cuts out skipped Red Hood, and cried, 'Oh, how frightened I have been; it was so dark in the wolf's maw!' Afterwards out came old granny, still alive, but scarcely able to breathe. But Red Hood made haste and fetched large stones, with which they filled the wolf's maw, and when he woke he wanted to jump up and run away, but the stones were so heavy that he fell on the ground and beat himself to death. Now, they were all

[p. 100]

three merry. The huntsman took off the wolf's skin; granny ate the cake and drank the wine which little Red Hood had brought, and became strong and well again; and little Red Hood thought to herself, 'As long as I live, I won't go out of the road into the forest, when mother has forbidden me.'

________

[Little Red Hood, like many folklore tales, is a singular mixture of myth and morality. In Cox's 'Comparative Mythology,' vol. ii., p. 831, note, Little Redcap, or Little Red Riding Hood, is interpreted as 'the evening with her scarlet robe of twilight,' who is swallowed up by the wolf of darkness, the Fenris of the Edda. It appears to me that this explanation may suit the colour of her cap or hood, but is at variance with the other incidents of the story. I am inclined to look upon the tale as a lunar legend, although the moon is only actually red during one portion of the year, at the harvest moon in the autumn. Red Hood is represented as wandering, like Io, who is undoubtedly the moon, through trees, the clouds, and flowers, the stars, before she reaches the place where she is intercepted by the wolf. An eclipse to untutored minds would naturally suggest the notion that some evil beast was endeavouring to devour the moon, who is afterwards rescued by the sun, the archer of the heavens, whose bow and arrow are by a common anachronism represented in the story by a gun. Though the moon is masculine in Slavonic, as in German, yet she is a lady, 'my lady Luna,' in the Croatian legend [*No. 53], below. In the Norse mythology, when Loki is let loose at the end of the world, he is to 'hung in the form of a wolf to swallow the moon' (Cox ii., p. 200). The present masculine Slavonic word for moon, which is also that for month, 'mesic,' or 'mesec,' is a secondary formation, the original word having perished. In Greek and Latin the moon is always feminine.]

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 101]

  

KASHUBIAN STORY.

THE Kashubians inhabit a small district in the North-east of Pomerania, 'the province upon the sea,' from po, upon, and more, the sea. The limits of the district may be roughly marked by the towns of Leba, Lauenburg and Butow or Bytom.

[*The story] contains many of the circumstances of the German story of 'The Table, the Ass and the Stick' in Grimm's collection. The Kashubian tales again would naturally be pressed into the service of the surrounding Germans. Bitter complaints have been made by Slavonic literati, that their Folklore tales have been appropriated by the Germans. Of course there is a vast amount of common ground in Folklore, and incidents belonging to one tale will sometimes start up at a distance in another apparently entirely unconnected with it. But I believe that there is considerable ground for the complaint.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[16]

  

XVI.--CUDGEL, BESTIR YOURSELF!

A COBBLER was busying himself on Saturday with mending old shoes, that he might be able to go to church on Sunday. He worked till late in the evening, and, having finished his work, early in the morning dressed

[p. 102]

himself, and took his book to service. In church he heard this doctrine, that if any one dedicates his property to the church, God will recompense him a hundredfold in another form. And as he was poor, he therefore determined to sell his cottage and goods and take the whole price to the priest at the church. He went home and told his wife of his intentions; and in a few days the money was in the hands of the parson. [**] But day passed after day, and nothing was to be seen of a recompense. At last, when hunger sorely tried the cobbler, he dressed himself like an old beggar and went to seek for the Lord God. After wandering a couple of days he met with an old shepherd, who was pasturing a large flock of lambs. And as he was very hungry, he made up his mind to go up to the old shepherd, and ask him to give him a little to eat out of his dinner-basket. [*+] During the meal he related all that he had done, and how it was then going with him. The old shepherd compassionated the poor cobbler, and gave him a lamb, which scattered ducats at every call: 'Lamb, shake yourself!' but gave it him under the condition, that in one village, through which he was obliged to pass, he was not to enter the house of his old gossip. He laid the lamb on his shoulder with great joy, thanked the old man for it, and started with speed on his way home to rejoice his wife and children. When he got behind the hill, he began to distrust the words of the old shepherd, for he could not get it into his head that an ordinary lamb would scatter ducats. Wishing, therefore, to assure himself of their truth, he placed the lamb on the ground and uttered the old man's words: 'Lamb, shake yourself!' and when at the selfsame moment he espied ducats round the lamb's feet, he considered

[p. 103]

himself the most fortunate man in the whole world. Without delay he put the lamb on his back, and went on towards home. But when he went past his gossip's tavern, she besought him to pay her a visit, for they had not seen each other for a very long time. The cobbler at first hesitated a little, but wishing to show that he had ducats in his pocket, and that he had met with such good fortune, he went into the tavern; and, after first giving into her charge his present from the old man, with these words, But don't say to him, "Lamb, shake yourself!' went to the table and drank off a noggin of brandy. But his gossip, a knavish old woman, bethought herself at once that there must be some secret lying in these words. She, therefore, took the lamb into another room, and when she was there by herself, said to the lamb: 'Lamb, shake yourself!' when she saw that he scattered ducats she began to consider how to cheat her gossip. After a short time she determined to make the cobbler drunk, to detain him all night at her house, and next day, early, to give him instead of his lamb another like it out of her own flock; which was effected according to her intention. Well, early in the morning the cobbler took the lamb on his shoulder and now hastened straight to his wife and children, and tossed them, as they wept, a couple of ducats, that his wife might get a good meal ready. His wife could not wonder enough whence her little husband had got so much money, but she did not venture to question him. After the meal the cobbler put the lamb on the table, called his children, that they might enjoy with him the rolling ducats, and shouted: 'Lamb, shake yourself!' But the lamb stood as if he were made of wood, and never even moved his head. The children, who had eaten their fill, began to laugh, and the wife thought that her husband was not quite right in his head. The cobbler, angry that his wish had not come

[p. 104]

to pass, repeated once more the old man's words, but this time, too, without effect, therefore he pushed the lamb off the table. So long as the ducats held out, there was content in the home; but as soon as they began to run short in the cottage, his wife began to reproach her husband for doing no work, and not troubling himself about a livelihood. So nothing again remained for the cobbler but, stick in hand, to go to look for the old man. He knew very well what a bad welcome he would receive from him, but what was to be done? However, the old man had compassion on the poor family, and this time gave him a tablecloth, which at every summons: 'Tablecloth, spread yourself!' spread itself of its own accord, and on it stood most excellent food and drink; but under the condition that he didn't go into his gossip's house. The cobbler, well content with the present, thanked the old man and moved towards home. In a short time he was behind the hill, sat down upon the ground, and, not from curiosity but from hunger, gave the word of command to the tablecloth to spread itself; for his inside was croaking. When, after eating his fill, he went past the tavern, his old gossip was waiting for him in front of the door; she begged him in the kindest terms not to pass her tavern, adding the proverb: 'Whoever passes a tavern sprains his foot.' The cobbler wavered long, but at last went in and entrusted her with the table-cloth with these words: 'Dear gossip, don't say, "Table-cloth, spread yourself!"' The crafty woman gave him brandy in welcome, not for money; therefore, her gossip tossed off noggin after noggin, till there came a dizziness in his head. Then his gossip did the same with the tablecloth as with the lamb. The cobbler came to his wife and children, placed the tablecloth on the table and cried: 'Tablecloth, spread yourself!' But the tablecloth didn't stir, and the cobbler began to despair and to revile the old woman, his

[p. 105]

gossip. He returned again to the old man, begged pardon of him on his knees for not fulfilling the condition that time also, and prayed him, nevertheless, to have compassion on him and to be his preserver once more. The old man for a long time refused, but at last gave him a cudgel with a silver mounting set with precious stones, and ordered him this time to visit his gossip, and take note of these words: 'Cudgel, bestir yourself!' The cobbler, seized with new joy, thanked the old man a hundred times, and made the more haste towards his wife and children. Still, when behind the hill, he was curious to know what the cudgel meant, and wishing to satisfy himself, said: 'Cudgel, bestir yourself!' In a moment there stood before him a couple of stout fellows, who began to thrash him mercilessly. The cobbler, seized by cruel terror, did not know how to order them to cease beating him; at last, when already well beaten, he cried out: 'Cudgel, leave off!' Instantly the fellows disappeared and the cudgel stood before him. 'You're good, you're good!' said the cobbler, getting up from the ground, 'you'll help me to those former gifts.' When he arrived at the village, where his gossip lived, he stepped into her house and made himself at home as with an old acquaintance. She was very glad to see him, for she thought she would again make a good profit, entertained him well, and afterwards began to inquire whether he hadn't something for her to take charge of. Then the cobbler gave up to her his cudgel with the request not to say: 'Cudgel, bestir yourself!' The old woman laughed in her sleeve at the simpleton, thinking to herself, He wouldn't tell me without cause what I'm not to say!' She went at once with the cudgel into the other room, and scarcely had she crossed the threshold, when she cried out impatiently: 'Cudgel, bestir yourself!' Immediately the two fellows with cudgels began to beat her, and she lost all self-possession. At her piercing shrieks the host darted

[p. 106]

up to help her, when, hey ho! he got it too. The cobbler all the time kept calling out: 'Go it, cudgel! go it! till they give me back my lamb and my tablecloth!' Then nothing remained to his gossip but to give up his property to him. She ordered the lamb and tablecloth to be brought. As soon as the cobbler had satisfied himself that this was really done, he shouted 'Cudgel, leave off!' and went with the three gifts as quick as he could to his wife and children. Then there was great joy, for they had money and victuals in abundance; and did not withal forget God and other people, but assisted every poor person.

Footnotes

^102:* Plebanus, the priest of a church in which baptisms are celebrated.

^102:+ Or dinner-pot: two earthenware pots united together, used by shepherds and others to carry their dinners in.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 107]

  

POLISH STORIES.

THE Polish language is one of great beauty and flexibility, but it is disfigured by an orthography which causes English readers to imagine that it is very difficult to pronounce, which is by no means the case. The letter z in Polish performs the office frequently assigned to h in English, viz., that of softening the preceding consonant without possessing any further power of its own. Thus cz is the exact equivalent in Polish of our ch, and sz exactly represents our sh. The other grand peculiarities of the Polish language are the sibillated r, written rz, the retention of the nasal sounds of long a (as on) and long e (as en in French), and the dull l represented by a curved stroke through the letter l, which has the sound of our final ll in 'bull,' but is somewhat difficult to pronounce at the beginning or in the middle of a word.

Poland, or rather Lithuania, the aristocracy of which is Polish, has produced a really great poet, Mickiewicz, whose poems are so beautiful, that it would be worth while for a literary person of leisure to study the language for the mere purpose of reading them. See Morfill's 'Russia' (Sampson Low, 1880), pp. 207-272. One of the most celebrated of Mickiewicz's poems, 'Pan Taddeus,' has lately been translated by Miss M. A. Biggs (Trubner and Co.).

[p. 108]

In the Polish story, [*No. 17], we make acquaintance with 'Kostchey the Deathless,' who plays a great part in Russian stories, but is entirely unknown by name among the southern and most of the western Slavonians. His place is with them taken by dragons and evil shapes of various kinds. His name is probably derived from kost, a 'bone,' and I have ventured to Anglicize it accordingly. He is generally supposed to symbolize winter, and certainly deciduous trees and bushes then exhibit a very skeleton-like appearance. In a story from the government of Perm, given by Mr. Ralston, the secret of his immortality is discovered, and he is put to death accordingly. But I cannot help inferring that his death is of annual occurrence, and that he resumes his reign annually at the proper season, to be again put to death towards spring. With [*No. 18] several Russian tales given by Mr. Ralston (pp. 185-193) may be compared. [*No. 19] is a singular story of a more Oriental than European cast, and [*No. 20] reads as much like a dream dreamed after the consumption of a considerable quantity of vodka, as a genuine Folklore story. Such is also the case with several of Crofton Croker's Legends of the south of Ireland.

Tale [*No. 17] has already appeared in the 'Folklore Journal' for January, 1884. For mere beauty of construction and narration I doubt whether its equal can be found in any language.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[17]

  

XVII.--PRINCE UNEXPECTED.

THERE was a king and queen who had been married for three years, but had no children, at which they were both much distressed. Once upon a time the king found himself obliged to make a visit of inspection round his dominions; he took leave of his queen, set off and was not at home for eight months. Towards the end of the ninth

[p. 109]

month the king returned from his progress through his country, and was already hard by his capital city, when, as he journeyed over an uninhabited plain during the most scorching heat of summer, he felt such excessive thirst that he sent his servants round about to see if they could find water anywhere and let him know of it at once. The servants dispersed in various directions, sought in vain for a whole hour, and returned without success to the king. The thirst-tormented king proceeded to traverse the whole plain far and wide himself, not believing that there was not a spring somewhere or other; on he rode, and on a level spot, on which there had not previously been any water, he espied a well with a new wooden fence round it, full to the brim with spring water, in the midst of which floated a silver cup with a golden handle. The king sprang from his horse and reached after the cup with his right hand; but the cup, just as if it were alive and had eyes, darted quickly on one side and floated again by itself. The king knelt down and began to try to catch it, now with his right hand, now with his left, but it moved and dodged away in such a manner that, not being able to seize it with one hand, he tried to catch it with both. But scarcely had he reached out with both hands when the cup dived like a fish, and floated again on the surface. 'Hang it!' thought the king, 'I can't help myself with the cup, I'll manage without it.' He then bent down to the water, which was as clear as crystal and as cold as ice, and began in his thirst to drink. Meanwhile his long beard, which reached down to his girdle, dipped into the water. When he had quenched his thirst, he wanted to get up again--something was holding his beard and wouldn't let it go. He pulled once and again, but it was of no use; he cried out therefore in anger, 'Who's there? let go!' 'It's I, the subterranean king, immortal Bony, and I shall not let go till you give me that which you left unknowingly at

[p. 110]

home, and which you do not expect to find on your return.' The king looked into the depth of the well, and there was a huge head like a tub, with green eyes and a mouth from ear to ear, which was holding the king by the beard with extended claws like those of a crab, and was laughing mischievously. The king thought that a thing of which he had not known before starting, and which he did not expect on his return, could not be of great value, so he said to the apparition, 'I give it.' The apparition burst with laughter and vanished with a flash of fire, and with it vanished also the well, the water, the wooden fence, and the cup; and the king was again on a hillock by a little wood kneeling on dry sand, and there was nothing more. The king got up, crossed himself, sprang on his horse, hastened to his attendants, and rode on.

In a week or maybe a fortnight the king arrived at his capital; the people came out in crowds to meet him; he went in procession to the great court of the palace and entered the corridor. In the corridor stood the queen awaiting him, and holding close to her bosom a cushion, on which lay a child, beautiful as the moon, kicking in swaddling clothes. The king recollected himself, sighed painfully, and said within himself: 'This is what I left without knowing and found without expecting!' And bitterly, bitterly did he weep. All marvelled, but nobody dared to ask the cause. The king took his son, without saying a word, in his arms, gazed long on his innocent face; carried him into the palace himself, laid him in the cradle, and, suppressing his sorrow, devoted himself to the government of his realm, but was never again cheerful as formerly, since he was perpetually tormented by the thought that some day Bony would claim his son.

Meanwhile weeks, months, and years flowed on, and no one came for his son. The prince, named 'Unexpected,'

[p. 111]

grew and developed, and eventually became a handsome youth. The king also in course of time regained his usual cheerfulness; and forgot what had taken place, but alas! everybody did not forget so easily.

Once the prince, while hunting in a forest, became separated from his suite and found himself in a savage wilderness. Suddenly there appeared before him a hideous old man with green eyes, who said: 'How do you do, Prince Unexpected? You have made me wait for you a long time.' 'Who are you?' 'That you will find out hereafter, but now, when you return to your father, greet him from me, and tell him that I should be glad if he would close accounts with me, for if he doesn't soon get out of my debt of himself, he will repent it bitterly.' After saying this the hideous old man disappeared, and the prince in amazement turned his horse, rode home and told the king his adventure. The king turned as pale as a sheet, and revealed the frightful secret to his son. 'Don't cry, father!' replied the prince, 'it isn't a great misfortune! I shall manage to force Bony to renounce the right over me, which he tricked you out of in so underhand a manner, and if in the course of a year I do not return, it will be a token that we shall see each other no more.' The prince prepared for his journey, the king gave him a suit of steel armour, a sword, and a horse, and the queen hung round his neck a cross of pure gold. At leave-taking they embraced affectionately, wept heartily, and the prince rode off.

On he rode one day, two days, three days, and at the end of the fourth day at the setting of the sun he came to the shore of the sea, and in the self-same bay espied twelve dresses, white as snow, though in the water, as far as the eye could reach, there was no living soul to be seen; only twelve white geese were swimming at a distance from the shore. Curious to know to whom they belonged, he took

[p. 112]

one of the dresses, let his horse loose in a meadow, concealed himself in a neighbouring thicket, and waited to see what would come to pass. Thereupon the geese, after disporting themselves on the sea, swam to the shore; eleven of them went to the dresses, each threw herself on the ground and became a beautiful damsel, dressed herself with speed, and flew away into the plain. The twelfth goose, the last and prettiest of all, did not venture to come out on the shore, but only wistfully stretched out her neck, looking on all sides. On seeing the prince she called out with a human voice: 'Prince Unexpected, give me my dress; I will be grateful to you in return.' The prince hearkened to her, placed the dress on the grass, and modestly turned away in another direction. The goose came out on the grass, changed herself into a damsel, dressed herself hastily, and stood before the prince; she was young and more beautiful than eye had seen or ear heard of. Blushing, she gave him her white hand, and, casting her eyes down, said with a pleasing voice: 'I thank you, good prince, for hearkening to me: I am the youngest daughter of immortal Bony; he has twelve young daughters, and rules in the subterranean realm. My father, prince, has long been expecting you and is very angry; however, don't grieve, and don't be frightened, but do as I tell you. As soon as you see King Bony, fall at once on your knees, and, paying no regard to his outcry, upbraiding, and threats, approach him boldly. What will happen afterwards you will learn, but now we must part.' On saying this the princess stamped on the ground with her little foot; the ground sprang open at once, and they descended into the subterranean realm, right into Bony's palace, which shone all underground brighter than our sun. The prince stepped boldly into the reception-room. Bony was sitting on a golden throne with a glittering crown on his head; his eyes gleamed like two saucers of green glass and

[p. 113]

his hands were like the nippers of a crab. As soon as he espied him at a distance, the prince fell on his knees, and Bony yelled so horribly that the vaults of the subterranean dominion quaked; but the prince boldly moved on his knees towards the throne, and, when he was only a few paces from it, the king smiled and said: 'Thou hast marvellous luck in succeeding in making me smile; remain in our subterranean realm, but before thou becomest a true citizen thereof thou art bound to execute three commands of mine; but because it is late to-day, we will begin to-morrow; meanwhile go to thy room.'

The prince slept comfortably in the room assigned to him, and early on the morrow Bony summoned him and said: We will see, prince, what thou canst do. In the course of the following night build me a palace of pure marble; let the windows be of crystal, the roof of gold, an elegant garden round about it, and in the garden seats and fountains; if thou buildest it, thou wilt gain thyself my love; if not, I shall command thy head to be cut off.' The prince heard it, returned to his apartment, and was sitting mournfully thinking of the death that threatened him, when outside at the window a bee came buzzing and said: 'Let me in!' He opened the lattice, in flew the bee, and the princess, Bony's youngest daughter, appeared before the wondering prince. 'What are you thus thinking about, Prince Unexpected?' 'Alas! I am thinking that your father wishes to deprive me of life.' 'Don't be afraid! lie down to sleep, and when you get up to-morrow morning your palace will be ready.'

So, too, it came to pass. At dawn the prince came out of his room and espied a more beautiful palace than he had ever seen, and Bony, when he saw it, wondered, and wouldn't believe his own eyes. 'Well! thou hast won this time, and now thou hast my second command. I shall place my

[p. 114]

twelve daughters before thee to-morrow; if thou dost not guess which of them is the youngest, thou wilt place thy head beneath the axe.' 'I unable to recognise the youngest princess!' said the prince in his room; 'what difficulty can there be in that?' 'This,' answered the princess, flying into the room in the shape of a bee, 'that if I don't help you, you won't recognise me, for we are all so alike that even our father only distinguishes us by our dress.' 'What am I to do?' 'What, indeed! That will be the youngest over whose right eye you espy a ladycow; only look well. Adieu!' On the morrow King Bony again summoned Prince Unexpected. The princesses stood in a row side by side, all dressed alike and with eyes cast down. The prince looked and marvelled how alike all the princesses were; he went past them once, twice--he did not find the appointed token; the third time he saw a ladycow over the eyebrow of one, and cried out: 'This is the youngest princess!' 'How the deuce have you guessed it?' said Bony angrily. 'There must be some trickery here. I must deal with your lordship differently. In three hours you will come here again, and will show your cleverness in my presence. I shall light a straw, and you will stitch a pair of boots before it goes out, and if you don't do it you will perish.'

The prince returned desponding and found the bee already in his apartment. 'Why pensive again, prince?' How shouldn't I be pensive, when your father wants me to stitch him a pair of boots, for what sort of cobbler am I?' 'What else will you do?' 'What am I to do? I shan't stitch the boots, and I'm not afraid of death--one can but die once!' 'No, prince, you shall not die! I will endeavour to rescue you, and we will either escape together or perish together! We must flee--there's nothing else to be done.' Saying this, the princess spat on one of the window-panes, and the spittle immediately froze. She then

[p. 115]

went out of the room with the prince, locked the door after her, and threw the key far away; then, taking each other by the hands, they ascended rapidly, and in a moment found themselves on the very spot whence they had descended into the subterranean realm; there was the self-same sea, the self-same shore overgrown with rushes and thornbushes, the self-same fresh meadow, and in the meadow cantered the prince's well-fed horse, who, as soon as he descried his rider, came galloping straight to him. The prince didn't stop long to think, but sprang on his horse, the princess seated herself behind him, and off they set as swift as an arrow.

King Bony at the appointed hour did not wait for Prince Unexpected, but sent to ask him why he did not appear. Finding the door locked, the servants knocked at it vigorously, and the spittle answered them from the middle of the room in the prince's voice, 'Anon!' The servants carried this answer to the king; he waited, waited, no prince; he therefore again sent the same servants, who heard the same answer: 'Anon!' and carried what they had heard to the king. 'What's this? Does he mean to make fun of me?' shouted the king in wrath: 'Go at once, break the door open and conduct him to me!' The servants hurried off, broke open the door, and rushed in. What, indeed? there was nobody there, and the spittle on the pane of glass was splitting with laughter at them. Bony all but burst with rage, and ordered them all to start off in pursuit of the prince, threatening them with death if they returned empty-handed. They sprang on horseback and hastened away after the prince and princess.

Meanwhile Prince Unexpected and the princess, Bony's daughter, were hurrying away on their spirited horse, and amidst their rapid flight heard 'tramp, tramp,' behind them. The prince sprang from the horse, put his ear to the ground

[p. 116]

and said, 'They are pursuing us.' 'Then,' said the princess, 'we have no time to lose.' Instantly she transformed herself into a river, changed the prince into a bridge, the horse into a raven, and the grand highway beyond the bridge divided into three roads. Swiftly on the fresh track hastened the pursuers, came on to the bridge, and stood stupefied; they saw the track up to the bridge, but beyond it disappeared, and the highway divided into three roads. There was nothing to be done but to return, and they came with nought. Bony shouted with rage, and cried out: 'A bridge and a river! It was they. How was it that ye did not guess it? Back, and don't return without them!' The pursuers recommenced the pursuit.

'I hear "tramp, tramp!" 'whispered the princess, Bony's daughter, affrightedly to Prince Unexpected, who sprang from the saddle, put his ear to the ground, and replied: 'They are making haste, and are not far off.' That instant the princess and prince, and with them also their horse, became a gloomy forest, in which were roads, by-roads, and footpaths without number, and on one of them it seemed that two riders were hastening on a horse. Following the fresh track, the pursuers came up to the forest, and when they espied the fugitives in it, they hastened speedily after them. On and on hurried the pursuers, seeing continually before them a thick forest, a wide road and the fugitives on it; now, now they thought to overtake them, when the fugitives and the thick forest suddenly vanished, and they found themselves at the self-same place whence they had started in pursuit. They returned, therefore, again to Bony empty-handed. 'A horse, a horse! I'll go myself! they won't escape out of my hands!' yelled Bony, foaming at the mouth, and started in pursuit.

Again the princess said to Prince Unexpected: 'Methinks they are pursuing us, and this time it is Bony, my father,

[p. 117]

himself, but the first church is the boundary of his dominion, and he won't be able to pursue us further. Give me your golden cross.' The prince took off his affectionate mother's gift and gave it to the princess, and in a moment she was transformed into a church, he into the priest, and the horse into the bell; and that instant up came Bony. 'Monk!' Bony asked the priest, 'hast thou not seen some travellers on horseback?' 'Only just now Prince Unexpected rode this way with the princess, Bony's daughter. They came into the church, performed their devotions, gave money for a mass for your good health, and ordered me to present their respects to you if you should ride this way.' Bony, too, returned empty-handed. But Prince Unexpected rode on with the princess, Bony's daughter, in no further fear of pursuit.

They rode gently on, when they saw before them a beautiful town, into which the prince felt an irresistible longing to go. 'Prince,' said the princess, 'don't go; my heart forebodes misfortune there.' 'I'll only ride there for a short time, and look round the town, and we'll then proceed on our journey.' 'It's easy enough to ride thither, but will it be as easy to return? Nevertheless, as you absolutely desire it, go, and I will remain here in the form of a white stone till you return; be circumspect, my beloved; the king, the queen, and the princess, their daughter, will come out to meet you, and with them will be a beautiful little boy--don't kiss him, for, if you do, you will forget me at once, and will never set eyes on me more in the world--I shall die of despair. I will wait for you here on the road for three days, and if on the third day you don't return, remember that I perish, and perish all through you.' The prince took leave and rode to the town, and the princess transformed herself into a white stone, and remained on the road.

[p. 118]

One day passed, a second passed, the third also passed, and nothing was seen of the prince. Poor princess! He had not obeyed her counsel; in the town, the king, the queen, and the princess their daughter, had come out to meet him, and with them walked a little boy, a curly-headed chatterbox, with eyes as bright as stars. The child rushed straight into the prince's arms, who was so captivated by the beauty of the lad that he forgot everything, and kissed the child affectionately. That moment his memory was darkened, and he utterly forgot the princess, Bony's daughter.

The princess lay as a white stone by the wayside, one day, two days, and when the third day passed and the prince did not return from the town, she transformed herself into a cornflower, and sprang in among the rye by the roadside.

Here I shall stay by the roadside; maybe some passer-by will pull me up or trample me into the ground,' said she, and tears like dew-drops glittered on the azure petals. Just then an old man came along the road, espied the corn-flower in the rye by the wayside, was captivated by its beauty, extracted it carefully from the ground, carried it into his dwelling, set it in a flower-pot, watered it, and began to tend it attentively. But--O marvel!--ever since the time that the cornflower was brought into his dwelling, all kind of wonders began to happen in it. Scarcely was the old man awake, when everything in the house was already set in order, nowhere was the least atom of dust remaining. At noon he came home--dinner was all ready, the table set; he had but to sit down and eat as much as he wanted. The old man wondered and wondered, till at last terror took possession of him, and he betook himself for advice to an old witch of his acquaintance in the neighbourhood. 'Do this,' the witch advised him: 'get up before the first morning dawn, before the cocks crow to announce daylight, and notice diligently what begins to stir first in the house, and

[p. 119]

that which does stir, cover with this napkin: what will happen further, you will see.'

The old man didn't close his eyes the whole night, and as soon as the first gleam appeared and things began to be visible in the house, he saw how the cornflower suddenly moved in the flower-pot, sprang out, and began to stir about the room; when simultaneously everything began to put itself in its place; the dust began to sweep itself clean away, and the fire kindled itself in the stove. The old man sprang cleverly out of his bed and placed the cloth on the flower as it endeavoured to escape, when lo! the flower became a beautiful damsel--the princess, Bony's daughter. What have you done?' cried the princess. 'Why have you brought life back again to me? My betrothed, Prince Unexpected, has forgotten me, and, therefore, life has become distasteful to me.' 'Your betrothed, Prince Unexpected, is going to be married to-day; the wedding feast is ready, and the guests are beginning to assemble.'

The princess wept, but after awhile dried her tears, dressed herself in frieze, and went into the town like a village girl. She came to the royal kitchen, where there was great noise and bustle. She went up to the clerk of the kitchen with humble and attractive grace, and said in a sweet voice: 'Dear sir, do me one favour; allow me to make a wedding-cake for Prince Unexpected.' Occupied with work, the first impulse of the clerk of the kitchen was to give the girl a rebuff, but when he looked at her, the words died on his lips, and he answered kindly: 'Ah, my beauty of beauties! do what you will; I will hand the prince your cake myself.' The cake was soon baked, and all the invited guests were sitting at table. The clerk of the kitchen himself placed a huge cake on a silver dish before the prince; but scarce had the prince made a cut in the side of it, when lo! an unheard-of marvel displayed itself in the presence of all. A gray

[p. 120]

tom-pigeon and a white hen-pigeon came out of the cake; the torn-pigeon walked along the table, and the hen-pigeon walked after him, cooing:

'Stay, stay, my pigeonet, oh stay!
 Don't from thy true love flee away;
 My faithless lover I pursue,
 Prince Unexpected like unto,
 Who Bony's daughter did betray.'

Scarcely had Prince Unexpected heard this cooing of the pigeon, when he regained his lost recollection, bounced from the table, rushed to the door, and behind the door the princess, Bony's daughter, took him by the hand; they went together down the corridor, and before them stood a horse saddled and bridled.

Why delay? Prince Unexpected and the princess, Bony's daughter, sprang on the horse, started on the road, and at last arrived happily in the realm of Prince Unexpected's father. The king and queen received them with joy and merriment, and didn't wait long before they prepared them a magnificent wedding, the like of which eye never saw and ear never heard of.

_________

With the above story should be compared that of 'The Water King, and Vasilissa the Wise' (Ralston, p. 120). A large number of tales that may also be compared with it are mentioned by Mr. Ralston in pp. 132-133 of his Russian Folk-tales. As to the interpretation of 'Prince Unexpected,' it is very tempting to look upon Kostchey's twelve daughters as representing the twelve months. And, as the year anciently began with spring, Kostchey's youngest daughter would be the month which forms the transition from winter to spring. The interruption of their progress by Prince Unexpected's temporary forgetfulness may be explained as the temporary cessation of warm weather and

[p. 121]

return of a kind of secondary winter, which often occurs in early spring. Prince Unexpected himself may, perhaps, be considered as representing the sun, who has been held in captivity by the winter and has escaped with the last month of the year. Vasilissa the Wise is the eldest daughter of the Water King, and would thus represent the first month of the new year.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[18]

  

XVIII.--THE SPIRIT OF A BURIED MAN.

A POOR scholar was going by the highway into a town, and found under the walls of the gate the body of a dead man, unburied, trodden by the feet of the passers-by. He had not much in his purse, but willingly gave enough to bury him, that he might not be spat upon and have sticks thrown at him. He performed his devotions over the fresh heaped-up grave, and went on into the world to wander. In an oak wood sleep overpowered him, and when he awoke, he espied with wonderment a bag full of gold. He thanked the unseen beneficent hand, and came to the bank of a large river, where it was necessary to be ferried over. The two ferrymen, observing the bag full of gold, took him into the boat, and just at an eddy took from him the gold and threw him into the water. As the waves carried him away insensible, he by accident clutched a plank, and by its aid floated successfully to the shore. It was not a plank, but the spirit of the buried man, who addressed him in these words: 'You honoured my remains by burial; I thank you for it. In token of gratitude I will teach you how you can transform yourself into a crow, into a hare, and into a deer.' Then he taught him the spell. The scholar, when acquainted with the spell, could with ease transform himself into a crow, into a hare, and into a deer. He wandered far, he wandered wide, till he wandered to the court of a mighty

[p. 122]

king, where he remained as an archer in attendance at the court. This king had a beautiful daughter, but she dwelt on an inaccessible island, surrounded on all sides by the sea. She dwelt in a castle of copper, and possessed a sword such that he who brandished it could conquer the largest army. Enemies had invaded the territory of the king; he needed and desired the victorious sword. But how to obtain it, when nobody had up to that time succeeded in getting on to the lonely island? He therefore made proclamation that whoever should bring the victorious sword from the princess should obtain her hand, and, moreover, should sit upon the throne after him. No one was venturesome enough to attempt it, till the wandering scholar, then an archer attached to the court, stood before the king announcing his readiness to go, and requesting a letter, that on receipt of that token the princess might give up the weapon to him. All men were astonished, and the king entrusted him with a letter to his daughter. He went into the forest, without knowing in the least that another archer attached to the court was dogging his steps. He first transformed himself into a hare, then into a deer, and darted off with haste and speed; he traversed no small distance, till he stood on the shore of the sea. He then transformed himself into a crow, flew across the water of the sea, and didn't rest till he was on the island. He went into the castle of copper, delivered to the beautiful princess the letter from her father, and requested her to give him the victorious sword. The beautiful princess looked at the archer. He captured her heart at once. She asked inquisitively how he had been able to get to her castle, which was on all sides surrounded by water and knew no human footsteps. Thereupon the archer replied that he knew secret spells by which he could transform himself into a deer, a hare, and a crow. The beautiful princess, therefore, requested the archer to

[p. 123]

transform himself into a deer before her eyes. When he made himself into a graceful deer, and began to fawn and bound, the princess secretly pulled a tuft of fur from his back. When he transformed himself again into a hare, and bounded with pricked up ears, the princess secretly, pulled a little fur off his back. When he changed himself into a crow and began to fly about in the room, the princess secretly pulled a few feathers from the bird's wings. She immediately wrote a letter to her father and delivered up the victorious sword. The young scholar flew across the sea in the form of a crow, then ran a great distance in that of a deer, till in the neighbourhood of the wood he bounded as a hare. The treacherous archer was already there in ambush, saw when he changed himself into a hare, and recognised him at once. He drew his bow, let fly the arrow, and killed the hare. He took from him the letter and carried off the sword, went to the castle, delivered to the king the letter and the sword of victory, and demanded at once the fulfilment of the promise that had been made. The king, transported with joy, promised him immediately his daughter's hand, mounted his horse, and rode boldly against his enemies with the sword. Scarcely had he espied their standards, when he brandished the sword mightily several times, and that towards the four quarters of the world. At every wave of the sword large masses of enemies fell dead on the spot, and others, seized with panic, fled like hares. The king returned joyful with victory, and sent for his beautiful daughter, to give her to wife to the archer who brought the sword. A banquet was prepared. The musicians were already striking up, the whole castle was brilliantly lighted; but the princess sat sorrowful beside the assassin-archer. She knew at once that he was in nowise the man whom she saw in the castle on the island, but she dared not ask her father where the

[p. 124]

other handsome archer was; she only wept much and secretly: her heart beat for the other.

The poor scholar, in the hare's skin, lay slain under the oak, lay there a whole year, till one night he felt himself awakened from a mighty sleep, and before him stood the well-known spirit, whose body he had buried. He told him what had happened to him, brought him back to life, and said: 'To-morrow is the princess's wedding; hasten, therefore, to the castle without a moment's delay; she will recognise you; the archer, too, who killed you treacherously, will recognise you.' The young man sprang up promptly, went to the castle with throbbing heart, and entered the grand saloon, where numerous guests were eating and drinking. The beautiful princess recognised him at once, shrieked with joy, and fainted; and the assassin-archer, the moment he set eyes on him, turned pale and green from fear. Then the young man related the treason and murderous act of the archer, and in order to prove his words, turned himself in presence of all the assembled company into a graceful deer, and began to fawn upon the princess. She placed the tuft of fur pulled off him in the castle on the back of the deer, and the fur immediately grew into its place. Again he transformed himself into a hare, and similarly the piece of fur pulled off, which the princess had kept, grew into its place immediately on contact. All looked on in astonishment till the young man changed himself into a crow. The princess brought out the feathers which she had pulled from its wings in the castle, and the feathers immediately grew into their places. Then the old king commanded the assassin-archer to be put to death. Four horses were led out, all wild and unbroken. He was bound to them by his hands and feet, the horses were started off by the whip, and at one bound they tore the assassin-archer to pieces. The young man obtained the hand of

[p. 125]

the young and charming princess. The whole castle was in a brilliant blaze of light, they drank, they ate with mirth; and the princess did not weep, for she possessed the husband that she wished for.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[19]

  

XIX.--THE PALE MAIDEN.

A PEASANT farmer in reduced circumstances had a beautiful daughter, whom an old knight, the proprietor of the village, wanted to marry, and that even by compulsion. But the damsel disliked him, and her parents also refused to consent to the marriage. So the proprietor persecuted them in every way in his power, and so oppressed them with forced labour and ordered them to be beaten on the slightest occasion, that the poor farmer could hold out no longer, but determined to remove from the village with his whole family. In the cottage in which the farmer dwelt there was something continually grating behind the stove, but though they searched several times, and turned the seat constructed at the side of the stove upside down, yet were they unable to discover aught. But when, on the day of their departure, they were removing the rest of their goods, they heard a more and more articulate grating, and whilst they were impatiently listening, as the grating and scraping went on, out of the stove sprang a thin pale form, like a buried maiden. 'What the devil is this?' cried the father. 'For heaven's sake!' screamed the mother, and all the children after her. 'I am no devil,' said the thin pale maiden, but I am your Poverty. You are now taking yourselves off hence, and you are bound to take me with you to your new abode.' The poor householder was no fool; he bethought himself a little, and neither seized nor throttled his Poverty, for she was so slight that he could have done

[p. 126]

nothing of any consequence to her, but he made the lowest possible reverence to her, and said: 'Well, your gracious ladyship, if you are so well satisfied amongst us, then come with us; but, as you see, we are removing everything for ourselves, so help us to carry something, and we shall get off the quicker.' Poverty agreed to this, and wanted to take a couple of small vessels out of the house, but the house-holder distributed the small vessels among his children to remove, and said that there was still a block of wood in the yard which must also be taken away. Going out into the yard, he made a cut in the block from above with his axe. He then called Poverty, and politely requested her to help him remove the block. Poverty did not see on which side to lift the block, till, when the farmer pointed out the cleft to her, she put her long thin fingers in the chink. The farmer, pretending to lift the block on the other side, suddenly pulled his axe out of the cleft, and Poverty's long thin fingers remained squeezed in the block, so that, being utterly unable to pull them out, she shrieked out immediately in what pain she was. But all in vain. The farmer removed all his goods as well as his children, quitted the cottage completely, and returned to the place no more.

When the farmer settled in another village, things went with him so prosperously that ere long he was the richest man in the whole village; he married his daughter to a respectable and wealthy farmer's son, twenty years old, and the whole family prospered. On the other hand, the proprietor of the first village, the oppressor of these poor people, having to assign vacant cottages to fresh tenants, came to inspect the cottage left vacant by the reduced farmer, who had refused to give him his daughter. Seeing Poverty beside the block complaining of the pain of her fingers, he took pity on the pale maiden, took her fingers out by means of a wedge, and set her completely free.

[p. 127]

[paragraph continues] From the time of her liberation the pale maiden never quitted the side of her liberator, and when, moreover, the devil lit a fire in the old stove, and the proprietor went dotty with love in his old age, he spent and spent, and ran through everything that he had.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[20]

  

XX.--THE PLAGUE-SWARM.

A RUTHENIAN, having lost his wife and children by the plague, fled into the forest from his desolate cottage and sought safety there. He wandered about all day long; towards evening he constructed a booth of branches, lit a little fire, and fell asleep, wearied out. It was already after midnight when a mighty noise awoke him. He rose to his feet, listened, and heard a kind of songs in the distance, and accompanying the songs a sound of tambourines and fifes. He listened, in no small astonishment, that, when death was raging around, people were rejoicing there so merrily. The noise that he heard kept continually approaching, and the terrified Podolian [**] espied a swarming multitude advancing along a wide road. It was a troop of strange-looking spectres that circled round a carriage; the carriage was black and elevated, and in it sat the Plague. At every step the frightful company kept increasing; for on the road almost everything was transformed into a spectre.

Feebly burned his little fire; a tolerably large firebrand was still smoking a little. Scarcely had the plague-swarm drawn near when the firebrand stood upon feet, extended two arms--the burning part began to glitter with two glaring eyes--it began to sing in concert with the others. The villager was stupefied; in speechless terror he seized his axe and was on the point of striking the nearest spectre, but the axe flew out of his hands, transformed itself into a

[p. 128]

tall woman with raven-black tresses, and, singing, vanished before his eyes. The plague-swarm proceeded onwards; and the Podolian saw how the trees, the bushes, the owls, the screech-owls, assuming tall shapes, increased the multitude, the terrible harbinger of a frightful death. He fell down powerless, and when in the morning the warmth of the sun awoke him, the vessels that he had brought with him were smashed and broken, the clothes torn to rags, the provisions spoilt. He perceived that no one but the plague-swarm had done him all this mischief, and, thanking God that he had at any rate escaped with life, proceeded further to seek shelter and food.

Footnotes

^127:* A Ruthenian by nationality, a Podolian by locality.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 129]

  

EASTERN SLAVONIANS.

[p. 130] [p. 131]

  

WHITE RUSSIAN STORIES.

WE now come to the first set of stories belonging to those Slavonians who make use of the Cyrillic instead of the Latin characters. The White Russians occupy the whole of the Governments of Minsk and Mogilef, and great part of those of Vitebsk and Grodno. In these stories we first met with the distinction between the Western and Eastern Slavonic terms for monarch. The Western Slavonians employ the terms kral, krul, or korol, for a monarch, which are believed to originate from the name of the mighty Frankish monarch, KARL the Great, whom we generally know by his French title, Charlemagne. The Eastern Slavonians usually make use of the term TZAR, 'Emperor,' which is a corruption of the Latin 'Caesar,' the title of the emperors of Constantinople, and later of the Russian emperors. Thus in the following stories we shall find emperors and empresses generally, though not invariably, replacing kings and queens, till we return again to the West.

The White Russian language possesses but little literature, but was employed for diplomatic purposes by the once powerful state of Lithuania (Morfill's 'Slavonic Literature,' S.P.C.K., p. 113).

The heroes 'Overturn-hill' (Vertogor) and 'Overturn-oak'

[p. 132]

[paragraph continues] (Vertodub), who appear in [*No. 22], occur also in a story from the Ukraine, given by Mr. Ralston (pp. 170-175). Several circumstances in [*No. 22] are also similar to incidents in the Russian tale of 'Ivan Popyalof' (Ralston, p. 66), but in spite of these similarities the stories are truly distinct.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[21]

  

XXI.--THE FROST, THE SUN, AND THE WIND.

ONCE upon a time a man went out alone, and met on the road the Sun, the Frost, and the Wind. Well, on meeting them, he gave them a salutation: 'Praised' [be the Lord Jesus Christ]! To which did he present the salutation? The Sun said: 'To me, that I might not burn him.' The Frost said: 'To me, and not to you, for he is not so much afraid of you as of me.' 'Story-tellers! it's false!' said, lastly, the Wind; 'that man presented the salutation not to you two, but to me.' They began to jangle and quarrel together, and all but pulled the mantles off each other's backs. 'Well, if it's so, let's ask him to whom he presented the salutation, to me or to you?' They overtook the man and asked him; then he said: 'To the Wind.' 'Didn't I say that it was to me?' 'Stop you! I'll give you a baking, you rascal!' said the Sun; 'you shall remember me.' Then said the Wind: 'Never fear, he won't bake you; I shall blow and cool him.' 'So will I freeze you up, you scoundrel!' said the Frost. 'Don't be frightened, poor fellow! then I shan't blow, and he'll do nothing to you; he doesn't freeze you up without a wind.'

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[22]

  

XXII.--LITTLE ROLLING-PEA.

IN a certain empire and a certain province, on the ocean sea, on the island of Bujan, stood a green oak, and under

[p. 133]

the oak a roasted ox, and by its side a whetted knife; suddenly the knife was seized. Be so good as to eat! This isn't a story (kazka), but only a preface to a story (prikazka): whoever shall listen to my story, may he have a sableskin cloak, and a horseskin cloak, and a very beautiful damsel, a hundred roubles for the wedding, and fifty for a jollification!

There was a husband and wife. The wife went for water, took a bucket, and after drawing water, went home, and all at once she saw a pea rolling along. She thought to herself: 'This is the gift of God.' She took it up and ate it, and in course of time became the mother of a baby boy, who grew not by years, but by hours, like millet dough when leavened. They nursed and petted him in a way that couldn't be improved upon, and put him to school. What others learnt in three or four years he understood in a single year, and the book was not sufficient for him. He came from the school to his father and mother: 'Now, then, daddy and mammy, thank my teachers, for already many come to school to me. Thank God, I know more than they.' Well, he went into the street to amuse himself, and found a pin, which he brought to his father and mother. He said to his father: 'Here's this piece of iron; take it to a smith, and let him make me a mace of seven poods weight.' His father didn't say a single word to him, but only thought in his own mind: 'The Lord has given me a child different from other people; I think he has a middling understanding, but he is now making a fool of me. Can it possibly be that a seven-pood [**] mace can be made out of a pin?' His father, having a considerable sum of money in gold, silver, and paper, drove to the town, bought seven poods of iron, and gave them to a smith to make a mace of. They made him a seven-pood mace, and he brought it home. Little Rolling-pea came out from the attic, took his seven-pood mace, and, hearing a

[p. 134]

storm in the sky, threw it into the clouds. He went up into his attic: 'Mother, look in my head before I start a nasty thing is biting me, for I am a young lad.' . . . Well, rising from his mother's knees, he went out into the yard and saw the clouds. He fell down with his right ear to the broad ground, and on rising up called his father: 'Father, come here: see what is whizzing and humming; my mace is coming to the ground.' He placed his knee in the way of his mace; the mace struck him on the knee and broke in halves. He became angry with his father: 'Well, father, why did you not have a mace made for me out of the iron that I gave you? If you had done so, it would not have broken, but only bent. Here is the same iron for you, go and get it made; don't add any of your own.' The smiths put the iron in the fire and began to beat it with hammers and pull it, and made a seven-pood mace.

Little Rolling-pea took his seven-pood mace and got ready to go on a journey, a long journey; he went and went, and Overturn-hill met him. 'I salute you, brother Little Rolling-pea! whither are you going? whither are you journeying?' Little Rolling-pea also asked him a question: 'Who are you?' 'I am the mighty hero Overturn-hill.' 'Will you be my comrade?' said Little Rolling pea. He replied: Possibly I will be at your service.' They went on together. They went and went, and the mighty hero Overturn-oak met them. 'God bless you, brothers! Good health to you! What manner of men are you?' inquired Overturn-oak. 'Little Rolling-pea and Overturn-hill.' 'Whither are you going?' 'To such a city. A dragon devours people there, so we are going to smite him.' 'Is it not possible for me to join your company?' 'It is possible,' said Little Rolling-pea. They went to the city, and made themselves known to the emperor. 'What manner of men are you?' 'We are mighty heroes!' 'Is it in your power to deliver this

[p. 135]

city? A dragon is ravenous and destroys much people. He must be slain.' 'Why do we call ourselves mighty heroes, if we do not slay him?' Midnight came, and the) went up to a bridge of guelder-rose-wood over a river of fire. Lo! up came a six-headed dragon, and posted himself upon the bridge, and immediately his horse neighed, his falcon chattered, and his hound howled. He gave his horse a blow on the head: 'Don't neigh, devil's carrion! [**] Don't chatter, falcon! And you, hound, don't howl! For here is Little Rolling-pea. Well now,' said he, 'come forth, Little Rolling-pea! shall we fight or shall we try our strength?' Little Rolling pea answered: 'Not to try their strength do good youths travel, but only to fight.' They began the combat. Little Rolling-pea and his comrades struck the dragon three blows at a time on three heads. The dragon, seeing that he could not escape destruction, said: 'Well, brothers, it is only little Rolling-pea that troubles me. I'd settle matters with you two.' They began to fight again, smashed the dragon's remaining heads, took the dragon's horse to the stable, his falcon to the mews, and his hound to the kennel; and Little Rolling pea cut out the tongues from all six heads, took and placed them in his knapsack, and the headless trunk they cast into the river of fire. They came to the emperor, and brought him the tongues as certain proof. The emperor thanked them. 'I see that you are mighty heroes and deliverers of the city, and all the people. If you wish to drink and eat, take all manner of beverages and eatables without money and without tax.' And from joy he issued a proclamation throughout the whole town, that all the eating-houses, inns, and small public-houses were to be open for the mighty heroes. Well, they went everywhere, drank, amused themselves, refreshed themselves, and enjoyed various honours.

[p. 136]

Night came, and exactly at midnight they went under the guelder-rose bridge to the river of fire, and speedily up came a seven-headed dragon. Immediately his horse neighed, his falcon chattered, and his hound howled. The dragon immediately struck his horse on the head. 'Neigh not, devil's carrion! chatter not, falcon! howl not, hound! for here is Little Rolling-pea. Now then,' said he, 'come forth, Little Rolling-pea! Shall we fight or try our strength?' 'Good youths travel not to try their strength, but only to fight.' And they began the combat, and the heroes beat off six of the dragon's heads; the seventh remained. The dragon said: 'Give me breathing time!' But Little Rolling-pea said: 'Don't expect me to give you breathing time.' They began the combat again. He beat off the last head also, cut out the tongues, and placed them in his knapsack, but threw the trunk into the river of fire. They came to the emperor, and brought the tongues for certain proof.

The third time they went at midnight to the bridge of guelder-rose and the river of fire; speedily up came to them a nine-headed dragon. Immediately his horse neighed, his falcon chattered, and his hound howled. The dragon struck his horse on the head. 'Neigh not, devil's carrion! falcon, chatter not! hound, howl not! for here is Little Rolling-pea. And now come forth, Little Rolling-pea! Shall we fight or try our strength?' Little Rolling-pea said: 'Not to try their strength do good youths travel, but only to fight.' They began the combat, and the heroes beat off eight heads; the ninth remained. Little Rolling-pea said: 'Give us breathing time, unclean power!' It answered: 'Take breathing time or not, you will not overcome me; you slew my brothers by craft, not by strength.' Little Rolling-pea not only fought, but thought how to delude the dragon. All at once he thought of a plan, and said: 'Yes, there's still much of your brother behind--I'll take you all.' Hastily the dragon

[p. 137]

looked round, and he cut off the ninth head also, cut out the tongues, put them into his knapsack, and threw the trunk into the river of fire. They went to the emperor. The emperor said: 'I thank you, mighty heroes! live with God, and with joy and courage, and take as much gold, silver, and paper money as you want.'

After this the wives of the three dragons met together and took counsel together. 'Whence did those men come who slew our husbands? Well, we shall be women if we don't get rid of them out of the world.' The youngest said: 'Now then, sisters! let us go by the highroad, where they will go. I will make myself into a very beautiful wayside seat, and if, when wearied, they sit down upon it, it will be death to them all.' The second said to her: 'If you do nothing to them, I will make myself into an apple-tree beside the high-road, and when they begin to come up to me, the agreeable odour will attract them; and if they taste the apples, it will be death to them all.' Well, the heroes came up to the beautiful wayside seat. Little Rolling-pea thrust his sword into it up to the hilt--blood poured forth! They went on to the apple-tree. 'Brother Little Rolling-pea,' said the heroes, 'let us each eat an apple.' But he said: 'If it is possible, let us eat; if it is not possible, let us go on further. He drew his sword and thrust it into the apple-tree up to the hilt, and blood poured forth immediately. The third she-dragon hastened after them, and extended her jaws from the earth to the sky. Little Rolling-pea saw that there was not room for them to pass by. How were they to save themselves? He looked about and saw that she specially aimed at him, and threw the three horses into her mouth. The she-dragon flew off to the blue sea to drink water, and they proceeded further. She pursued them again. He saw that she was near, and threw the three falcons into her mouth. Again the she-dragon flew to the blue sea to drink

[p. 138]

water, and they proceeded further. Little Rolling-pea looked round; the she-dragon was again pursuing him, and seeing his danger, he took and threw the three hounds into her mouth. Again she flew off to the blue sea to drink water; while she drank her fill, they proceeded still further. He looked round and saw that she was catching them up again. Little Rolling-pea took his two comrades and threw them into her, mouth. The she-dragon flew to the blue sea to drink water, and he went on. Again she overtook him; he looked round, saw that she was not far off, and said: 'Lord, protect me and save my soul!' He saw before him an iron workshop, and fled into the smithy. The smith said to him: Why, stranger, are you so cowardly?" 'Honourable gentlemen! protect me from an unclean power, and save my soul!' They took and shut the smithy completely up. 'Give up to me what is mine!' said the she-dragon. Then the smiths said to her: 'Lick the iron door through, and we will place him on your tongue.' She licked the door through, and placed her tongue in the centre. The smiths seized her tongue three at a time with red-hot pincers, and said: 'Come, stranger, do with her what you will!' He went out into the yard, and began to pound the she-dragon, and pounded her skin to the bones, and her bones to the marrow; then took her with her whole carcase and buried her seven fathoms deep. Then, and not till then, did he live and eat morsels; but we ate bread, for he had none. I was there, too, and drank honey-wine; it flowed over my beard, but didn't get into my mouth.

Footnotes

^133:* A pood is 40 Russian, 36 English, pounds.

^135:* An insulting nickname.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[23]

  

XXIII.--THE WONDERFUL BOYS.

A FATHER had three daughters; they went to the river to wash the linen. The king's son rode up. One said: Well, if the king's son were to marry me, I would hem the

[p. 139]

whole palace round with a single needle.' The second said: 'If the king's son were to marry me, I would feed the whole palace with a single roll.' But the third said: 'If the king's son were to marry me, I would bring him two sons, each with a moon on his head and a star on the nape of his neck.' The king rode up to the one that said: 'I would bring him two sons;' they lived one year, two years, and she was expecting to become a mother. The king came and gave orders to her mother: 'Whatever God gives my wife, let it be reared.' He rode away twenty miles off, and God gave his wife children; she brought him two sons, each with a moon on his head and a star on the nape of his neck. His wife wrote a letter, that God had given them two sons, each with a moon on his head and a star on the nape of his neck. A servant carried the letter to him, and went in to stop the night at the house of the queen's sister, without knowing that it was her sister. He lay down to sleep; then she took and opened the letter, erased that which was written in it--'Each with a moon on his head and a star on the nape of his neck '--and wrote instead, that it was not a snake nor a lizard--it was nobody knew what, that she had become the mother of. The man went to the king and delivered the letter. He read it through: 'What God has given her, let it not be destroyed without my orders.' He went back and again stopped at the same place to pass the night; she took the letter again, opened it, erased what the king had written, and wrote instead, that before he returned, she was to bury her sons. When he arrived, the king's wife read it through, and began to weep; she was grieved to bury those beautiful sons. She dug two graves in the yard and buried them; out of them grew two maples, a golden stem and a silver one. The king came to the house and put her away because she had buried them without his orders.

[p. 140]

He rode off and married his wife's second sister. They lived together, and after a time she said: 'My most illustrious husband! let us cut down those maples and make ourselves a bed.'--'Ah! my most illustrious husband! let us cut up that bed and burn it, and sprinkle the ashes on the road.' A shepherd was driving sheep that way; a ewe strayed and swallowed some of the ashes; she bore two he-lambs; on the head of each was a moon, on the back of the neck a star. Then she disliked those lambs, ordered them to be slaughtered, and the entrails to be thrown out into the street. The first wife came out, collected the entrails, cooked and ate them, and became the mother of two sons; each had a moon on his head and a star on the nape of his neck. The two sons grew and grew, and never took off their caps. Then the king had a desire that somebody should come to tell him stories. People said that there were two brothers there who could tell stories. They came to tell stories.

They began to tell a story. 'There was a king who had a queen; the queen become the mother of two sons; on the head of each was a moon, on the nape of the neck a star. Afterwards the king went hunting; the queen wrote a letter and sent it. The man went to her sister's for the night; she took the letter, opened it, and wrote that it was not a snake nor a lizard--it was nobody knew what, that the queen had been the mother of. The king read it through, and replied that it was to be reared, whether it were a snake or a lizard. The man went homewards, and again rested at the house where he had passed the night. She opened the letter, and wrote that she was to bury it 'by my arrival.' Then she dug two holes--graves--and buried them; and two maples grew out, a golden stem and a silver one. The new queen contrived that they should be cut down and a bed made of them, and began to sleep on it,

[p. 141]

and began to be uncomfortable: she ordered the bed to be cut up and burnt, and the ashes to be thrown out into the yard. A shepherd was driving sheep; a ewe swallowed some of the ashes and bore two he-lambs; each had a moon on the head and a star on the back of the neck. The queen ordered the lambs to be slaughtered, and their entrails to be thrown out into the street. Her divorced sister went out into the street, collected the entrails, took them to her house, cooked and ate them, and became the mother of two sons; each had a moon on his head and a star on the nape of his neck.' The boys bowed and took off their caps, thus illuminating the whole room. The second wife was placed on an iron harrow, and torn to pieces, but the king took his first wife, and they began to live happily.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 142]

  

LITTLE RUSSIAN STORIES.

  

(FROM GALICIA.)

MR. RALSTON does not seem to have been directly acquainted with these tales; at any rate, none of them are given in either his book of Russian folk-tales or in that of Russian songs. It is, therefore, the more necessary for me to supplement his admirable work by giving all the Galician stories in Erben's collection.

The Little Russians, or Ruthenians, form the bulk of the population in the Austrian province of Galicia, formerly the principality of Halicz, and also designated 'Red Russia.' The capital is Lemberg (contracted from Lowenberg), or Lvov. They are also found in the adjoining parts of the north of Hungary, and in the Bukovina.

I think that the present selection is the first introduction of the literature of the Austrian Russians to the notice of the British reader.

The prophet Elijah (Ilya) is a very important and powerful personage in Russian folklore, and we find him accordingly in [*No. 27] holding a prominent position in the heavenly hierarchy, even before the creation of man! He seems to have taken the place of Perun, the god of thunder, among the heathen Slavonians.

I must also draw attention to the extreme stupidity of the

[p. 143]

'devils' of Slavonic folklore. They are still less intelligent than their Teutonic brethren, and do not appear to have any connection with the Arch Enemy, but to be, as Mr. Ralston says (p. 370), rather 'the lubber fiends of heathen mythology, beings endowed with supernatural might, but scantily provided with mental power.' [*No. 26] gives a specimen of their average intelligence.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[24]

  

XXIV.--GOD KNOWS HOW TO PUNISH MAN.

THERE was a wealthy, a very wealthy proprietor; he had buildings enough; there was where and wherewith for every purpose. Once upon a time he had guests at his house, and said to them: 'If my buildings were to be burnt down, I should know where and how to rebuild them.' He said, and it came to pass. While he was conversing thus with his guests, somebody went out into the courtyard, but returned still quicker and said: 'You're on fire!' But the proprietor said: 'Never mind; I wish it to be so.' He neither attempted to extinguish the fire himself nor allowed others to do so, and thus all was reduced to ashes; only the site was left. But he didn't trouble himself a bit, but went and lived by the waterside, and kept his money in a willow-tree, being thus a source of danger to himself. Unexpectedly a heavy rain fell, and before he could look about him the water had already undermined the willow and carried it away. He then became poor, so that it became his lot to serve others. He was obliged to carry letters for gentlemen.

Well, it came to pass once that he was going with a letter, and night overtook him on the way; what was he now to do? He begged a night's lodging at a certain man's house; this man was rich and kindly, so he said: 'Good! you shall not pass my house.' Meanwhile the mistress prepared supper, and after supping they prayed to God, but before

[p. 144]

they lay down to sleep they conversed together about this and that. The traveller began to relate how he had himself been wealthy, how he had been burnt out, and had come to poverty. 'I had,' said he, 'still a little money, and kept it in a willow-tree, but great floods came, undermined the willow, and carried my money away with the water! Thus I remained with nothing, and now it has been my lot more than once to beg for bread.'

Scarcely had his host heard this when he looked at his wife, for the willow had floated to shore under their barn, and when they began to cut it up, the money tumbled out a little at a time. They both went out into a room, and began to consult how to return the money to him without his knowing whence it came. They consulted. Then said the host: 'Well, what shall we do? Let us cut off the under part of a loaf; take out the crumb, put the money inside, then cover it again with the crust; and when he is on the point of departing let us give it him, as if it were provision for his journey.' And so they did. The next day when he was starting to proceed on his way, they gave him the loaf of bread, and said: 'Here's for you; it will be of use on the road.' He took it, made his bow, and went on his way. On the road there met him some merchants--pardon me, some drovers--purchasing swine, who had formerly visited him more than once, and they asked him: 'Of course you know what we're after?' and he replied: 'Formerly it was at my house; misfortune has come upon me; I've been burnt out, and now I serve others.' When he had spoken these words he all at once gave his knapsack a tap, and said: 'Come! buy some bread.' (He took it out.) 'Somehow I'm not hungry, and it's heavy to carry; some money would be more advantageous on my journey.' Bargain and sale. They came to an agreement. The merchants took the bread and he the money, and they parted.

[p. 145]

The merchants came to that very same village, and went to the house of that very same proprietor, from whom the bread came, and began to make inquiries of him respecting their business. 'Not I, but God!' said he; 'sit down, meanwhile, and rest;' and he sent for a snack for them. But they said to him that he needn't trouble himself. 'On the road we bought a loaf of excellent bread from a man who was going with a letter.' They (the host and his wife) felt a quaking at the heart; they had a suspicion; but the merchants soon took it out and placed it on the table, the very same loaf, which they had given to the traveller. The proprietor looked at his wife, and said to their guests: 'Before anything is done, let us go and have a look round; maybe you will make a purchase.' 'Let us go and they went out of the house, but he winked to his wife, and she knew at once what he wanted. When they went out on their business, the mistress brought out another loaf and placed it on the table, but removed the first one. They returned, breakfasted, either did or didn't come to terms, and went away.

After some time the man came again with a letter, and turned in again at the proprietor's, just as at an old acquaintance's, for the night. They received him and were glad, for they thought they might now be successful in returning the money somehow or other. They waited; they passed the night, and when he had gone out of the house, they wrapped the money in a cloth, put it in his knapsack, gave him breakfast, and dismissed him, He went off, and as he went by a footpath through the orchard, he bethought himself: 'Ah! what beautiful apples! Come! let me pluck a few for my journey.' He took off his knapsack and hung it on a tree, that it mightn't embarrass him, and began himself to reach after the apples. Just then up came his host, the proprietor. He saw him, and took flight

[p. 146]

so much the quicker, leaving his knapsack on the tree. The proprietor espied the knapsack hanging on a branch, began to think, and afterwards also said: 'The poor fellow was frightened, and has forgotten his knapsack.' He took down the knapsack, and said: 'His road goes to the foot-bridge; he ran away through the bushes that he mightn't see me. I'll put it on the bridge, and then he'll be sure to take it up.' Even so he did. He ran round sideways, placed the money on the bridge, and went himself behind a bush not very far off, to keep a look-out and see what would happen.

Suddenly the traveller came up to the bridge, and looking downwards thought, and afterwards said: 'It's good that I still have some sight, at any rate, and can go on my way and earn something to get my bread. What should I do if I were to go blind? How should I get across this bridge? Come, I'll see whether I could do it successfully.' Then, closing his eyes, tap, tap, with his stick over the bridge, he went straight forwards, stepped over the money, and went his way. The proprietor, recovering from his astonishment, said aloud: 'He has angered God!'

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[25]

  

XXV.--THE GOOD CHILDREN.

THE Lord was angered at mankind, and for three years there was a great famine over all the world; nowhere in the world was even a grain of corn produced, and what people sowed failed to come up from a drought so great, that for three years there was not a drop of rain or dew. For one year more people managed to live somehow or other, thrashing up what old corn there was; the rich made money, for corn rose very high. Autumn came. Where anybody had or purchased old seed, they sowed it; and entreated the Lord, hoped in the love of God, if God would give fertility,

[p. 147]

[paragraph continues] 'if God would forgive our sins.' But it was not so. They did not obtain the love of God. When they cast the seed into the holy earth, that was the last they saw of it; if it germinated somewhat, if it sent up shoots, it withered away close to the ground. Woe! and abundance of it! God's world went on, sorrowed and wept, for now it was manifest that death by hunger was approaching. They somehow got miserably through the winter. Spring came. Where anybody had still any grain, they sowed it. What would come to pass? No blessing was poured forth, for the drought began with wind. Moreover, there was but little snow in the winter, and everything dried up so that the black earth remained as it was. It now came to this--all the world began to perish! The people died; the cattle perished; as misery carried them, so did the people proceed.

There was at that time a powerful emperor in a certain empire; as the young ordinarily cleave to the young, so would he associate only with young men. Whether in council or in office or in the army, there were none but young men; no old man had access to anything anywhere. Well, as young men, unripe in understanding, were the counsellors, so was their counsel also unripe. One year passed, a second passed; then, in the third year, they saw that misery was already on every side, that it was already coming to this, that all the world would perish. The young emperor assembled his young council, and they began to advise after their fashion; they advised, they advised, and ah! the resolutions they came to were such that it is a sin even to give an account of their resolutions! Weil, the emperor made proclamation after their advice, that all old people were to be drowned, in order that, said he, bread might not be wasted in vain, but there might be a supply of bread for the young; and that no one should venture, on pain of death, to maintain or harbour any old man. Well,

[p. 148]

heralds went about throughout the whole country, and promulgated the emperor's command everywhere--yea, brigands seized old people where they chose, and drowned them without mercy.

There were then in a certain place three own brothers, who had an aged father. When they heard of this edict, they told their father; and their father said: 'My sons, such is the will of God and the will of the emperor; take me, let me perish at once, only that you, my children, may live on. I am already with one foot in the grave.' 'No, our own daddy! we will die, but we will not give you up,' cried the good sons with one voice, and fell upon his neck; we will keep you; we will take from our own mouths, and will nourish you.'

The three brothers took their aged father, conducted him into their cottage, dug under the raised portion of the floor, made up a bed with sheets and frieze-coats, for straw was scarce, and placed the old man there, brought him a loaf of bread as black as the holy earth, and covered him over with the floor. There the old man abode for two or three months, and his sons brought him clandestinely all that they had. The summer passed without harvest, without mowing. September passed too. Autumn passed without joy. Winter passed too. Now came spring; the sun became warm. It was now time to sow, but there was no seed. The world was large, but there was no seed-corn. When one kind was used up, the people sowed others, hoping that there would be a crop; but when they cast it into the holy earth, it rotted there. It seemed as if the end of the world were come.

Then the three sons went to their father, and asked him: 'Daddy, what shall we do? It's time to sow, God is now sending showers of rain; the earth is warmed and is crumbling like grits; but of seed there is not a blessed

[p. 149]

grain.' 'Take, my sons, and strip the old roof off the house, and thresh the bundles and sow the chaff.' The lads stripped the house and barn (anyhow, there was nothing in it), and threshed away till the sweat ran from their brows, so that they crushed the bundles as small as poppy-seeds. When they sowed, God gave a blessing; so in a week's time it became green like rue; in a month's time, in two months' time, there was corn, ever so much--ever so much, and all manner of seed was found there: there was rye, there was wheat and barley; yea, maybe, there was also a plant or two of buckwheat and millet. Wherever you went throughout the world there was no corn to be seen; all the plain was overgrown with grasses, steppe-grasses, and thistles, but with them was corn like a forest. How people wondered and were astounded! The fame thereof went over the whole world, and the news reached the emperor himself, that in such and such a place there were three own brothers, and with them corn had sprung up for all the world, and so beautiful, never was the like beheld! The emperor ordered the three brothers to appear in the imperial presence.

The brothers heard of it, and smacked the tops of their heads with their hands. 'Now it will be amen with us!' They went again to their father. 'Daddy! they tell us to appear before the emperor. Advise us, daddy, what to do!' 'Go, my sons--what will be, will be; and tell the pure truth before the emperor.' The brothers started off and went to the emperor. The emperor inquired menacingly: 'Why, villains, did ye hoard up corn, when there was such a famine that so many people died of hunger? Tell the truth; if not, I shall order you to be tortured and racked even unto death.' The brothers related all as it had been, from the beginning to the end. 'Now, most gracious emperor, give us over to any torture whatever, or let thy kindness have compassion on us!' The emperor's brow

[p. 150]

became smooth, his eyes became serene. He then ordered the old father to be brought before him at once, and made him sit beside him close to his throne, and hearkened to his counsel till death, and his sons he rewarded handsomely. He ordered the corn to be collected ear by ear, and to be rubbed out in men's hands; and sent it about for seed-corn in all empires, and from it was produced holy corn for all the world.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[26]

  

XXVI.--THE DEVIL AND THE GIPSY.

AN old gipsy went to engage himself as servant to a devil; the devil said: 'I will give you what you wish to bring me firewood and water regularly, and to put fire under the kettle.' 'Good!' The devil gave him a pail and said: 'Go yonder to the well and draw some water.'

Our gipsy went off, got some water into the pail, and drew it up with a hook; but, being old, he couldn't draw it out, and was obliged to pour the water out, in order not to lose the pail in the well. But what was he now to return home with? Well, our gipsy took some stakes out of a fence, and grubbed round about the well, as if he were digging. The devil waited and waited, and as the gipsy didn't appear himself; of course he didn't appear with the water. After awhile he went himself to meet the gipsy, and without thinking inquired: 'But why do you loiter so? Why haven't you brought water by this time?' 'Well, what? I want to dig out the whole well, and bring it to you!' 'But you would have wasted time, if you had purposed anything of the sort; then you wouldn't have brought the pail in time, that the quantity of firewood might not be diminished.' And he drew out the water and carried it himself. 'Eh! if I had but known, I should have brought it long ago.'

[p. 151]

The devil sent him once to the wood for firewood. The gipsy started off, but rain assailed him in the wood and wetted him through; the old fellow caught cold and couldn't stoop after the sticks. What was he to do? Well, he took and pulled bast; he pulled several heaps, went round the wood, and tied one tree to another with strips of the bast. The devil waited, waited on, and was out of his wits on account of the gipsy. He went himself, and when he saw what was going on: 'What are you doing, loiterer?' said he. 'What am I doing? I want to bring you wood. I'm tying the whole forest into one bundle, in order not to do useless work.' The devil saw that he was having a bad time of it with the gipsy, took up the firewood, and went home.

After settling his affairs at home, he went to an older devil to ask his advice: 'I've hired a gipsy, but he's quite a nuisance; we're tolerably 'cute,' says he, 'but he's still stronger and 'cuter than we. Unless I kill him--''Good, when he lies down to sleep, kill him, that he mayn't lead us by the nose any more.' The time came to go home; they lay down to sleep; but the gipsy evidently noticed something, for he placed his fur-coat on the bench where he usually slept, and crept himself into a corner under the bench. When the time came, the devil thought that the gipsy was now in a dead sleep, took up an iron club, and beat the fur-coat till the sound went on all sides. He then lay down to sleep, thinking: 'Oho! it's now amen for the gipsy!' But the gipsy grunted: 'Oh!' and made a rustling in the corner. 'What ails you?' 'Oh, a flea bit me.'

The devil went again to the older one for advice: 'But where to kill him?' said he. 'When I smashed him with a club, he only made a rustling and said: "A flea bit me."' 'Then pay him up now,' said the elder devil, 'as much as he wants, and pack him off about his business.' The gipsy

[p. 152]

chose a bag with ducats and went off. Then the devil was sorry about the money, and consulted the older one again. 'Overtake the gipsy, and say that the one of you that kicks a stone best, so that the sound goes three miles, shall have the money.' The devil overtook him: 'Stay, gipsy! I've something to say to you.' 'What are you after, son of the enemy?' 'Oh, stay, let us kick; the one that kicks loudest against a stone, let his be the money.' 'Now then, kick away,' said the gipsy. The devil kicked once, twice, till it resounded in their ears; but the gipsy meanwhile poured some water on it: 'Eh! what's that, you fool?' 'When I kick a dry stone, water spurts out.' 'Ah! when he kicks, tremble! water has spurted out of the stone.'

The devil went again for advice. The elder one said: Let the one who throws the club highest have the money.' The gipsy had now got some miles on his way; he looked round; the devil was behind him: 'Stop! wait, gipsy!' What do you want, son of the enemy?' 'The one of us that throws the club highest, let his be the money.' 'Well, let us throw now. I've two brothers up yonder in heaven, both smiths, and it will just suit them either for a hammer or for tongs.' The devil threw, so that it whizzed, and was scarcely visible. The gipsy took it by the end, scarcely held it up, and shouted: 'Hold out your hands there, brothers--hey!' But the devil seized him by the hand: 'Ah, stop! don't throw; it would be a pity to lose it.'

The elder devil advised him again: 'Overtake him once more, and say, "The one that runs fastest to a certain point, let him have the money."' The devil overtook him; the gipsy said: 'Do you know what? I shan't contend with you any more, for you don't deserve it; but I've a young son, Hare, who's only just three days old; if you overtake him, you shall measure yourself with me.' The gipsy espied a hare in a firwood: 'There he is! little Hare!

[p. 153]

now, then, Hare! Catch him up!' When the hare started he went hither and thither in bounds, only a line of dust rose behind him. 'Bah!' said the devil, 'he doesn't run straight.' 'In my family no one ever did run straight. He runs as he pleases.'

The elder devil advised him to wrestle; the stronger was to have the money. 'Eh!' said the gipsy; 'you hear the terms for me to wrestle with you: I have a father, he is so old that for the last seven years I have carried him food into a cave; if you floor him, then you shall wrestle with me.' But the gipsy knew of a bear, and led the devil to his cave. 'Go,' said he, 'in there; wake him up, and wrestle with him.' The devil went in and said: 'Get up, long-beard! let us have a wrestle.' Alas! when the bear began to hug him, when he began to claw him, he beat him out, he turned him out, and threw him down on the floor of the cave.

The elder devil advised that the one who whistled best, so that it could be heard for three miles, should have the money. The devil whistled so that it resounded and whizzed again. But the gipsy said: 'Do you know what? When I whistle you will go blind and deaf; bind up your eyes and ears.' He did so. The gipsy took a mallet for splitting logs, and banged it once and twice against his ears. 'Oh, stop! Oh! don't whistle, or you'll kill me! May ill luck smite you with your money! Go where you will never be heard of again!' That's all.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[27]

  

XXVII.--GOD AND THE DEVIL.

ONCE upon a time there was nothing; there was only the heaven above, and water beneath. Then God journeyed [in a boat] upon the water and saw a vast, vast crust of hard foam, on which sat the devil. God asked him: 'What

[p. 154]

art thou?' 'I will not converse with thee,' replied the wicked one, 'unless thou takest me into thy boat.' God promised, and heard in reply: 'I'm the devil.' They both journeyed on without conversing together at all, till the devil began: 'How very nice and beautiful it would be, if there were firm land in the world l' 'There shall be,' answered God; 'go down into the depth of the sea and bring up a handful of sand; I will make the land from it. When thou descendest, and art about to take the sand, say these words: "I take thee in the name of God."' The devil didn't wait long, but was immediately under the water. On the bottom he reached after the sand with both hands with these words: 'I take thee in my own name.' When he came up to the top he looked with curiosity at his closed fists, and was astonished at seeing that they were empty. But God, observing what had happened to him, consoled him, and told him to go down to the bottom once more. He did so, and as soon as he began to grub into the sand in the deep, he said: 'I take thee in his name.' However, he brought up only as much sand, as could get under his nails; God took a little of the sand and firm land formed itself; but only as much as was required for a bed. When night came, God and the devil lay down side by side on the firm land to pass the night. As soon as our Lord God fell asleep, the devil pushed him towards the east, in order that he might fall into the water and perish. In the direction in which he pushed him, there did it become land for a long way. The devil tried pushing him towards the west, and on that side the land extended far. A similar circumstance helped to form land also on the other sides of the world.

As soon as God had made the land, he ascended to heaven. The devil, not liking to stay without him, followed in his track. Now he heard how the angels praised God in hymns, and began to feel annoyed, that he had no one to

[p. 155]

rejoice at his arrival. He went up to God and whispered in his ear: 'What must I do, that I may have such a multitude?' God answered him: 'Wash thy hands and face, and sprinkle the water behind thee.' He did so, and there came into existence such a multitude of devils that the angels and saints no more had sufficient room in heaven. God observed what an injury there was from this to his own. He summoned St. Ilya, and ordered him to let off a storm of thunder and lightning. Ilya was glad at this; he roared, thundered, and lightened with a tempest, and poured rain for forty days and nights, and along with the great rain the devils also fell from heaven on to the earth. At last there were no more wicked ones, and angels also began to fall. Then God ordered Ilya to stop, and wherever any devil struck the ground at the time that he fell, there he remained. From that time to this bright little fires have darted about in heaven, and only now fall upon the earth.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 156]

  

LITTLE RUSSIAN STORIES

  

(FROM SOUTH RUSSIA).

HERE again Mr. Ralston informs us in his preface that he 'has been able to use but little the South Russian collections of Kulish and Rudchenko, there being no complete dictionary available of the dialect, or rather language, in which they are written.' He has, however, given a long and interesting story from the Ukraine, which I find also in Erben, the 'Norka.' One of Erben's South Russian stories is too closely identical with a pretty tale from the government of Voronezh, given by Ralston (p. 63), for me to give it a place here. All the other South Russian stories in Erben's collection I have translated, and only wish they had been more numerous.

The tales of Snake Husbands always appear to have an evil end, though the two that I have translated do not conclude so touchingly as the beautiful Great Russian story, 'The Watersnake' (Ralston, p. 116). Certainly the science of comparative mythology cannot be considered as having its data complete, until Slavonic folklore has been thoroughly investigated and analyzed.

In [*No. 28] an old friend will be discovered in a very rustic dress.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 157]

[28]

  

XXVIII.--THE BEAUTIFUL DAMSEL AND THE WICKED OLD WOMAN.

IN the woods stood a cottage. In it lived a man and his wife, but they had no children. Well, they went on a pilgrimage to beseech God to give them a child. God gave them a daughter. She grew and prospered. The prince about that time rode up to the place, as he was out hunting, and sent his attendant, saying: 'Be so good as to go and ask for a draught of water at yon cottage.' The attendant went to ask for the water just when the child was weeping, and pearls were rolling down from her eyes. Her mother pacified her; she began to smile; all manner of flowers bloomed. The servant went out and said: 'Prince, I have seen a little girl; when she weeps, pearls roll down; and when she smiles, all manner of flowers bloom.' The prince went into the cottage, and began to tease the child to make her cry. She cried, and pearls rolled down. He then begged her mother to pacify her. When she smiled, the prince saw that all manner of flowers bloomed.

The girl continued to grow, and the prince always rode round that way when he went hunting. Well, she grew up. The prince said: 'Old man, give me your daughter to wife.' She now embroidered handkerchiefs with eagles. But the emperor said: 'Where are your wits gone to, my son, that you want to take a peasant girl to wife?' Then the prince took one of the handkerchiefs that she had embroidered, and carried it to the emperor, whereat the emperor clapped his hands. 'Marry,' said he, 'my son, marry!' Then he conducted her homeward, but in his suite was an old woman who had her daughter with her. Well, as they were on their way, the prince stopped to shoot something, and the old woman took everything from the damsel, scooped out her eyes, and thrust her into a cavern in the ground, and

[p. 158]

dressed her daughter in her apparel; so the prince took her to wife without recognising her.

But round the cavern there grew a multitude of bushes. An old man came to gather brushwood. The girl, the damsel, was sitting in the cavern, and in front of her a heap of pearls, which she had wept as she sat; but she had no eyes. 'Take me,' said she, 'kind old man, and pick up this jewellery here.' Well, the old man took her, collected the jewellery, and led her home. At the old man's there were no children, but there was an old woman. She, the damsel, said: 'Collect the jewellery in a bag, and carry it to the town for sale; and if a certain old woman meets you, then don't sell to her, but say: "Give what you have about you."' Well, he carried it to the town and met the old woman. The old woman said: 'Sell me the jewellery!' 'Purchase.' 'How much for it?' 'Give what you have about you?' She gave him an eye. Then the damsel began with one eye to embroider a handkerchief. Again the old man carried jewellery to the town. The old woman again said: 'Old man, sell me the jewellery!' 'Purchase.' 'How much for it?' 'Give what you have about you?' She gave him the other eye. The damsel then began to embroider still more beautifully. The old man said: 'There's a dinner at the emperor's.' The damsel said to him: 'Go, kind old man, to the dinner and take a jug, that you may beg some soup for me.' She also tied a handkerchief of her own sewing on the old man's neck. When the prince espied the handkerchief on the old man's neck, he cried: 'Whence come you, old man?' 'From the farm yonder, prince; and there is also a damsel living at my house, so be so kind as to give her something in this jug.' 'But, old man, where did you get that handkerchief?' 'I found a damsel in a cavern in the ground, and she embroidered it.' The prince at once recognised it by the embroidery. ''Tis she! 'tis she!' But the old woman's daughter he packed off to tend swine. That's all.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 159] [29]

  

XXIX.--THE SNAKE AND THE PRINCESS.

THERE was an emperor and empress who had three daughters. The emperor fell ill, and sent his eldest daughter for water. She went to fetch it, when a snake said: 'Come! will you marry me?' The princess replied: 'No, I won't.' 'Then,' said he, 'I won't give you any water.' Then the second daughter said: 'I'll go; he'll give me some.' She went; the snake said to her: 'Come! will you marry me?' 'No,' she said, 'I won't.' He gave her no water. She returned and said: 'He gave me no water. He said: "If you will marry me I will give it."' The youngest said: 'I will go; he will give me some.' She went, and the snake said to her: 'Come! will you marry me?' 'I will,' she said. Then he drew her water from the very bottom, cold and fresh. She brought it home, gave it her father to drink, and her father recovered. Then on Sunday a carriage came, and those with it said:

'Open the door,
      Princess!
 Why did the dear one love?
 Why draw water from the ford,
      Princess?'

[paragraph continues] She was terrified, wept, and went and opened the door. Then they said again:

'Open the rooms,
      Princess!
 Why did the dear one love?
 Why draw water from the ford,
      Princess?'

[paragraph continues] Then they came into the house and placed the snake in a plate on the table. There he lay, just as if he were of gold! They went out of the house, and said:

[p. 160]

'Sit in the carriage,
      Princess!
 Why did the dear one love?
 Why draw water from the ford,
      Princess?'

[paragraph continues] They drove off with her to the snake's abode. There they lived, and had a daughter born to them. They also took a godmother to live with them, but she was a wicked woman. The child soon died, and the mother died soon after it. The godmother went in the night to the place where she was buried, and cut off her hands. Then she came home, and heated water-gruel, scalded the hands, and took off the gold rings. Then the princess--such was the ordinance of God--came to her for the hands, and said:

'The fowls are asleep, the geese are asleep,
 Only my godmother does not sleep.
 She scalds white hands in water-gruel,
 She takes off golden rings.'

[paragraph continues] The godmother concealed herself under the stove. She said again:

'The fowls are asleep, the geese are asleep,
 Only my godmother does not sleep.
 She scalds white hands in water-gruel,
 She takes off golden rings.'

[paragraph continues] The next day they came and found the godmother dead under the stove. They didn't give her proper burial, but threw her into a hole.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[30]

  

XXX.--TRANSFORMATION INTO A NIGHTINGALE AND A CUCKOO.

A DAMSEL fell in love with a snake, and was also beloved by him. He took her to wife. His dwelling was of pure glass, all crystal. This dwelling was situated underground, in a kind of mound, or something of the sort. Well, it is said

[p. 161]

that her old mother at first grieved over her. How could she help doing so? Well, when the time came, the snake's wife became the mother of twins, a boy and a girl; they looked, as they lay by their mother, as if they were made of wax. And she was herself as beautiful as a flower. Well, God having given her children, she said: 'Now, then, since they have been born as human beings, let us christen them among human beings.' She took her seat in a golden carriage, laid the children on her knees, and drove off to the village to the pope. [**] The carriage had not got into the open country, when sadness was brought to the mother. The old woman had made an outcry in the whole village, seized a sickle, and rushed into the country. She saw she had manifest death before her, when she called to her children, and went on to say: 'Fly, my children, as birds about the world: you, my little son, as a nightingale, and you, my daughter, as a cuckoo.' Out flew a nightingale from the carriage by the right-hand, and a cuckoo by the left-hand window. What became of the carriage and horses and all nobody knows. Nor did their mistress remain, only a dead nettle sprang up by the roadside.

Footnotes

^161:* The orthodox Greek priests are always designated 'popes.'

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[31]

  

XXXI.--TRANSMIGRATION OF THE SOUL.

A CERTAIN woman had a kind of adventure. When she went out into the field to cut grass, or to fetch hemp, and placed food in the stove, then somebody took the victuals out of the stove, and ate them all clean up. She thought, what might such a thing as this signify? Nohow could she guess it. She came, the door was shut, and there was only remaining in the house a baby--maybe half a year old--in the cradle. Well, she betook herself to a wise woman. She entreated her and paid her to come, and she came. She

[p. 162]

looked about, she snuffed about--I mean the wise woman. All at once she heard something indefinite. 'Go you,' she said, 'into the field, and I'll hide myself and we'll see what this is.' The woman went into the field, and the wise woman hid herself in a corner, and kept a look-out. Then, pop! the baby jumped out of the cradle! She looked, and it was no more a baby, but an old man. He was quite dwarfish, and his beard was long. In a moment he was after the eatables, pulled the victuals out of the stove, then gave a screech, and began to gobble up the food. When he had devoured all, then he became a baby again; but now he didn't crawl into the cradle, but lay down, and screeched till the whole house rang. Then the wise woman was after him: she placed him on a block of wood, and began to chop the block under his feet. He screeched and she chopped: he screeched and she chopped. Then she saw how, taking an opportunity, he became an old man again, and said: 'Old woman, I have transformed myself not once nor twice only: I was first a fish, then I became a bird, an ant, and a quadruped, and now I have once more made trial of being a human being. It isn't better thus than being among the ants; but among human beings--it isn't worse!'

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[32]

  

XXXII.--THE WIZARD.

THERE was here once in our village a certain Avstriyat, who was such a wizard that he could cause rain or hail to pass away when he chose. It happened that we were cutting corn in the country; a cloud came up. We began to hurry off the sheaves, but he took no notice, cut and cut away by himself, smoked his pipe, and said: 'Don't be frightened--there'll be no rain.' Lo and behold, there was no rain. Once--all this I saw with my own eyes--we were cutting rye, when the sky became black, the wind rose: it began to

[p. 163]

whistle at first afar off, then over our very heads. There was thunder, lightning, whirlwind--such a tempest, that--O God! Thy will be done! We went after our sheaves, but he--'Don't be frightened, there'll be no rain.' 'Where won't it be?' We didn't hearken to him. But he smoked his pipe out, and cut away quietly by himself. Up came a man on a black horse, and all black himself: he darted straight up to Avstriyat: 'Hey! give permission!' said he. Avstriyat replied: 'No, I won't!' 'Give permission; be merciful!' 'I won't. It would be impossible to get such a quantity in.' The black horseman bowed to the man, and hastened off over the country.

Then the black cloud became gray and whitened. Our elders feared that there would be hail. But Avstriyat took no notice. He cut the corn by himself and smoked his pipe. But again a horseman came up; he hastened over the country still quicker than the first. But this one was all in white, and on a white horse. 'Give permission he shouted to Avstriyat. 'I won't!' 'Give permission, for God's sake!' 'I won't. It wouldn't be possible to get such a quantity in.' 'Hey! give permission; I can't hold out! Then, and not till then, did Avstriyat relent. 'Well, then, go now, but only into the glen, which is beyond the plain.' Scarcely had he spoken, when the horseman disappeared, and hail poured down as out of a basket. In the course of a short hour it filled the glen brimful, level with the banks.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 164]

  

GREAT RUSSIAN STORIES.

HERE I have but little to remark that has not already been noticed by Mr. Ralston. In [*No. 33] I have given a pretty variant of Grimm's 'Fisherman's Wife.' In this story, which is from the Government of Moscow, there is a curious confusion between 'king' (korol), and 'emperor' (tzar). The peasant asks to be made korol 'king,' but is answered that an 'emperor' (tzar) is chosen by God. The King of Poland was formerly the mighty potentate west of Moscow, which emerged from Tartar bondage under a grand-duke, or grand-prince. This confusion may possibly imply that the story was crystallized in its present form not long after the assumption of the imperial dignity by the ruler of Muscovy.

As to [*No. 34], Mr. Ralston, in his 'Songs of the Russian People,' gives an account of the manner in which Ilya of Murom obtained a vast accession of strength from the still mightier hero Svyatozor (pp. 58-63). By his exploits, however, in the story which I have given, Ilya appears to have already possessed strength enough for most purposes.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[33]

  

XXXIII.--THE LIME-TREE.

ONE evening Vanyusha (Johnny) was sitting with his grand- father, and asked his grandfather: 'Whence comes it that bears' paws are like our hands and feet?' His grandfather replied: 'Listen, Johnny. I will tell you what I have myself heard from ancient people. Ancient people said

[p. 165]

bears were like human beings, like us orthodox Christians. In a certain village there lived a poor cottager. His cottage was wretched; he had no pony; a cow he never even thought of; he had no firewood. Winter came, and it was cold in his unwarmed room. The cottager took his axe, and went with it into the wood. An enchanted tree--a lime-tree--presented itself to his sight. He struck it with his axe, and now to cut it down; but the lime-tree addressed him in human speech: "I will give you all that you want. If you have no riches, if you have no wife, I will give you all." The peasant said: "Very good, mother, if you make me richer than any of the peasants. But I have no pony, no cow, and my cottage is wretched." The lime-tree said: "Go home; all shall be yours." The peasant went. A new house was his: fences of stout boards, horses that were ready to fly, and storerooms full of corn. The cottager was not satisfied, because his wife was not handsomer. What was to be done? "I'll go off quick to Mother Lime-tree." He took his axe, and went off into the wood.

'He went into the wood to the lime-tree, and struck it with his axe. "What do you want?" "Mother Lime-tree, among mankind there are wives and wives, but mine is such a disagreeable one. Do me a service: give me a handsome wife." The lime-tree said: "Go home." The peasant went. His wife came to meet him--such a beauty--blood and milk, and storerooms full of everything good. Well, the cottager began to live comfortably with his young wife, and thought: "It is a fine thing for us to live possessed of riches, but we're under a superior authority. Is it impossible for me to be the superior authority myself?" He thought it over with his wife. He went again to the enchanted lime-tree.

'He went into the wood, he struck it with his axe. "What do you want, peasant?" "What, indeed, Mother Lime-tree! It's a fine thing for us to live in possession of riches; but

[p. 166]

we're under a superior authority. Is it impossible for me to be head-borough myself?" "Very well: go home; all shall be yours." No sooner had the cottager got home, when a letter came for him--"The cottager was to be head-borough." The cottager got used to living as head-borough, and thought to himself: "It's a fine thing to be head-borough, but all is under the control of the lord of the manor. Is it impossible for me to be the lord myself?" He considered the matter with his wife, they consulted together, and he went off again to the lime-tree.

'He went up to it, and struck it with his axe. The tree asked him: "What do you want?" "Thanks to you, mother, for all; but how not to doff my cap before the lord, to become the lord myself?" "What is to be done with you? Go home; it shall all be yours." Scarcely had he got home, when up drove the lord-lieutenant, and brought him a letter from the king, that "he was to be a gentleman." It was advantageous to be a gentleman. He began to give entertainments and banquets. "It's a fine thing to be a gentleman, but without an official position! Was it impossible for him to become an official?" They thought and talked it over. He went off to the lime-tree and struck it with his axe. "What do you want, peasant?" "I thank you, mother, for all; but is it impossible for me to be an official?" "Well, then, go home!" No sooner had he got home, when a royal letter arrived--he was invested with orders. "It's a fine thing to be decorated, but all is under the control of the lord-lieutenant. Is it impossible for me to be lord-lieutenant myself?" He thought it over with his wife, went off into the wood to the enchanted tree, the lime-tree.

'He came to the lime-tree and struck it with his axe. It said: "What do you want, peasant? With what are you discontented?" "I thank you, mother, for everything; but is it impossible for me to be lord-lieutenant myself, and to have a rich patrimony?" "It is difficult to effect this. But

[p. 167]

what is to be done with you? Go home!" The cottager had scarcely got home, when a letter arrived the cottager was to be lord-lieutenant, and was presented with an estate of inheritance. The cottager became used to living as lord-lieutenant--indeed, by descent, he was not a peasant. "It's a fine thing for me to live as lord-lieutenant, but all is under the control of the king." He considered; he went off into the wood to the enchanted tree, the lime-tree.

'He came to it, and struck it with his axe. The tree inquired: "What do you want?" "All is excellent; I thank you for all; but is it impossible for me to be king myself?' The lime-tree began to try to persuade him. "Foolish man, for what are you asking? Consider what you were, and what you have become. From a cottager you have become a man of high rank and everything; but an emperor [**] is chosen by God." The lime-tree endeavoured to persuade him with all manner of arguments that he had better not make the request, but all in vain. The cottager would not budge, but insisted that it should make him emperor. The lime-tree said to him: "It is impossible to effect this, and it will not be done; you will lose, too, what you have already obtained!" But the cottager still insisted. The lime-tree said: "Become a bear, and your wife a she-bear!" And he became a bear, and she a she-bear. They went off bears.'

The grandson inquired: 'Grandfather, can this be a true story?' 'In reality 'tis a fable. Do not desire what is impossible; be content with a little. If you desire much, you will lose what you have obtained.'

Footnotes

^167:* Note the transition from king (korol) to emperor (tzar).

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[34]

  

XXXIV.--ILYA OF MUROM AND NIGHTINGALE THE ROBBER.

IN the famous city of Murom, in the village of Karatcharof, lived a peasant, Ivan Timofeewitch. He had an

[p. 168]

only child, Ilya Murometz. He sat as children do for thirty years, and when thirty years had passed, he began to walk firmly on his feet, became conscious of vast strength, made himself a warrior's equipment and a steel spear, and saddled a good horse, worthy of a hero. He went to his father and mother, and begged their blessing. 'My honoured father and mother, let me go to the famous city of Kief to perform my devotions to God, and to kneel to the Prince of Kief.' His father and mother gave him their blessing, laid upon him serious injunctions, and spoke to this effect: 'Ride straight to the city of Kief; straight to the city of Chernigof, and on your road do no injury, shed no Christian blood causelessly.' Ivan Murometz received the blessing of his father and mother, prayed to God, took leave of his father and mother, and started on his journey.

He travelled far on into the gloomy forest, until he came to a robbers' camp. The robbers espied Ilya Murometz, and their robber hearts burned for his heroic horse, and they began to talk together about taking his horse from him, for they were not wont to see such horses anywhere, and now an unknown man was riding on so good a horse. And they arose to assail Ilya Murometz by tens and twenties. Ilya Murometz halted his heroic horse, and took out of his quiver an arrow of guelder-rosewood, and placed it on his tough bow. He shot the arrow of guelder-rosewood along the ground, and it penetrated to the distance of a fathom slanting. Seeing this, the robbers were terrified, collected into an orb, fell on their knees, and said: You are our lord and father, valiant and good youth! We are guilty before you; take for such a fault as ours as much as you please of coloured raiment and herds of horses.' Ilya smiled and said: 'I've nowhere to put it; but if you wish to live, don't venture any further!' and rode on his way to the famous city of Kief.

He rode on to the city of Chernigof, and under that city

[p. 169]

of Chernigof were standing armies of heathen innumerable, and they were besieging the city of Chernigof, and wanted to destroy it and ravage the churches of God therein, and to take into captivity the Prince and Duke of Chernigof himself. Ilya Murometz was terrified at this great force; nevertheless, he committed himself to the Lord God, his Creator, and determined to risk his head for the Christian faith. Ilya Murometz began to slaughter the heathen forces with his steel spear, and defeated all the pagan power, and took captive the heathen prince, and led him into the city of Chernigof. The citizens came out of the city of Chernigof to meet him with honour; the Prince and Duke of Chernigof came himself. They received the good youth with honour, and gave thanks to the Lord God, because the Lord unexpectedly sent deliverance to the city, and caused them not all to perish in vain at the hands of such a heathen host. They received him into their houses, made him a great entertainment, and let him proceed on his journey.

Ilya Murometz rode off towards the city of Kief by the direct road from Chernigof, which had been beset for full thirty years by Nightingale the robber, who allowed neither horseman nor foot-traveller to pass, and slew them not by any weapon, but by his robber whistling. Out rode Ilya Murometz into the open country, and espied the tracks of horses, and rode on upon them, and arrived at the Branskian forest, at the muddy swamps, at the bridges of guelder-rosewood, and at the river Smorodinka. Nightingale the robber forboded his end and a great misfortune, and before Ilya Murometz approached within twenty versts, began to whistle vigorously with his robber whistling; but the hero's heart was not terrified. Then, before he approached within ten versts, he began to whistle still more violently, and from this whistling Ilya Murometz's horse tottered under him. Ilya Murometz rode up to the nest itself, which was constructed upon twelve oaks. Nightingale the robber espied

[p. 170]

the hero of Holy Russia, whistled with all his might, and wanted to smite Ilya Murometz to death.

Ilya Murometz took down his tough bow, placed on it an arrow of guelder-rosewood, shot it at Nightingale's nest, struck his right eye and knocked it out. Nightingale the robber tumbled down like a sack of oats. Ilya Murometz took Nightingale the robber, bound him fast to his steel stirrup, and rode on towards the famous city of Kief. On the way stood a mansion belonging to Nightingale the robber, and when Ilya Murometz came opposite the robber's mansion, the windows thereof were open, and at these windows the robber's three daughters were looking out. The youngest daughter saw him, and cried to her sisters: 'There's our father outside coming with booty, and leading to us a man bound to his steel stirrup.' But the eldest daughter looked, and began to weep bitterly. That isn't our father coming: it's an unknown man coming, and leading our father.' They began to scream to their husbands: 'Our dear husbands! ride and meet the man, and take our father from him; do not let our family be put to such contempt.' Their husbands, strong heroes, rode against the hero of Holy Russia; their horses were good, their spears were sharp, and they were about to receive Ilya on their spears. Nightingale the robber espied this, and said to them: 'My dear sons-in-law, do not cause yourselves to be put to shame, and do not provoke so mighty a hero; rather with humility entreat him to drink a cup of green wine in my house.' At the request of the sons-in-law, Ilya turned into the house, not knowing their villainy. The eldest daughter raised on chains an iron slab, which was placed over the door, in order to crush him. But Ilya observed her at the door, struck her with his spear, and smote her to death.

When Ilya Murometz arrived at Kief city, he rode straight to the prince's palace, and entered the house, which was of

[p. 171]

white stone, prayed to God, and knelt to the prince. The Prince of Kief asked him: 'Tell me, good youth, how men name you, and of what city you are a native?' Ilya Murometz made reply: 'My lord, men call me Little Ilya, but by my father's family I am an Ivanof; a native of the city of Murom, of the village of Karatcharof.' The prince inquired: 'By what road did you ride from Murom?' 'By that of Chernigof, and under the walls of Chernigof I defeated an innumerable heathen host, and delivered the city of Chernigof. Thence I proceeded by the direct road, and took captive the mighty hero, Nightingale the robber, and led him hither with me bound to my steel stirrup.' The prince, becoming angry, said: 'What a lie you are telling!' When the heroes, Alesha Popovitch and Dobrynya Nikititch, heard this, they flew to look, and assured the prince that it really was so. The prince ordered a cup of green wine to be brought to the good youth. The prince had a wish to listen to the robber's whistling. Ilya enveloped the prince and princess in a sable mantle, placed them beneath his arms, summoned Nightingale, and commanded him to give the Nightingale whistle with half strength. But Nightingale the robber whistled with his full robber whistle, and deafened the heroes, so that they fell on the floor. For this Ilya Murometz slew him.

Ilya Murometz made a brotherhood with Dobrynya Nikititch. They saddled their good steeds, and rode into the open country to seek adventures; and they rode full three months without finding any adversary. But they rode on in the open country; there came a wandering beggar: the ragged dress upon his back weighed fifty poods, his hat nine poods, his staff was ten fathoms long. Ilya Murometz began to urge his horse toward him, and was about to match his heroic strength with him. The wandering beggar recognised Ilya Murometz, and said 'Oh! you are Ilya Murometz. If you remember, we learnt to read and write

[p. 172]

together at one school, and now you are urging your horse against a poor cripple like me, as against an enemy. But this you don't know, that in the famous city of Kief a great misfortune has happened. An infidel, a mighty hero, the unclean Idolishtcha, has arrived. His head is as big as a beer caldron, his shoulders are a fathom broad, the distance between his eyebrows is a span, that between his ears is an arrow of guelder-rosewood; he eats an ox at a time, and drinks a caldron at a draught; and the Prince of Kief is very grieved about you, because you have left him in such perplexity.' Clothing himself in the beggar's dress, Ilya Murometz went straight to the prince's court, and cried with heroic voice: 'Oh, is it you, Prince of Kief? Send me an alms, wandering beggar that I am.' The prince saw him, and spake as follows: 'Come into the palace to me, beggar; I will give you your fill of food and drink, and gold for your journey.' And the beggar entered the palace and stood by the stove; he looked on at what was occurring. Idolishtcha asked for something to eat. They brought him a whole ox roasted, and he ate it up, bones and all. Idolishtcha asked for something to drink. They brought him a caldron of beer, carried by twenty men; he took it up by the handles, and drank it all up. Ilya Murometz said: 'My father had a greedy mare; she over-ate herself and died.' Idolishtcha didn't stand that, and said: 'Oh, it's you, wandering beggar! Why do you insult me? It's nothing to me to take you up in my hands. Nay, what are you? If such an one as Ilya Murometz was among you, I'd make a fight of it even with him.' 'Then here's such an one as he,' said Ilya Murometz, and, taking off his hat, struck him gently on the head with it.--But he broke through the wall of the house, took the corpse of Idolishtcha, and threw it out by the rent. For this the prince honoured Ilya Murometz with great commendations, and placed him on the list of mighty heroes.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 173]

  

SOUTHERN SLAVONIANS.

[p. 174] [p. 175]

  

BULGARIAN STORIES.

THE Bulgarians do not derive their name from a Slavonic origin, but from a small and warlike nation of horsemen, which in A.D. 679 crossed the Danube under a chief named Isperich, conquered the disunited Slavonic tribes that had settled in Moesia, and consolidated them into a powerful realm. The conquerors melted into the conquered, and lost their language, but gave their name to the state and country. The Slavonic language of the people does not appear to have been affected by that of their Ugrian conquerors, but rather by the old Thracian language, which, conjointly with Latin, has produced the present Roumanian. The peculiarities of the present Bulgarian language are: (1) the loss of case-inflexions in nouns and adjectives, while the verbal system is most complete and complex; (2) the expression of the genitive and dative cases by prefixing the preposition na; (3) the post-positive article, which is also borrowed from the old Thracian language, which was akin to the Illyrian now spoken by the present Albanians and Epirots; (q) the loss of the infinitive mood, which is replaced by da with the finite verb. Baron Wenceslas Wratislaw, in describing his journey through Bulgaria in 1591, says of the people: They use a Slavonic language, so that we Bohemians can converse with them.'

[p. 176]

The Bulgarian tales themselves are curious, and some of them very beautiful, as are also the songs, to which considerable space is devoted by Mr. Morfill in his 'Slavonic Literature' (pp. 125-144). There are old traditions as to the world and its inhabitants, apparently of heathen origin ([*No. 35]) a singular fusion of the history of Abraham and Isaac with some other, probably heathen, tradition ([*No. 36]); a version of 'Cinderella' ([*No. 37]), which, involving as it does the transmigration of souls, clearly exhibits an Indian origin; a beautiful story ([*No. 38]), the latter part of which is a variant of the latter part of the Russian tale of 'Marya Morevna' (Ralston, p. 85), and [*No. 39], in the latter part of which many people will recognise a variant of an old acquaintance.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[35]

  

XXXV.--THE LORD GOD AS AN OLD MAN.

IN the beginning, when man began to plough, when he had cut a furrow from one end to the other, he lifted his plough on to his shoulder, and when he had carried it back to the same end that he had begun from, he began again to plough thence. The Lord, in the form of an old man, passed by and said to him, 'Not thus, my son, but when you make a furrow, turn your plough round at the same place to which you have cut the furrow, and plough back to the end from which you began.' And thus the ploughman learnt to plough aright, as people plough at this day.

Thence the Lord went away in the form of an old man, and saw a woman who was weaving at a loom, and putting the thread, three threads at a time, into her mouth; she bit the thread off at one end, and began again at the same side. The Lord said to her, 'Not thus, daughter; but put the thread hither and thither with two hands without biting the thread off.' And she learnt to weave as people weave at this day.

[p. 177]

The next day the Lord again passed alongside of the ploughman in a different guise, and asked him: 'Who taught you, my son, to plough thus?' He replied to him: 'The Lord God, in the form of an old man.' The Lord blessed him, and said: 'A day to plough and a year to eat!' Afterwards he passed by the woman and asked her: 'Who taught you, daughter, to weave thus?' She replied: 'Myself, my very own self, quickly, quite quickly.' Then the Lord said to her: 'A year to weave, that you may carry it under the arm!'

They say, moreover, that at that time men had command not only over all animals, but also over inanimate things; but later, they say, it was altered when men became wicked. For instance, when a man had cut logs of wood and piled them in a heap, he struck them with a stick, and they went of themselves whither they were required to go. But a certain woman having cut logs and struck them to make them go, they started; but she, being tired of walking beside them on foot, seated herself at top, and the logs resisted. She struck them on one side, she struck them on the other, but they didn't move any whither. Then she unfastened her girdle, and put them on her back. On the way God showed himself to her, and said to her: 'Since you are wicked, instead of your riding on them, let them ride on you.'

When the Lord walked about the earth and blessed it, he went first to a herdsman. He was lying on his back under a tree, a pear-tree; his pitcher, in which he fetched water for himself, stood by empty. The Lord, in the form of an old man, asked him: 'My son, is there any water in the pitcher?' He said to him: 'No.' The Lord said to him: 'Go, my son, to fetch me a little water, that the old man may drink.' The herdsman made a sign to him with his foot: 'There is where the spring is; if you're thirsty, go,

[p. 178]

drink.' The Lord then gave the word that all the herd should run off as if assailed by the gadfly; then, when they began all to run in one direction, the herdsman took his hat in his hand and started off, and as he ran after them thought: 'How I have sinned against God!'

Then the Lord went to a shepherd. The shepherd also had a pitcher. The Lord asked him: 'My son, have you any water?' He replied to him: 'There is water, old man, but I cannot go to fetch it myself, or the sheep will disperse.' Then said the Lord: 'Go, my son; I will watch them.' When the shepherd went off for the water, the Lord took the shepherd's staff, and when he had stuck it into the ground, placed the shepherd's cloak upon it, and blessed the sheep. They became quiet and tranquil in the shade. During the shepherd's absence up came a wolf to obtain the appointed tribute which he received every day from the shepherd. The Lord gave him a lamb of little value. The wolf, discontented, did not choose to take it, but darted forward and seized another, which he liked. Then the Lord took the shepherd's trumpet, and struck him on the loins--on the spine. From this it has remained a property of the wolf that his loins are just as weak as his neck is strong. But he carried off the lamb which he had seized. The Lord took two little stones, threw them after the wolf and blessed them; they became two dogs, ran after the wolf, and took away the lamb which the wolf had seized. The shepherd came up bringing the Lord cold water, and saw the sheep quiet, for they were standing in the shade and the two dogs were frolicking round them. The shepherd then asked the old man: 'Well, old man, now when the sheep are standing quiet, and are like blocks of wood, how shall I drive them to pasture?' The Lord said to him: 'My son, take a copper trumpet, and blow it to them; they will start off in the direction from which the

[p. 179]

wind blows gently.' From that time forth down to the present day people drive their sheep to pasture blowing trumpets.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[36]

  

XXXVI.--BULGARIAN HOSPITALITY.

ONCE upon a time, when the Lord had formed the world, he wished to see how his people lived; he came down from heaven first of all on the Balkan Mountains, took the form of a man with a long white beard and white clothes; took a staff in his hand, and went about the world in the Bulgarian land; he travelled much, a whole day long, over desolate mountains. In the evening he came to a village to pass the night. He went into the first house at the end of the village and sat down on the threshold, said nothing, but meditated by himself. The mistress was in her house doing some work, and did not see him. But now her husband came from the field, from his plough, espied the old man, was delighted, and said to him: 'Old man, you are very tired; you are a weary traveller. Come into the house; rest yourself, if it is but a poor one. I will entertain you with all that the Lord has given me--only say the word.' The old man regarded him with cheerful eyes, went into the house and sat down. The man and his wife quickly rose up and prepared a hospitable meal according to what they possessed, and as nicely and as handsomely as they could, and placed it on the table. The couple ate of their homely meal, but the old man would not; he only smelt the homely banquet, said nothing, but watched how the two persons enjoyed themselves, and rejoiced. They urged him, they begged him. 'Old man, why don't you eat? You will remain hungry. Take, and taste, and try what you please. What we have is all here before you.' The old man only said this: 'Eat you--eat; I am thinking of something'

[p. 180]

[paragraph continues] When they had eaten their fill, they rose. The mistress went out to feed the child because it was crying. Then said the old man to her husband: 'Do you know what, master, if you wish to entertain me? I cannot eat everything, but I wish for baked human flesh. Kill your little son, wash him nicely, and place him whole on the frying-pan in the oven; only look out that your wife does not see you, for she will weep.' He replied: 'Is this all that you want, old man? Why did you not tell me long before, that you might not have sat a hungry guest in the house? Did I not tell you that all was yours that the Lord had given me? Indeed, I love you exceedingly, old man; my heart tells me that you are good and worthy, and now you shall see; only have a little patience, till I get ready that which you desire.' The man went out of doors, and his wife had begun to do some work, and had left her child to play by itself in the moonlight till it fell asleep, without knowing what was about to take place. Her husband stole the child, killed it with all haste, put it entire in the frying-pan, and shut it up in the oven, that its mother might not see it till it was cooked; he then went to the old man, sat down by him and conversed cheerfully with him. They had not talked long, when the old man became silent, sniffed with his nose, and said to the servant lad: 'Go, look at the baked meat; it smells nicely; perhaps it is cooked.'

The lad rose, went out, opened the oven to look at and take out the baked meat. But what did he see? He was amazed and frightened at the wonder; all the oven and all the house was glittering with the brightness of the child. The frying-pan and the child had become gold, and shone like the sun. The child was sitting in the frying-pan like a big boy--handsome, cheerful, bright, and well. On his head was a crown of pearls and precious stones; on the girdle at his waist was a sword. In his right hand he held

[p. 181]

a book of blessing; in his left hand he had a wheatsheaf full of ears; and all this was shining more than fire, because it had all become gold. He returned to tell the old man what a wonder had taken place, and to ask what was to be done; but the old man was no longer there; he had gone out in front of the house, and said to them: 'Fare ye well, and live as ye have done till now, honourably and contentedly. Your good hearts will have good from field and cattle, and blessing and peace upon your children and children's children from the Lord. He will receive you and entertain you in his heavenly house.' He then went away alone under cover of the night, no one knows whither.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[37]

  

XXXVII.--CINDERELLA.

ONCE upon a time, a number of girls were assembled spinning round a deep rift or chasm in the ground. As they spun they chattered together and told stories to each other. Up came a white-bearded old man, who said to them: 'Girls! as you spin and chatter, be circumspect round this rift; or, if any of you drops her spindle into it, her mother will be turned into a cow.' Thus saying he departed. The girls were astonished at his words, and crowded round the rift to look into it. Unfortunately, one of them, the most beautiful of all, dropped her spindle into it. Towards evening, when she went home, she espied a cow--her mother--in front of the gate, and drove her out with the other cattle to pasture. After some time the father of the girl married a widow, who brought a daughter with her into the house. The second wife had a spite at the man's first daughter, especially because she was more beautiful and more industrious than her own, and she allowed her neither to wash herself, nor to comb her hair, nor to change her clothes. One day she sent her out with the cattle, gave her a bag full of tow, and

[p. 182]

told her: 'If you don't spin this tow into yarn to-day, or if you don't wind it into a ball, you had better not come home at eventide--I shall kill you.' It was sad for the poor girl, as she went after the cattle, endeavouring as well as she could to keep them together. In the afternoon, when the cattle lay down to chew the cud, she began to look at the bag to see how to perform her task upon it; but when she saw that she could not make out what to do with it, she began to cry. When the cow which was her mother saw her crying, she asked her why she was crying. She told her how it was, and what it was. Then said the cow to her: 'Don't be afraid; I will help you. I will take all the tow into my mouth, and will chew it, and yarn will come up into my ear. You must take it and reel it into a ball, and you will finish it in good time.' As she said, so it was. She began to chew the tow, piece after piece; yarn came up, into her ear, and the girl wound and reeled it, and finished the task. In the evening she departed and went to her stepmother, who was amazed at seeing so much work completed. The next time she gave her as much tow again. The girl spun till noon, and then in the afternoon, when the cattle lay down to chew the cud, the cow came up to her and began to chew the tow; yarn came up into her ear, and the girl wound and reeled it, and finished in good time. In the evening she went home and delivered to her stepmother all the tow spun and wound. She was astonished at seeing so much work completed. The third time she gave her still more tow, and sent her own daughter to see who helped her. The daughter went and concealed herself apart, and saw how it was and what it was, that the girl completed so much work in the day; she saw how the cow took the tow into her mouth, how yarn came up into her ear, and how the girl wound and reeled it. She went home to tell her mother. When she heard this from her daughter, she

[p. 183]

urged her husband to kill the cow. He endeavoured in every way to persuade her not to kill the cow, but could not over-persuade her. At last, when he saw that there was no escape, he promised to kill it on a certain day. When the girl heard that they were going to kill the cow she began to cry, and told the cow secretly that they were going to kill her. She said to the girl: 'Be quiet--don't cry! If they kill me, you must not eat any of my flesh, but must collect the bones and bury them behind the cottage. Then if need come to you, you must go to the grave, and help will come to you thence.' On hearing this she went away.

One day they killed the cow and boiled her flesh, brought it into the parlour, and began to eat. The girl alone did not eat of it, according to the instructions she had received; but collected the bones, and then, without anybody seeing her, took them and buried them behind the cottage, where the cow (her mother) had ordered her so to do. The girl was named Mary; but at length, when they had put all the work in the cottage upon her--that is to say, to sweep, to fetch water, to cook, to wash up the plates--she had become dirty and begrimed with ashes and cinders from excessive work at the fireplace; and therefore her stepmother nicknamed her Cinderella (Pepelezka), and this remained her name afterwards.

One Sunday her stepmother got ready to go to church with her daughter, but, before starting, took a wooden dish of millet, scattered it on the ground in the cottage, and said to Cinderella: 'Here you, Cinderella! if you don't pick up this millet, and if you don't get dinner ready by the time that I return from church, don't come before my eyes, or I shall put you to death.' Then they went away. Poor Cinderella, when she looked at all the millet, cried out weeping and wailing: 'I will cook, I will sweep, I will attend to everything, but what poor girl can pick up all this millet?'

[p. 184]

[paragraph continues] When she had wept and spoken, immediately there came into her mind what the cow had told her, to go to the grave, and there help would be given her in trouble. Cinderella went off to the grave. When there, what did she see? On the grave stood an open box, filled with all manner of rich clothes, and on the lid were two pigeons, white as snow. They said to her: 'Mary! take the clothes out, put them on, and go to church, and we will pick up the millet and get the dinner ready.' She put out her hands and took the upper ones, which were of pure silk and satin, put them on, and went to church. In the church people great and small marvelled at her beauty and her dress, especially because no one recognised her or knew who or what she was. Most of all did the emperor's son marvel at her, and never took his eyes off her. When service was ended, she stole away and ran quickly home, undressed immediately, and put the clothes in the box, and the box immediately vanished from sight. She went to the fireplace, and what did she see there? The millet picked up, dinner ready--in one word, everything attended to! Soon afterwards, lo! her stepmother came with her daughter from church, saw everything in proper order, and was astounded.

Next Sunday, when she was about to go to church, taking a larger dish of millet and scattering it on the ground, she threatened Cinderella that she would kill her if she didn't pick it up and get dinner ready. The stepmother went off with her daughter to church, and Cinderella betook herself to the grave of the cow. On the grave she found the two pigeons and the box with the dresses in it open. They told her to dress herself and go to church, and they would pick up the millet and get dinner ready. Taking a dress of pure silver, she dressed herself and went off to church. Now everybody, small and great, marvelled at her more than before, and the emperor's son did not take his eyes off her

[p. 185]

for a moment. Service ended, she stole off amidst the multitude and got away home. There she undressed, and put the clothes in the box, and the box disappeared from sight. Soon afterwards, lo! her stepmother came and looked about; the millet was picked up, dinner was ready, and Cinderella was at the fireplace. She was astonished at seeing so much work completed.

The third time her stepmother got ready to go to church, and before she started, taking a dish of millet thrice as large, and scattering it on the ground, she said to Cinderella: 'Cinderella, if you don't pick up all this millet before we return from church, and if you don't get dinner ready, go and hide yourself; don't come before my eyes--I shall kill you.' Then she went off to church. After this Cinderella went to the grave of the cow, and found there the box open and the two pigeons upon it. They told her to dress herself and go to church; they would pick up the millet and get the dinner ready. Taking a dress of pure gold, she dressed herself and went to church. There, when the people saw her, they marvelled, but no one knew who or what she was. The emperor's son never took his eyes off her, and planned, when service was over, to follow her closely, to see whither she betook herself. Service ended, she stole off amidst the crowd, hastening to get away before her stepmother; but as she was pushing through the crowd, she lost one of her shoes, and the emperor's son took it up. She escaped from among them with one shoe, undressed very quickly, put the clothes in the box, and the box vanished. She went home and looked in the cottage; the millet was picked up, dinner was ready, and everything attended to. She sat down at the fireplace, and, lo! her stepmother came and looked about the cottage; everything was in order, the millet picked up, dinner ready; she had nothing to find fault with her or scold her about.

[p. 186]

The emperor's son left the people, disguised himself, took the shoe, and went from cottage to cottage to try it on, to find out whose it was; and wherever he went he made inquiries, and tried it on the foot of every girl, but it did not fit one. For some it was too large, and for others too small; for some too narrow, for others too broad. At last he came to Cinderella's cottage. As soon as her stepmother saw him, she concealed Cinderella under a trough. He asked whether there was any girl in the house. She replied that there was, and brought her daughter to him. He tried the shoe on her, but it wouldn't even allow her toes to go in. He then asked whether there wasn't another girl there, and she told him that there wasn't. The cock had flown on to the trough, and when she told the emperor's son that there was no other girl there, he crowed: 'Cock-a-doodle-doo! pretty girl under trough!' The stepmother shrieked out: 'Shoo! eagles have brought you!' [**] But the emperor's son, on hearing the cock say this, went up and took the trough off; and there was, indeed, the girl that he had seen in the church with those beautiful dresses, only on one foot she had no shoe. He tried the shoe on her; it went on, and was exactly the same as that on the other foot. Then the emperor's son took her by the hand, conducted her to his court, married her, and punished her stepmother for her evil heart.

Footnotes

^186:* One might have expected, 'Eagles take you!' but it is as I have given it. Eagles are frequently supernatural messengers in Bulgarian tales.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[38]

  

XXXVIII.--THE GOLDEN APPLES AND THE NINE PEAHENS.

THERE was once upon a time an emperor who had three sons, and in his yard a golden apple-tree, which flowered and ripened every night; but somebody robbed it, and the emperor was utterly unable to discover who the robber was.

[p. 187]

[paragraph continues] Once he was conversing with his sons, and said to them: 'I do not know whither goes the fruit from our apple-tree.' Then the eldest son answered him: 'I will go to-night to see who takes it.' When it became dark, the eldest son did as he had said: went out, and lay down under it. Well, when the apples began to ripen in the course of the night, slumber overtook him, and he fell asleep; and when he awoke at dawn he looked--but where were the apples? Taken away! When he saw this, he went and related all to his father just as it really happened. The second son said to his father: 'I will go to-night to watch, that I may see who takes it.' But he, too, watched it even as the first one. About the time when the apples began to ripen, he fell asleep. When he woke up in the morning, where were the apples? Taken away! Now came the turn of the third and youngest brother. He went out at eventide under the apple-tree, placed a sofa there, lay down, and went to sleep. About midnight, when the apples began to ripen, he woke up and looked at the apple-tree. It had just begun to ripen, and illuminated all the yard from the brightness of its fruit. Just then up flew nine peahens, eight of which settled upon the apple-tree, and the ninth on the ground beside his sofa, and, as soon as she had alighted, became a damsel, who shone with beauty like a bright sun. They conversed together while the other eight were rifling the tree, and when dawn came, she thanked him for the apples, and he begged her to leave just one behind her. She gave him two--one for himself, and one to take to his father--transformed herself into a peahen, and flew away, followed by the other eight. In the morning the prince rose up, and took one apple to his father, who did not know what to do for joy, and commended him without ceasing. The next evening the youngest prince went out again to watch the apple-tree, and as soon as he had gone out, lay down as before, and

[p. 188]

watched it that night also. In the morning he again brought his father an apple. This went on for a few days, when his brothers began to envy him, because they could not watch it, whereas he watched it successfully. They could not make out how to discover the manner in which he watched the apple-tree. So they sought out an old witch, who promised them to find out how their young brother watched the apple-tree. At the approach of evening, when the youngest prince was about to go out to watch the apple-tree, the accursed witch stole out and went off before him, lay down under his sofa, and there concealed herself. The prince came, lay down without knowing that the old woman was under his sofa, and went to sleep as previously. About midnight, when the prince had just woke up, the nine peahens arrived; eight of them settled on the tree, and the other on the ground beside his sofa, transformed herself into a damsel, and they began to converse together. While these were talking to each other, the accursed old witch softly raised herself up, and cut off a piece of the damsel's long hair. As soon as she felt this, the damsel sprang on one side, transformed herself into a peahen, and flew away, with the other eight behind her. The prince, on seeing this, sprang off his sofa, and shouted: What is this?' He erelong espied the old woman under the sofa, seized and hauled her from under it, and, when morning came, ordered her to be fastened to the tails of two horses and torn asunder. The peahens came no more to the apple-tree, and the prince was much grieved on this account, and wept and mourned day after day. At last he determined to go to seek them all over the world, and went and told his father what his intention was, and his father endeavoured to comfort him, and said: 'Stay, my son! I will find you another damsel in my empire, such an one as you wish for.' But in vain; he would not follow his father's

[p. 189]

advice, and made preparations to go; took with him one of his servants, and went into the world to find the peahen. When he had travelled a long time, he came to a lake, in the midst of which was a rich palace, and in the palace an aged empress, who had one daughter. The prince, on coming to the old empress, asked her to tell him about the nine peahens, if she knew about them; and the old woman replied that she did, and that the nine peahens came daily to bathe in the lake. On telling him this, she began to try to over-persuade him with these words: 'Never mind those nine peahens, my son. I have a handsome damsel, and abundance of wealth--it will all remain yours.' But as soon as the prince heard where the peahens were, he would not listen to her talk, but in the morning ordered his servant to get the horses ready to go to the lake. Before they started for the lake, the old woman called his servant, bribed him, and gave him a little whistle, saying to him: 'When the time approaches for the peahens to come to the lake, do you secretly look out, and blow the whistle behind your master's neck; he will immediately fall asleep, and will not see them.' The accursed servant hearkened to her, took the whistle, and did as the old woman told him. When they arrived at the shore of the lake, he calculated the time when the peahens would arrive, blew the whistle behind his master's neck, and he immediately fell as sound asleep as if he were dead. Scarcely had he fallen asleep, when the peahens arrived; eight of them settled on the lake, and the ninth perched upon his horse, and began to try to awaken him: 'Arise, my birdie! arise, my lamb! arise, my dove!' But he heard nothing, but slept on as if dead. When the peahens had finished bathing, they all flew away, and he awoke, and asked his servant: 'What is it? Did they come?' The servant replied: 'They did come,' and told him how eight of them settled on the lake, and the ninth on

[p. 190]

his horse, and that she tried to wake him. When the unhappy prince heard this from his servant, he was ready to kill himself from pain and anger. The next morning they visited the shore of the lake again, but his accursed servant calculated the time to blow the whistle behind his neck, and he immediately fell asleep as if he were dead. Scarcely had he fallen asleep, when the nine peahens arrived; eight settled on the lake, and the ninth on his horse, and began to try to awake him: 'Arise, my birdie! arise, my lamb! arise, my dove!' But he slept on as if he were dead, hearing nothing. When the peahen failed to wake him, and they were about to fly away again, the one which had been trying to wake him turned and said to his servant: 'When your master wakes, tell him that to-morrow it will once more be possible for him to see us, but after that, never more.' On saying this she took flight, and the others from the lake after her. Scarcely had they flown away, when the prince awoke, and asked his servant: 'Did they come?' He told him: 'They did come, and eight of them settled on the lake, and the ninth on your horse, and tried to wake you, but you slept soundly. As she departed, she told me to tell you that you will see her here once again to-morrow, and never more.' When the prince heard this, he was ready to kill himself in his unhappiness, and did not know what to do for sorrow. On the third day he got ready to go to the lake, mounted his horse, went to the shore, and, in order not to fall asleep, kept his horse continually in motion. But his wicked servant, as he followed him, calculated the time, and blew the whistle behind his neck, and he immediately leant forward on his horse and fell asleep. As soon as he fell asleep, the nine peahens flew up; eight settled on the lake, and the ninth on his horse, and endeavoured to wake him: 'Arise, my birdie! arise, my lamb! arise, my dove!' But he slept as if he were dead, and heard nothing. Then,

[p. 191]

when they were about to fly away again, the one which had perched on his horse turned round, and said to his servant: When your master wakes up, tell him to roll the under peg on the upper, and then he will find me.' [**] Then she flew off, and those from the lake after her. When they had flown away, he awoke again, and asked his servant: 'Did they come?' He replied: 'They did; and the one that had perched on your horse told me to tell you to roll the upper peg on the under one, and then you would find her. When the prince heard this, he drew his sword, and cut off his servant's head. When he had done this, he started to travel on alone. When he had travelled a long time, he came at dusk to the cottage of a hermit, and lodged there for the night. In the evening the prince asked the hermit: Grandfather, have you heard of nine golden peahens?' The hermit answered: 'Yes, my son; you are fortunate in having come to me to ask about them. They are not far hence; it is not more than half a day's journey to them from here.' In the morning, when the prince departed to seek them, the hermit came out to accompany him, and said to him: 'Go to the right, and you will find a large gate. When you enter that gate, turn to the right, and then you will go right into their town, and in that town is their palace. He went on his way according to the hermit's words, and went on till he came to that gate; then turned to the right, and descried the town upon a hill. When he saw the town he was much rejoiced. When he entered the town he inquired where the palace of the nine peahens was. It was pointed out to him. At the gate a watchman stopped him, and inquired whence and who he was. The prince told him all, whence he was and who he was. After this the watchman went off to announce him to the empress. When she heard it, she ran breathless, and stood in the form of a damsel before him,

[p. 192]

took him by the hand, and led him upstairs. Then the two rejoiced together, and in a day or two were wedded.

When a few days had elapsed after their marriage, the empress departed to go on a journey, and the prince remained alone. When she was about to start, she took out and gave him the keys of twelve cellars, and said to him: 'Open all the cellars, but do not have any nonsense with the twelfth.' She went away. When the prince remained alone in the palace, he bethought himself: 'What does this mean, that I am to open all the cellars, but not to open the twelfth? Glory to the Lord God! what can there be in it?' He then began to open them one after the other. He came to the twelfth, and at first would not open it; but as he had no occupation, he began to brood and to say to himself: How can it be in this cellar that she told me not to open it?' At last he opened it too, and found standing in the midst of it a cask bound with iron hoops, and a voice out of it was heard, saying: 'I pray you, brother--I am athirst for water--give me a cup of water.' On hearing this voice, the prince took a cup of water, and sprinkled it on the bung; and as soon as he had sprinkled it, one of the hoops of the cask burst. The voice then cried: 'Give me one more cup of water; I am athirst.' He took a cup of water and sprinkled it on the bung; and as soon as he had done so, another hoop burst on the cask. The voice then cried: 'I am athirst; give me, brother, one more cup of water.' The prince took another cup of water and poured it on the bung; but as soon as he had finished pouring it, the third hoop of the cask burst, the cask split asunder, and out of it flew a dragon, found the empress on her way, and carried her off. Thus it happened, and the attendants came and told their master that a dragon had carried the empress away. Finally he set off to seek her in the world. When he had travelled a long time, he came to a marsh, and in

[p. 193]

that marsh espied a little fish, which was endeavouring to jump into the water, but was unable to do so. This little fish, on seeing the prince, addressed itself to him: 'I pray you, brother, do a good action: throw me into the water; I shall some time be of use to you; only take a scale from me, and when you are in want of me, rub it between your fingers.' On hearing this he took a scale off it, threw the fish into the water, put the scale into a handkerchief, and went on his way. When he had gone a little further, he espied a fox caught in a trap. When the fox saw him, it called out: 'I pray you, brother, let me out of this trap; I shall some day be of use to you; only take one or two hairs from my fur, and when I am wanted for you, rub them between your fingers.' He let it out of the trap, took one or two hairs from it, and went on his way. Thus he proceeded onwards, till, as he went, he came to a hill, and found a crow caught in a trap just like the fox before. As soon as the crow saw him, it cried out: 'I pray you, be a brother to me, traveller; let me out of this trap; I shall some day be of use to you; only take a feather or two from me, and when you are in want of me, rub them between your fingers.' The prince took one or two feathers from the crow, let it out of the trap, and then went on his way. As he went on to find the empress, he met a man, and asked him: 'I pray you, brother, do you not know where is the palace of the dragon emperor?' The man showed him the way, and also told him at what time he was at home, that he might find him. The prince thanked him, and said: 'Farewell.' He then went on, and gradually came to the palace of the dragon emperor. On his arrival there he found his beloved, and when she saw him and he saw her, they were both full of joy. Now they began to plan together how to escape. Finally they agreed to saddle their horses and take to flight. They saddled them, mounted, and off. When they had

[p. 194]

ridden off, the dragon arrived and looked about, but the empress was not to be found. 'Now what shall we do?' said the dragon to his horse. 'Shall we eat and drink, or pursue them?' The horse replied to him: 'Don't trouble yourself; eat and drink.' When he had dined, the dragon mounted his horse and galloped after them, and in course of time overtook them, and took the empress away, but said to the prince: 'Go in safety; this time you are forgiven, because you gave me water in the cellar; but do not come a second time if your life is dear to you.' The poor prince remained as if thunderstricken, then started and proceeded a little way; but as he could not overcome his heart, he returned to the dragon's palace. There he found the empress weeping. When they saw each other and met, they began to consult how to get away so as to escape. Then said the prince to the empress: 'When the dragon comes, ask him from whom he bought that horse, and tell me, that I may obtain such another, that we may escape.' After saying this to her he went out, that the dragon might not find him on his arrival. When the dragon came, the empress began to coax him and make herself agreeable to him, and said to him: 'What a swift horse yours is! From whom did you buy him? Tell me, I pray you.' He answered: 'Where I bought him nobody can make a purchase. On a certain hill lives an old woman who has twelve horses in her stable, such that you don't know which is better than another. One of them is in the corner, and this one looks skinny; but he is the best of all, and is brother of mine: this one could fly to the sky. Whoever seeks to obtain a horse from the old woman must serve her three days. The old woman has a mare with a foal; whoever watches the mare successfully for three days, to him the old woman gives the choice of whichever horse he wishes. Whoever engages himself to watch the mare, and

[p. 195]

fails to watch her successfully for three days and three nights, loses his life.' On the morrow the dragon went away, and the prince came in. The empress told him what the dragon had said. Then the prince started off and went to the hill where the old woman was to be found. When he entered her house, he said to her: 'Good-day, old woman!' The old woman replied: 'The Lord give you prosperity, my son!' She said to him: 'What brings you here, my son?' He replied: 'I should like to take service with you.' The old woman said to him: 'Very good, my son. I have a mare with a foal. If you watch her successfully for three days, I will give you one of these twelve horses of mine to take away, whichever you choose; but if you fail to watch her successfully, I shall take off your head.' Then she took him into the yard. In the yard post after post was fixed in the ground, and on each was stuck a human head; only one remained vacant, and this cried out continually: 'Old woman, give me a head!' When the old woman had shown him all, she said: 'Know that all these engaged to watch the mare and the foal, but were unable to watch her successfully.' But the prince was in no wise terrified thereby. In the afternoon he mounted the mare and galloped uphill and downhill, and the foal galloped after her. Thus till midnight, and then, would he nould he, sleep crept over him, and he fell asleep. When he woke up at dawn his arms were round a stump instead of the mare, but he held the halter in his hand. When he perceived this, the poor fellow became dizzy from terror, and started off to look for her; and while he was looking for her, came to a sheet of water, and when he came to the water, he remembered the little fish, unfolded the handkerchief, and took out the scale and rubbed it between his fingers. Up sprang the little fish out of the water, and lay before him. What is the matter, adopted brother?' said the fish. He

[p. 196]

replied: 'The old woman's mare has escaped from me, and I don't know where she is.' The fish said to him: 'Here she is amongst us; she has transformed herself into a fish, and her foal into a little fish; but do you flap the halter on the water, and call out: "Coop! coop! old woman's mare!"' He flapped the water with the halter, and called out: 'Coop! coop! old woman's mare!' and immediately she transformed herself again into a mare, and, pop! there she was on the brink of the water before him! He put the halter on her and mounted her, and trot! trot! and at the old woman's. When he brought her in, the old woman gave him his dinner, but led the mare into the stable, scolded her, and said: 'Among the fish, good-for-nothing rogue?' The mare replied: 'I was among the fish, but they told of me, because they are his friends.' The old woman said to her: 'Go among the foxes.' The second day he mounted the mare, and galloped uphill and downhill, and the foal galloped after. Thus till midnight. When it was about midnight sleep overcame him, and he fell asleep upon the mare's back. At dawn, when he awoke, his arms were round a stump, but he held the halter in his hand. When he perceived this, he sprang off again to seek her. As he was seeking her, it came at once into his head what the old woman had said to the mare when she was leading it into the stable. Then he unwrapped the fox's hairs out of the handkerchief, rubbed them between his fingers, and the fox immediately jumped out before him. 'What is it, adopted brother?' He replied: 'The old woman's mare has run away.' The fox said to him: 'Here she is amongst us; she has become a fox, and the foal a fox-cub. But do you flap the ground with the halter, and call out: "Coop! coop! old woman's mare!"' He flapped and called, and the mare leaped out before him. Then he caught her and put the halter on her, mounted her, and rode to the old woman's.

[p. 197]

[paragraph continues] When he brought her home, the old woman gave him his dinner, led the mare off to the stable, and said: 'Among the foxes, good-for-nothing rogue?' The mare replied: 'I was among them, but they are his friends, and told of me.' The old woman said to her: 'Be among the crows.' The third day the prince again mounted the mare, and galloped her uphill and downhill, and the foal galloped after. Thus till midnight. About midnight he became sleepy, and fell asleep, and woke up at dawn; but his arms were round a stump, and he held the halter in his hand. As soon as he perceived this, he darted off again to seek the mare, and as he was seeking her, it came into his head what the old woman had said the day before when scolding the mare. He took out the handkerchief and unwrapped the crow's feathers, rubbed them between his fingers, and, pop! the crow was before him. 'What is it, adopted brother?' The prince replied: 'The old woman's mare has run away, and I don't know where she is.' The crow answered: 'Here she is amongst us; she has become a crow, and the foal a young crow. But flap the halter in the air, and cry: "Coop! coop! old woman's mare!"' He flapped the halter in the air, and cried: 'Coop! coop! old woman's mare and the mare transformed herself from a crow into a mare, just as she had been, and came before him. Then he put the halter on her, and mounted her, and galloped off, the foal following behind, to the old woman's. The old woman gave him his dinner, caught the mare, led her into the stable, and said to her: 'Among the crows, good-for-nothing rogue?' The mare replied: 'I was among them, but they are his friends, and told of me.' Then when the old woman came out, the prince said to her: 'Well, old woman, I have served you honestly; now I ask you to give me that which we agreed upon.' The old woman replied: 'My son, what is agreed upon must be given. Here are twelve horses--choose whichever you please.' He replied: 'Why shall I pick and

[p. 198]

choose? Give me that one where he is in the corner; there is none better in my eyes.' Then the old woman began to dissuade him: 'Why chose that skinny one when there are so many good ones?' He then insisted once for all: 'Give me the one which I ask, for such was our agreement.' The old woman twisted, turned, and without more ado gave him the one which he asked for. Then he mounted it, and 'Farewell, old woman!' 'Good-bye, my son!' When he took it to a wood and groomed it, it glittered like gold. Afterwards, when he mounted it and gave it its head, it flew, flew like a bird, and in a jiffy arrived at the dragon's palace. As soon as he entered the courtyard, he bade the empress to get ready for flight. She was not long in getting ready they both mounted the horse and set off. They had not long started in flight when the dragon arrived--looked about. No empress. Then he said to his horse: Shall we eat and drink, or shall we pursue?' 'Eat or not, drink or not, pursue or not, you won't catch him.' When the dragon heard this, he immediately mounted his horse, and started to pursue them. When the prince and empress perceived that he was pursuing them, they were terrified, and urged their horse to go quickly, but the horse answered them: 'Never fear; there's no need to hurry.' The dragon came trot, trot, and the horse he rode called to that which bore the prince and the empress: 'Bless you, brother, wait! for I shall break my wind from pursuing you.' The other replied: 'Whose fault is it, if you're such a fool as to carry that spectre on your back? Buck, and throw him on the ground, and then follow me.' When the dragon's horse heard this, up with his head, a jump with his hind-quarters, and bang went the dragon against a stone. The dragon was smashed to pieces, and his horse followed the prince and empress. Then the empress caught and mounted it, and they arrived safe and sound in the empress's dominions, and reigned honourably as long as they lived.

Footnotes

^191:* I do not understand this expression. It is afterwards inverted by the servant. But it has no further bearing on the story.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 199] [39]

  

XXXIX.--THE LANGUAGE OF ANIMALS.

A CERTAIN man had a shepherd, who served him faithfully and honestly for many years. This shepherd, when he was once upon a time following the sheep, heard a whistling on the hill, and, not knowing what it was, went off to see. When he got to the place, there was a conflagration, and in the middle of it a serpent was squeaking. When he saw this, he waited to see how the serpent would act, for all around it was burning, and the fire had almost come close to it. When the serpent saw him, it screamed: 'Dear shepherd, do a good action: take me out of this fire.' The shepherd took pity on its words, and reached it his crook, and it crawled out upon it. When it had crawled out, it coiled itself round his neck. When the shepherd saw this, he was frightened, and said: 'Indeed you are a wretch! Is that the way you are going to thank me for rescuing you? So runs the proverb: "Do good, and find evil."' The serpent answered him: 'Don't fear: I shall do you no harm; only carry me to my father; my father is the emperor of the serpents.' The shepherd begged pardon, and excused himself: 'I can't carry you to your father, because I have no one to leave in charge of my sheep.' The serpent said to him: 'Don't fear for your sheep; nothing will happen to them; only carry me to my father, and go quickly.' Then there was no help for it, so he started with it over the hill. When he came to a door, which was formed of nothing but serpents intertwined, and went up to it, the serpent which was coiled round his neck gave a whistle, and the serpents, which had twined themselves into the form of a door, immediately untwined, and made way for them to enter. As the shepherd and the serpent entered the palace, the serpent called to the shepherd: 'Stop! let me tell you something: when you come into my father's palace, he will

[p. 200]

promise you what you desire, silver and gold; but don't you accept anything, only ask him to give you such a tongue that you will be able to understand all animals. He will not give you this readily, but at last grant it you he will.' The shepherd went with it into its father's palace, and its father, on seeing it, shed tears, and asked it: 'Hey, my son, where have you been till now?' It replied, and told him everything in order: what had taken place, and how it had taken place, and how the shepherd had rescued it. Then the emperor of the serpents turned to the shepherd, and said to him: 'Come, my son, what do you wish me to give you in recompense for rescuing my child?' The shepherd replied to him: 'Nothing else, only give me such a tongue that I can understand all animals.' The emperor of the serpents said to him: That is not a proper gift for you, my son, because, if I give you anything of the kind, you will betray yourself in somebody's presence by boasting of it, and then you will die immediately; ask something else.' The shepherd replied to him: 'I wish for nothing else. If you will give it me, give it; if not, farewell!' He turned to go; but the emperor of the serpents cried out: 'Stay! Return! If you ask this, come, that I may give it you. Open your mouth.' The shepherd opened his mouth, and the emperor of the serpents spat into it, and told him to spit also into his mouth. And thus they spat thrice into each other's mouths. When this was done, the emperor of the serpents said to the shepherd: 'Now you have the tongue which you desired; go, and farewell! But it is not permitted you to tell anybody, because, if you do, you will die. I am telling you the truth.' The shepherd then departed. As he went over the hill, he understood the conversation of the birds, and, so to speak, of everything in the world. When he came to his sheep, he found them correct in number, and sat down to rest. But scarcely had he lain down, when two crows flew

[p. 201]

up, perched on a tree hard by him, and began to converse in their language: 'If that shepherd knew that just where that black lamb lies a vault full of silver and gold is buried in the ground, he would take its contents.' When he heard this, he went and told his master, and he brought a cart, and they broke open the door of the vault, and took out its valuable contents. His master was a righteous man, and said to him: 'Well, my son, this is all yours; the Lord has given it you. Go, provide a house, get married, and live comfortably.' The shepherd took the property, went away, provided a house, got married, and lived very comfortably. This shepherd, after a little time, became so rich and prosperous that there was nobody richer than he in his own or the neighbouring villages. He had shepherds, cowherds, swineherds, grooms, and everything on a handsome scale. Once upon a time this shepherd ordered his wife on New Year's Eve to provide wine, brandy, and everything requisite, and to go the next morning to his cattle, to take the provisions to the herdsmen, that they, too, might enjoy themselves. His wife obeyed him, and did as her husband ordered her.

The next day they got up, got ready, and went. When they arrived where the cattle were, the master said to his shepherds: 'Lads, assemble together, and sit down to eat and drink your fill, and I will watch the cattle to-night.' This was done; they assembled together, and he went out to sleep by the cattle. In the course of the night, after some time, the wolves began to howl and speak in their language, and the dogs to bark and speak in theirs. The wolves said: 'Can we capture any young cattle?' The dogs answered in their language: 'Come in, that we, too, may eat our fill of flesh.' But among the dogs there was one old dog, who had only two teeth left. This dog spoke and answered the wolves: 'In faith, as long as these two teeth of mine last, you shan't come near to do harm to my

[p. 202]

master.' In the morning, when it dawned, the master called the herdsmen, and told them to kill all the dogs except that old one. His servants began to implore him: 'Don't, master! Why? It's a sin.' But he said to them 'Do just as I ordered you, and not otherwise.'

Then he and his wife mounted their horses and went off. His wife rode a mare, and he a horse. As they went, the master's horse outstripped the wife's mare, and began to say to her in their language: 'Go quicker; why do you hang back?' The mare's reply in defence of her lagging pace was so amusing that the man laughed out loud, turned his head, and looked behind him with a smile. His wife observed him smiling, whipped her mare to catch him up, and then asked him to tell her why he smiled. He said to her: 'Well, suppose I did? Something came into my head.' This answer did not satisfy her, but she began to worry him to tell her why he smiled. He said this and that to her to get out of it, but the more he said to get out of it, the more did she worry him. At length he said to her that, if he told her, he would die immediately. But she had no dread of her husband's dying, and went on worrying him: 'There is no alternative, but tell me you must.' When they got home, they dismounted from their horses, and as soon as they had done so, her husband ordered a grave to be dug for him. It was dug, and he lay down in it, and said to his wife: 'Did you not press me to tell you why I smiled? Come now, that I may tell you; but I shall die immediately.' On saying this, he gave one more look round him, and observed that the old dog had come from the cattle. Seeing this, he told his wife to give him a piece of bread. She gave it him, but the dog would not even look at it, but shed tears and wept; but the cock, seeing it, ran up and began to peck it. The dog was angry, and said: 'As if you'd die hungry! Don't you see that our master is going

[p. 203]

to die?' 'What a fool he is! Let him die! Whose fault is it? I have a hundred wives. When I find a grain of millet, I call them all to me, and finally eat it myself. If one of them gets cross at this, I give her one or two pecks, and she lowers her tail; but this man isn't equal to keeping one in order.' When the man heard the cock say this, he jumped up at once out of the grave, seized a stick, chased his wife over hill and dale, and at last settled her completely, so that it never entered her head any more to ask him why he smiled.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 204]

  

SERBIAN STORIES.

THE Serbian is the most widely spread of the South Slavonic dialects, being spoken not only in Serbia proper, but also in Bosnia, Herzegovina, Croatia, Carniola, and a great part of South Hungary. It has, like the Bulgarian, been affected by the old Thracian language, but not to the same extent. The infinitive is very frequently represented by da with the finite verb. Szafarzik includes the whole of the South Slavonic dialects, except the Bulgarian, under the common name 'Illyrian,' and subdivides them into the three divisions of Serbian, Croatian, and Carinthian-Slovenish.

The Serbian stories are generally good, particularly [*No. 40], which may be compared with a very inferior variant in Grimm, 'The Golden Bird.' [*No. 40] is one of the stories, the beauty of which set me to work upon the present series of translations. In it is to be noticed the pobratimstvo, or adoptive brotherhood, which plays so important a part in Serbian life, and of which we have just had a glimpse in the Bulgarian story, [*No. 38]. [*No. 43] is a very good story, containing novel and interesting incidents. In [*No. 44] it must be observed that 'Fate' is represented as a man, for the converse reason to that for which Death is represented as a woman in the Moravian story, [*No. 8].

[p. 205]

[paragraph continues] Usud (Fate) is masculine, while Smrt (Death) is feminine in Slavonic.

The Serbs possess actual epic poetry, of which an account is given by Mr. Morfill ('Slavonic Literature,' pp. 154-162).

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[40]

  

XL.--THE LAME FOX.

THERE was a man who had three sons--two intelligent, and one a simpleton. This man's right eye was always laughing, while his left eye was weeping and shedding tears. This man's sons agreed to go to him one by one, and ask him why his right eye laughed and his left eye shed tears.

Accordingly the eldest went to his father by himself, and asked him: 'Father, tell me truly what I am going to ask you. Why does your right eye always laugh and your left eye weep?' His father gave him no answer, but flew into a rage, seized a knife, and at him, and he fled out of doors, and the knife stuck in the door. The other two were outside, anxiously expecting their brother, and when he came out, asked him what his father had said to him. But he answered them: 'If you're not wiser than another, go, and you will hear.'

Then the middle brother went to his father by himself, and asked him: 'Father, tell me truly what I am going to ask you. Why does your right eye always laugh and your left weep?' His father gave him no answer, but flew into a rage, seized a knife, and at him, and he fled out of doors, and the knife stuck in the door. When he came out to his brothers, his brothers asked him: 'Tell us, brother--so may health and prosperity attend you I--what our father has said to you.' He answered them: 'If you're not wiser than another, go, and you will hear.' But this he said to his elder brother on account of the simpleton, that he, too, might go to his father to hear and see.

[p. 206]

Then the simpleton, too, went by himself to his father, and asked him: 'Father, my two brothers won't tell me what you have said to them; tell me why your right eye always laughs and your left eye weeps?' His father immediately flew into a rage, seized a knife, and brandished the knife to pierce him through; but as he was standing, so he remained standing where he was, and wasn't frightened in the least. When his father saw that, he came to him, and said: 'Well, you're my true son, I will tell you; but those two are cowards. The reason why my right eye laughs is, that I rejoice and am glad because you children obey and serve me well. And why my left eye weeps, it weeps on this account: I had in my garden a vine, which poured forth a bucket of wine every hour, thus producing me twenty-four buckets of wine every day and night. This vine has been stolen from me, and I have not been able to find it, nor do I know who has taken it or where it is. And for this reason my left eye weeps, and will weep till I die, unless I find it.' When the simpleton came out of doors, his brothers asked him what his father had said, and he told them all in order.

Then they prepared a drinking bout for their father and the domestics, and set out on their journey. On the journey they came to a cross-road, and three ways lay before them. The two elder consulted together, and said to their youngest brother, the simpleton: 'Come, brother, let us each choose a road, and let each go by himself and seek his fortune.' 'Yes, brothers,' answered the simpleton; 'you choose each a road; I will take that which remains to me.' The two elder took two roads which ran into each other, started on their way, and afterwards met, came out into the road, and said: 'Praise be to God that we're quit of that fool!' They then sat down to take their dinner. Scarcely had they sat down to eat, when up came a lame she-fox on

[p. 207]

three legs, which approached them, fawning and begging to obtain something to eat. But as soon as they saw the fox: 'Here's a fox,' said they; 'come, let us kill it.' Then, stick in hand, and after it. The fox limped away in the best fashion it could, and barely escaped from them. Meanwhile, shepherd-dogs came to their wallet and ate up everything that they had. When they returned to the wallet they had a sight to see.

The simpleton took the third road right on, and went forward till be began to feel hungry. Then he sat down on the grass under a pear-tree, and took bread and bacon out of his wallet to eat. Scarcely had he sat down to eat, when, lo! that very same lame fox which his two brothers had seen began to approach him, and to fawn and beg, limping on three feet. He had compassion on it because it was so lame, and said: 'Come, fox, I know that you are hungry, and that it is hard lines for you that you have not a fourth foot.' He gave it bread and bacon to eat, a portion for himself, and a portion for the fox. When they had refreshed themselves a little, the fox said to him: 'But, brother, tell me the truth: whither are you going?' He said: 'Thus and thus: I have a father and us three brothers; and one of my father's eyes always laughs, because we serve him well, and the other eye weeps, because there has been stolen from him a vine belonging to him, which poured forth a bucket of wine every hour; and now I am going to ask people all over the world whether someone cannot inform me about this vine, that I may obtain it for my father, that his eye may not weep any longer.'

The fox said: 'Well, I know where the vine is; follow me.' He followed the fox, and they came to a large garden. Then the fox said: 'There is the vine of which you are in search; but it is difficult to get to it. Do you now mark well what I am going to say to you. In the garden, before

[p. 208]

the vine is reached, it is necessary to pass twelve watches, and in each watch twelve warders. When the warders are looking, you can pass them freely, because they sleep with their eyes open. If they have their eyes closed, go not, for they are awake, not sleeping, with their eyes closed. When you come into the garden, there under the vine stand two shovels--one of wood, and the other of gold. But mind you don't take the golden shovel to dig up the vine, for the shovel will ring, and will wake up the watch; the watch will seize you, and you may fare badly. But take the wooden shovel, and with it dig up the vine, and, when the watch is looking, come quietly to me outside, and you will have obtained the vine.'

He went into the garden, arrived at the first watch; the warders directed their eyes towards him; one would have thought they would have looked him to powder. But he went past them as past a stone, came to the second, third, and all the watches in succession, and arrived in the garden at the vine itself. The vine poured forth a bucket of wine every hour. He was too lazy to dig with the wooden shovel, but took the golden one, and as soon as he struck it into the ground, the shovel rang and woke the watch; the watch assembled, seized him, and delivered him to their lord.

The lord asked the simpleton: 'How did you dare to pass so many watches, and come into the garden to take my vine away?' The simpleton said: 'It is not your vine, but my father's; and my father's left eye weeps, and will weep till I obtain him the vine, and I must do it; and if you don't give me my father's vine, I shall come again, and the second time I shall take it away.' The lord said: 'I cannot give you the vine. But if you procure me the golden apple-tree which blooms, ripens, and bears golden fruit every twenty-four hours, I will give it you.'

He went out to the fox, and the fox asked him: 'Well,

[p. 209]

how is it?' He answered: 'No how. I went past the watch, and began to dig up the vine with the wooden shovel; but it was too long a job, and I took the golden shovel; the shovel rang and woke the watch; the watch seized me, and delivered me to their lord, and the lord promised to give me the vine, if I procured him the golden apple-tree which, every twenty-four hours, blooms, ripens, and bears golden fruit.' The fox said: 'But why did you not obey me? You see how nice it would have been to go to your father with the vine.' He shook his head: 'I see that I have done wrong; but I will do so no more.' The fox said: 'Come! now let us go to the golden apple-tree.' The fox led him to a far handsomer garden than the first one, and told him that he must pass similarly through twelve similar watches. 'And when you come in the garden,' said she, 'to where the golden apple-tree is, two very long poles stand there--one of gold, and the other of wood. Don't take the golden one to beat the golden apple-tree, for the golden branch will emit a whistling sound, and will wake the watch, and you will fare ill; but take the wooden pole to beat the golden apple-tree, and then mind you come out immediately to me. If you do not obey me, I will not help you further.' He said: 'I will, fox, only that it may be mine to acquire the golden apple-tree to purchase the vine; I am impatient to go to my father.' He went into the garden, and the fox stayed waiting for him outside. He passed the twelve watches, and also arrived at the apple-tree. But when he saw the apple-tree, and the golden apples on the apple-tree, he forgot for joy where he was, and hastily took the golden pole to beat the golden apple-tree. As soon as he had stripped a golden branch with the pole, the golden branch emitted a whistling sound, and woke the watch; the watch hastened up, seized and delivered him to the lord of the golden apple-tree.

[p. 210]

The lord asked the simpleton: 'How did you dare, and how were you able, to go into my garden in face of so many watches of mine, to beat the golden apple-trees?' The simpleton said: 'Thus and thus: my father's left eye weeps because a vine has been stolen from him, which poured forth a bucket of wine every hour. That vine is kept in such and such a garden, and the lord of the garden and the vine said to me: "If you procure me the golden apple-tree which, every twenty-four hours, blooms, ripens, and produces golden fruit, I will give you the vine." And, therefore, I have come to beat the golden apple-tree, to give the apple-tree for the vine, and to carry the vine to my father, that his left eye may not weep. And if you do not give me the golden apple-tree now, I shall come again to steal it.'

The lord said: 'It is good, if it is so. Go you and procure me the golden horse which, in twenty-four hours, goes over the world, and I will give you the golden apple-tree; give the apple-tree for the vine, and take the vine to your father, that he may weep no more.'

Then he went outside, and the fox, awaiting him, said: 'Now, then; how is it?' 'Not very well. The golden apple-trees are so beautiful that you can't look at them for beauty. I forgot myself, and couldn't take the wooden pole, as you told me, but took the golden pole to beat the golden apple-tree; the branch emitted a whistling sound, and woke the watch; the watch seized me, and delivered me to their lord, and the lord told me, if I procured him the golden horse which goes over the world in twenty-four hours, he would give me the golden apple-tree, that I may give the apple-tree for the vine to take to my father, that he may weep no more.'

Again the fox began to scold and reproach him: 'Why did you not obey me? You see that you would have been by now at your father's. And thus you torment both yourself

[p. 211]

and me.' He said to the fox: Only procure me the horse, fox, and I will always henceforth obey you.'

The fox led him to a large and horrible forest, and in the forest they found a farmyard. In this farmyard twelve watches, as in the case of the vine and the apple-tree, guarded the golden horse. The fox said: 'Now you will pass the watches as before; go if they are looking; do not go if they have their eyes shut. When you enter the stable, there stands the golden horse, equipped with golden trap-pings. By the horse are two bridles--one of gold, and the other plaited of tow. Mind you don't take the golden bridle, but the one of tow; if you bridle him with the golden bridle, the horse will neigh and will wake the watch; the watch will seize you, and who will be worse off than you? Don't come into my sight without the horse!' 'I won't, fox,' said he, and went. He passed all the watches, and entered the stable where the horse was. When he was there, golden horse! golden wings! so beautiful, good heavens! that you couldn't look at them for beauty! He saw the golden bridle; it was beautiful and ornamented; he saw also that of tow; it was dirty, and couldn't be worse. Now he thought long what to do and how to do. 'I can't put that nasty thing' (the tow bridle)--'it's so nasty!--on that beauty; I had rather not have him at all than put such a horse to shame.' He took the golden bridle, bridled the golden horse, and mounted him. But the horse neighed, and woke the watch; the watch seized him and delivered him to their lord.

Then the lord said: 'How did you have resolution to pass my numerous warders into my stable to take away my golden horse?' The simpleton replied: 'Need drove me; I have a father at home, and his left eye continually weeps, and will weep till I obtain for him a vine which in a day and night poured forth twenty-four buckets of wine; this

[p. 212]

vine has been stolen from him. Well, I have found it, and it has been told me that I shall obtain the vine if I procure the golden apple-tree for the lord of the vine. And the lord of the golden apple-tree said if I procured him the golden horse, he would give me the golden apple-tree. And I came from him to take away the golden horse, that I might give the golden horse for the golden apple-tree, and the golden apple-tree for the vine, to take it home and give it my father, that he may weep no more.' The lord said: 'Good; if it is so, I will give you my golden horse, if you procure me the golden damsel in her cradle, who has never yet seen either the sun or the moon, so that her face is not tanned.' And the simpleton said: 'I will procure you the golden damsel, but you must give me your golden horse, on which to seek the golden damsel and bring her to you. And a golden horse properly appertains to a golden damsel.' The lord: 'And how will you guarantee that you will return to me again?' The simpleton: 'Behold, I swear to you by my father's eyesight, that I will return to you again, and either bring the horse, if I do not find the damsel, or give you the damsel, if I find her, for the horse.' To this the lord agreed, and gave him the golden horse; he bridled it with the golden bridle, and came outside to the fox. The fox was impatiently expecting him, to know what had happened.

The fox: 'Well, have you obtained the horse?' The simpleton: 'I have, but on condition that I procure for him the golden damsel in her cradle, who has never yet seen the sun or the moon, so that her face is not tanned. But if you know what need is, good friend, in the world, say whether she is anywhere, and whether you know of such a damsel.' The fox said: 'I know where the damsel is; only follow me.' He followed, and they came to a large cavern. Now the fox said: 'There the

[p. 213]

damsel is. You will go into that cavern, deep into the earth. You will pass the watches as before. In the last chamber lies the golden damsel in a golden cradle. By the damsel stands a huge spectre, which says: "No! No! No!" Now, don't be at all afraid; it cannot do anything to you in any wise; but her wicked mother has placed it beside her daughter, that no one may venture to approach her to take her away. And the damsel is impatiently waiting to be released and freed from her mother's cruelty. When you come back with the damsel in the cradle, push all the doors to behind you, that they may be shut, that the watch may not be able to come out after you in pursuit.' He did so. He passed all the watches, entered the last chamber, and in the chamber was the damsel, rocking herself in a golden cradle, and on the way to the cradle stood a huge spectre, which said: 'No! No! No!' But he paid no attention to it. He took the cradle in his hands, seated himself with the cradle on the horse, and proceeded, pushed the doors to, and the doors closed from the first to the last, and out he flew with the damsel in the cradle before the fox. The fox was anxiously expecting him.

Now the fox said to him: 'Are you not sorry to give so beautiful a damsel for the golden horse? But you will not otherwise be able to acquire the golden horse, because you have sworn by your father's eyesight. But come! let me try whether I can't be the golden damsel.' She bounded hither and thither, and transformed herself into a golden damsel; everything about her was damsel-like, only her eyes were shaped like a fox's eyes. He put her into the golden cradle, and left the real damsel under a tree to take charge of the golden horse. He went, he took away the golden cradle, and in the cradle the fox-damsel, delivered her to the lord of the golden horse, and absolved himself from the oath by his father's eyesight. He returned to the

[p. 214]

horse and the damsel. Now that same lord of the golden horse, full of joy at acquiring the golden damsel, assembled all his lordship, prepared a grand banquet for their entertainment, and showed them what he had acquired in exchange for his golden horse. While the guests were gazing at the damsel, one of them scrutinized her attentively, and said: 'All is damsel-like, and she is very beautiful, but her eyes are shaped like a fox's eyes.' No sooner had he said this, when up sprang the fox and ran away. The lord and the guests were enraged that he had said 'fox's eyes,' and put him to death.

The fox ran to the simpleton, and on they went to give the golden horse for the golden apple-tree. They arrived at the place. Here again the fox said: 'Now, you see, you have got possession of the golden damsel, but the golden horse properly appertains to the golden damsel. Are you sorry to give the golden horse?' 'Yes, fox; but though I am sorry, yet I wish my father not to weep.' The fox: But stay; let me try whether I can be the golden horse.' She bounded hither and thither, and transformed herself into a golden horse, only she had a fox's tail. Then she said: 'Now lead me; let them give you the golden apple-tree, and I know when I shall come to you.'

He led off the fox-horse, delivered it to the lord of the golden apple-tree, and obtained the golden apple-tree. Now, the lord of the golden apple-tree was delighted at having acquired so beautiful a horse, and invited his whole lordship to a feast, to boast to them what a horse he had acquired. The guests began to gaze at the horse, and to wonder 'how beautiful he was. All at once one scrutinized his tail attentively, and said: 'All is beautiful and all pleases me, only I should say that it is a fox's tail!' The moment he said that, the fox jumped up and ran away. But the guests were enraged at him for using the expression 'fox's tail,' and put

[p. 215]

him to death. The fox came to the simpleton, and proceeded with the golden damsel, the horse, and the golden apple-tree to the vine.

Now again the fox said: 'You see, now you have acquired the golden apple-tree. But the golden damsel is not appropriate without the golden horse, or the golden horse without the golden apple-tree. Are you sorry to give the golden apple-tree?' The simpleton: 'Yes, fox; but I must, to obtain the vine, that my father may not weep. I had rather that my father did not weep than all that I have.' The fox said: 'Stay! I will try whether I can be the golden apple-tree.' She bounded hither and thither, and transformed herself into a golden apple-tree, and told him to take it away and give it for the vine. He took off the golden fox-apple-tree, and gave it to the lord of the vine, obtained the vine, and went away.

The lord for joy assembled his whole lordship, and prepared a grand feast, to display what a golden apple-tree he had acquired. The guests assembled and began to gaze at the apple-tree. But one scrutinized it attentively, and said: 'All is beautiful, and cannot be more beautiful, only the fruit is in shape a fox's head, and not like other apples.' No sooner had he said this when up jumped the fox and ran away. But they were enraged at him and slew him, because he had said 'fox's head.'

Now the simpleton took leave of the fox and went home, having with him the golden damsel, the golden horse, the golden apple-tree, and the vine. When he arrived at the crossroad, where he had parted from his brothers when he went from home to seek the vine, he saw a multitude of people assembled, and he, too, went thither to see what was the matter. When he got there, his two brothers were standing condemned, and the people were going to hang them. He told the damsel that they were his brothers, and that he

[p. 216]

would like to ransom them. The damsel took a large quantity of treasure out of her bosom, and he ransomed his brothers, the malefactors, who had thought to acquire the vine by slaying, burning, and plundering. They envied him, but could not help themselves. They proceeded home. The simpleton planted the vine in the garden where it had been; the vine began to pour forth wine, and his father's left eye ceased to weep and began to laugh. The apple-tree began to blossom, the golden horse to neigh, the damsel to sing, and there was love and beauty at the farm-house. Everything was merry, everything was rejoicing and making progress.

All at once the father sent his sons to bring him from the country three ears of rye, that he might see what manner of season it would be. When they came to a well in the country, they told their simpleton brother to get them some water to drink. He stooped over the well to reach the water for them; they pushed him into the water and he was drowned. Immediately the vine ceased to pour forth wine, the father's eye began to weep, the apple-tree drooped, the horse ceased to neigh, the damsel began to weep, and everything lost its cheerful appearance. Thereupon that selfsame lame fox came up, got down into the well, gently drew her adopted brother out, poured the water out of him, placed him on the fresh grass, and he revived. As soon as he revived the fox was transformed into a very beautiful damsel. Then she related to him how her mother had cursed her because she had rescued her greatest enemy-from death. She was cursed, and was transformed into a cunning fox, and limped on three feet until she should rescue her benefactor from a watery death. 'And, lo! I have rescued you, my adopted brother. Now, adieu!' She went her way, and the simpleton his way to his father, and when he arrived at the farmhouse the vine began again to pour

[p. 217]

forth wine, his father's eye to laugh [the golden apple-tree to bloom], the golden horse to neigh, and the golden damsel to sing. He told his father what his brothers had done to him on the way, and how a damsel had rescued him and freed herself from a curse. When his father heard this he drove the two villains into the world. But he married the simpleton to the golden damsel, with whom he lived long in happiness and content.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[41]

  

XLI.--THE SONS' OATH TO THEIR DYING FATHER.

THERE was an old man who had three sons and one daughter. When the time came for the old man to die, he summoned all his three sons, and made them promise under oath to give their sister to the first who came to ask for her, whoever he might be. When some time had elapsed after the father's death, an old man arrived in a two-wheeler, and asked for the maiden in marriage. The two elder brothers would not give her to him immediately, because he was old and poor; but the youngest insisted that they should give her to him, reminding them of the oath they had sworn to their father. And so they gave her in marriage to the old man, and the old man took her away to his home. After some time, the elder brother went on a visit to his sister. When he got there, it was a large house, and couldn't be better. The sister was greatly delighted when she saw her brother, and when he inquired of her how she was getting on, she replied: 'Excellently; it can't be better.' When the brother arrived at his sister's, the old man was not at home, but soon afterwards arrived, and was very pleased when he saw his wife's brother, and said to him: 'We will feast and be merry; but first you shall go on my horse to fetch him some grass, but you must cut it where the horse paws with his foot, and not where you please.' His wife's

[p. 218]

brother said to him: 'Good! brother-in-law, I will.' He then mounted the horse and went off. As on he went, he came to a silver bridge. When he espied the bridge and saw that it was all of silver, he became covetous, dismounted, and pulled off a silver plate, saying: 'I may benefit myself.' Afterwards he cut grass where he pleased, without waiting till the horse pawed with his foot, mounted the horse again, and returned back. On arriving at the house, he put the horse in the stable, placed the grass before him, and went off into the house. When he arrived in the house, the old man asked him whether he had satisfied the horse, and whether the horse was eating the grass. He replied, 'Yes,' and that the horse was eating. The old man said: 'It is good that I also look.' He then went into the stable. When he got there, the horse had not touched it. The old man understood that the grass had not been cut where he had told him; he therefore at once sent off his brother-in-law supperless, to go back whence he had come. On reaching home, he didn't tell his brothers how he had fared at his brother-in-law's, but said to the middle brother: 'Our brother-in-law salutes you, and wishes you to go to be his guest.' After some time, the middle brother went on a visit to his sister; but he, too, fared even as the first one. His sister's husband sent him, too, for grass, and when he got to the silver bridge, he, too, became covetous, like the first, pulled off a silver plate, and did not cut the grass as his brother-in-law told him, but where he thought fit. When he came back to his brother-in-law's house, his brother-in-law caught him, too, out in a lie, and sent him home supperless, like the first one. When he got home, he told nobody how he had fared at his brother-in-law's, but said to the youngest brother: 'Our brother-in-law salutes you, and wishes you to go to visit him.'

After some time, the youngest brother, too, went off.

[p. 219]

[paragraph continues] When his sister espied him, she said to him: 'Only, brother, be sure not to do as our two brothers have done.' He didn't know what they had done, and his sister would not tell him anything more. When his sister's husband came home, he, too, was delighted with his wife's brother, and said to him: 'We will feast and be merry, only go first on my horse and fetch him some grass; but you will cut it there where the horse paws with his foot, and not where you please.' He mounted the horse and went off for the grass. When he arrived at the bridge, he was astonished at its beauty, but was quite sorry that it hadn't those two plates; and when he came to the middle, he looked on one side and the other, and saw under it, where water was bubbling in a huge caldron, and human heads boiling in it, and eagles pecking them from above. Afterwards, having passed over the bridge, he came to a village, and, as he passed through it, saw that there everything was sad and sorrowful, and wondered thereat, and asked a man: 'How is this, brother, that all is so sorrowful with you?' He replied: How should it not be sorrowful, when hail smites us every hour, and we have nothing.' When he came out of the village, he found two pigs on the road, and they were fighting without ceasing. He tried to part them, but in vain, and, being unable to part them, went on further. Thus proceeding, he came to another village, and, as he went through, heard on all sides singing and merriment, and said to someone: 'I went through one village and found everything sorrowful, and why is all so merry with you?' The villager answered him: 'Why should it not be so, when every hour is productive to us, and we have all in abundance?' Finally, the horse carried him to a very beautiful meadow. When they were in the middle of the meadow, the horse stood still and pawed with his foot, and he dismounted and cut grass, and returned back to the house.

[p. 220]

[paragraph continues] When he got to the house, he led the horse into the stable, laid the grass before him, and the horse immediately began to eat. When his sister's husband saw that he had satisfied the horse, he was very pleased, and said to him: 'You are my true brother-in-law; now let us be merry and feast.' Then they sat down to table and began to sup. At supper the old man said to him: 'Now, tell me what you have seen.' He answered him: 'Oh, my brother-in-law! what I have seen cannot be expressed. First I saw a very beautiful silver bridge, but it was disfigured where it wanted a pair of plates. Whoever took these away, the living God bath slain him!' The old man thereupon told him: 'Your two brothers stole them. As they have done, so have they fared. But tell me what you saw next.' His wife's brother replied: 'At the middle under the bridge I saw a huge caldron, where it was bubbling, and in it the heads of dead people, and eagles were pecking them from above.' Thereupon his sister's husband said: 'Those are the eternal torments in that world. What did you see more?' His wife's brother continued: 'I saw a village, and in it everything miserable.' The old man said to him: 'There there is no union and no truth, nor knowledge of God, What did you see further?' His wife's brother said to him further: 'I saw two pigs fighting without ceasing.' His sister's husband replied: 'Those are two brothers who do not live in concord. What did you see further?' 'I saw another village, and in it all was cheerful.' His sister's husband said to that: 'Those are people after God's will; they gladly welcome and entertain everybody, and do not drive the poor empty-handed from before their houses. Tell me what you saw further.' His wife's brother said to him: 'I saw a very beautiful meadow. I would stay there three days to view such beauty.' His sister's husband replied: That is the paradise of that world, but it is difficult to

[p. 221]

attain to it.' After this they enjoyed each other's society for many days. Finally, the wife's brother declared that he must go home, and his sister's husband presented him with a large gift, and told him that he recognised him immediately for an honourable man, because he had insisted that his father's directions, which he had sworn to observe, should be carried out, and that he would be prosperous, and his two brothers unprosperous.

N.B.--There are two words for 'brother-in-law' in Servian: shura, the wife's brother, and zet, the sister's husband. This makes the tale read better in Servian than in English.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[42]

  

XLII.--THE WONDERFUL HAIR.

THERE was a man who was very poor, but so well supplied with children that he was utterly unable to maintain them, and one morning more than once prepared to kill them, in order not to see their misery in dying from hunger, but his wife prevented him. One night a child came to him in his sleep, and said to him: 'Man! I see that you are making up your mind to destroy and to kill your poor little children, and I know that you are distressed thereat; but in the morning you will find under your pillow a mirror, a red kerchief, and an embroidered pocket-handkerchief; take all three secretly and tell nobody; then go to such a hill; by it you will find a stream; go along it till you come to its fountain-head; there you will find a damsel as bright as the sun, with her hair hanging down over her back, and without a scrap of clothing. Be on your guard, that the ferocious she-dragon do not coil round you; do not converse with her if she speaks; for if you converse with her, she will poison you, and turn you into a fish, or something else, and will then devour you; but if she bids you examine her

[p. 222]

head, examine it, and as you turn over her hair, look, and you will find one hair as red as blood; pull it out and run back again; then, if she suspects and begins to run after you, throw her first the embroidered pocket-handkerchief, then the kerchief, and, lastly, the mirror; then she will find occupation for herself. And sell that hair to some rich man; but don't let them cheat you, for that hair is worth countless wealth; and you will thus enrich yourself and maintain your children.'

When the poor man awoke, he found everything under his pillow, just as the child had told him in his sleep; and then he went to the hill. When there, he found the stream, went on and on alongside of it, till he came to the fountain-head. Having looked about him to see where the damsel was, he espied her above a piece of water, like sunbeams threaded on a needle, and she was embroidering at a frame on stuff, the threads of which were young men's hair. As soon as he saw her, he made a reverence to her, and she stood on her feet and questioned him: 'Whence are you, unknown young man?' But he held his tongue. She questioned him again: 'Who are you? Why have you come?' and much else of all sorts; but he was as mute as a stone, making signs with his hands, as if he were deaf and wanted help. Then she told him to sit down on her skirt. He did not wait for any more orders, but sat down, and she bent down her head to him, that he might examine it. Turning over the hair of her head, as if to examine it, he was not long in finding that red hair, and separated it from the other hair, pulled it out, jumped off her skirt and ran away back as he best could. She noticed it, and ran at his heels full speed after him. He looked round, and seeing that she was about to overtake him, threw, as he was told, the embroidered pocket-handkerchief on the way, and when she saw the pocket-handkerchief, she stooped and began to

[p. 223]

overhaul it in every direction, admiring the embroidery, till he had got a good way off. Then the damsel placed the pocket-handkerchief in her bosom, and ran after him again. When he saw that she was about to overtake him, he threw the red kerchief, and she again occupied herself, admiring and gazing, till the poor man had again got a good way off. Then the damsel became exasperated, and threw both the pocket-handkerchief and the kerchief on the way, and ran after him in pursuit. Again, when he saw that she was about to overtake him, he threw the mirror. When the damsel came to the mirror, the like of which she had never seen before, she lifted it up, and when she saw herself in it, not knowing that it was herself, but thinking that it was somebody else, she, as it were, fell in love with herself in the mirror, and the man got so far off that she was no longer able to overtake him. When she saw that she could not catch him, she turned back, and the man reached his home safe and sound. After arriving at his home, he showed his wife the hair, and told her all that had happened to him, but she began to jeer and laugh at him. But he paid no attention to her, and went to a town to sell the hair. A crowd of all sorts of people and merchants collected round him; one offered a sequin, another two, and so on, higher and higher, till they came to a hundred gold sequins. Just then the emperor heard of the hair, summoned the man into his presence, and said to him that he would give him a thousand sequins for it, and he sold it to him. What was the hair? The emperor split it in two from top to bottom, and found registered in it in writing many remarkable things, which had happened in the olden time since the beginning of the world. 'Thus the man became rich and lived on with his wife and children. And that child, that came to him in his sleep, was an angel sent by the Lord God, whose will it was to aid the poor man, and to reveal secrets which had not been revealed till then.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 224] [43]

  

XLIII.--THE DRAGON AND THE PRINCE.

THERE was an emperor who had three sons. One day the eldest son went out hunting, and when he got outside the town, up sprang a hare out of a bush, and he after it, and hither and thither, till the hare fled into a water-mill, and the prince after it. But it was not a hare, but a dragon, and it waited for the prince and devoured him. When several days had elapsed and the prince did not return home, people began to wonder why it was that he was not to be found. Then the middle son went hunting, and as he issued from the town, a hare sprang out of a bush, and the prince after it, and hither and thither, till the hare fled into the water-mill and the prince after it; but it was not a hare, but a dragon, which waited for and devoured him. When some days had elapsed and the princes did not return, either of them, the whole court was in sorrow. Then the third son went hunting, to see whether he could not find his brothers. When he issued from the town, again up sprang a hare out of a bush, and the prince after it, and hither and thither, till the hare fled into the water-mill. But the prince did not choose to follow it, but went to find other game, saying to himself: 'When I return I shall find you.' After this he went for a long time up and down the hill, but found nothing, and then returned to the water-mill; but when he got there, there was only an old woman in the mill. The prince invoked God in addressing her: 'God help you, old woman!' The old woman replied: 'God help you, my son!' Then the prince asked her: 'Where, old woman, is my hare?' She replied: 'My son, that was not a hare, but a dragon. It kills and throttles many people.' Hearing this, the prince was somewhat disturbed, and said to the old woman: What shall we do now? Doubtless my two brothers also have perished here.' The old woman answered: 'They

[p. 225]

have indeed; but there's no help for it. Go home, my son, lest you follow them.' Then he said to her: 'Dear old woman, do you know what? I know that you will be glad to liberate yourself from that pest.' The old woman interrupted him: 'How should I not? It captured me, too, in this way, but now I have no means of escape.' Then he proceeded: 'Listen well to what I am going to say to you. Ask it whither it goes and where its strength is; then kiss all that place where it tells you its strength is, as if from love, till you ascertain it, and afterwards tell me when I come.' Then the prince went off to the palace, and the old woman remained in the water-mill. When the dragon came in, the old woman began to question it: Where in God's name have you been? Whither do you go so far? You will never tell me whither you go.' The dragon replied: 'Well, my dear old woman, I do go far.' Then the old woman began to coax it: 'And why do you go so far? Tell me where your strength is. If I knew where your strength is, I don't know what I should do for love; I would kiss all that place.' Thereupon the dragon smiled and said to her: 'Yonder is my strength, in that fireplace.' Then the old woman began to fondle and kiss the fireplace, and the dragon on seeing it burst into a laugh, and said to her: 'Silly old woman, my strength isn't there; my strength is in that tree-fungus in front of the house.' Then the old woman began again to fondle and kiss the tree, and the dragon again laughed, and said to her: 'Away, old woman! my strength isn't there.' Then the old woman inquired: 'Where is it?' The dragon began to give an account in detail: 'My strength is a long way off, and you cannot go thither. Far in another empire under the emperor's city is a lake, in that lake is a dragon, and in the dragon a boar, and in the boar a pigeon, and in that is my strength.' The next morning when the dragon went away

[p. 226]

from the mill, the prince came to the old woman, and the old woman told him all that she had heard from the dragon. Then he left his home, and disguised himself; he put shepherd's boots on his feet, took a shepherd's staff in his hand, and went into the world. As he went on thus from village to village, and from town to town, at last he came into another empire and into the imperial city, in a lake under which the dragon was. On going into the town, he began to inquire who wanted a shepherd. The citizens told him that the emperor did. Then he went straight to the emperor. After he announced himself, the emperor admitted him into his presence, and asked him: Do you wish to keep sheep?' He replied: 'I do, illustrious crown!' Then the emperor engaged him, and began to inform and instruct him: 'There is here a lake, and alongside of the lake very beautiful pasture, and when you call the sheep out, they go thither at once, and spread themselves round the lake; but whatever shepherd goes off there, that shepherd returns back no more. Therefore, my son, I tell you, don't let the sheep have their own way and go where they will, but keep them where you will.' The prince thanked the emperor, got himself ready, and called out the sheep, taking with him, moreover, two hounds that could catch a boar in the open country, and a falcon that could capture any bird, and carrying also a pair of bagpipes. When he called out the sheep he let them go at once to the lake, and when the sheep arrived at the lake, they immediately spread round it, and the prince placed the falcon on a stump, and the hounds and bagpipes under the stump, then tucked up his hose and sleeves, waded into the lake, and began to shout 'Dragon! dragon! come out to single combat with me to-day that we may measure ourselves together, unless you're a woman.' [**] The dragon called out in reply, 'I will

[p. 227]

do so now, prince--now!' Erelong, behold the dragon! it is large, it is terrible, it is disgusting! When the dragon came out, it seized him by the waist, and they wrestled a summer day till afternoon. But when the heat of afternoon came on, the dragon said: 'Let me go, prince, that I may moisten my parched head in the lake, and toss you to the sky.' But the prince replied: 'Come, dragon, don't talk nonsense; if I had the emperor's daughter to kiss me on the forehead, I would toss you still higher.' Thereupon the dragon suddenly let go of him, and went off into the lake. On the approach of evening, he washed and got himself up nicely, placed the falcon on his arm, the hounds behind him, and the bagpipes under his arm, then drove the sheep and went into the town playing on the bagpipes. When he arrived at the town, the whole town assembled as to see a wondrous sight because he had come, whereas previously no shepherd had been able to come from the lake. The next day the prince got ready again, and went with his sheep straight to the lake. But the emperor sent two grooms after him to go stealthily and see what he did, and they placed themselves on a high hill whence they could have a good view. When the shepherd arrived, he put the hounds and bagpipes under the stump and the falcon upon it, then tucked up his hose and sleeves, waded into the lake and shouted: 'Dragon, dragon! come out to single combat with me, that we may measure ourselves once more together, unless you are a woman!' The dragon replied: 'I will do so, prince; now, now!' Erelong, behold the dragon! it was large, it was terrible, it was disgusting! And it seized him by the waist and wrestled with him a summer's day till afternoon. But when the afternoon heat came on, the dragon said: 'Let me go, prince, that I may moisten my parched head in the lake, and may toss you to the sky.' The prince replied: 'Come, dragon, don't talk nonsense;

[p. 228]

if I had the emperor's daughter to kiss me on the forehead, I would toss you still higher.' Thereupon the dragon suddenly left hold of him, and went off into the lake. When night approached the prince drove the sheep as before, and went home playing the bagpipes. When he arrived at the town, the whole town was astir and began to wonder because the shepherd came home every evening, which no one had been able to do before. Those two grooms had already arrived at the palace before the prince, and related to the emperor in order everything that they had heard and seen. Now when the emperor saw that the shepherd returned home, he immediately summoned his daughter into his presence and told her all, what it was and how it was. 'But,' said he, 'to-morrow you must go with the shepherd to the lake and kiss him on the forehead.' When she heard this she burst into tears and began to entreat her father. 'You have no one but me, and I am your only daughter, and you don't care about me if I perish.' Then the emperor began to persuade and encourage her: 'Don't fear, my daughter; you see, we have had so many changes of shepherds, and of all that went out to 'the lake not one has returned; but he has been contending with the dragon for two whole days and it has done him no hurt. I assure you, in God's name, that he is able to overcome the dragon, only go to-morrow with him to see whether he will free us from this mischief which has destroyed so many people.'

When, on the morrow, the day dawned, the day dawned and the sun came forth, up rose the shepherd, up rose the maiden too, to begin to prepare for going to the lake. The shepherd was cheerful, more cheerful than ever, but the emperor's daughter was sad, and shed tears. The shepherd comforted her: 'Lady sister, I pray you, do not weep, but do what I tell you. When it is time, run up and kiss me, and fear not.' As he went and drove the sheep, the shepherd

[p. 229]

was thoroughly cheery, and played a merry tune on his bagpipes; but the damsel did nothing but weep as she went beside him, and he several times left off playing and turned towards her: 'Weep not, golden one; fear nought.' When they arrived at the lake, the sheep immediately spread round it, and the prince placed the falcon on the stump, and the hounds and bagpipes under it, then tucked up his hose and sleeves, waded into the water, and shouted: 'Dragon! dragon! Come out to single combat with me; let us measure ourselves once more, unless you're a woman!' The dragon replied: 'I will, prince; now, now!' Erelong, there was the dragon! it was huge, it was terrible, it was disgusting! When it came out, they seized each other by the middle, and wrestled a summer's day till afternoon. But when the afternoon heat came on, the dragon said: 'Let me go, prince, that I may moisten my parched head in the lake, and toss you to the skies.' The prince replied 'Come, dragon, don't talk nonsense; if I had the emperor's daughter to kiss me on the forehead, I would toss you much higher.' When he said this, the emperor's daughter ran up and kissed him on the face, on the eye, and on the forehead. Then he swung the dragon, and tossed it high into the air, and when it fell to the ground it burst into pieces. But as it burst into pieces, out of it sprang a wild boar, and started to run away. But the prince shouted to his shepherd dogs: 'Hold it! don't let it go!' and the dogs sprang up and after it, caught it, and soon tore it to pieces. But out of the boar flew a pigeon, and the prince loosed the falcon, and the falcon caught the pigeon and brought it into the prince's hands. The prince said to it: 'Tell me now, where are my brothers?' The pigeon replied: 'I will; only do me no harm. Immediately behind your father's town is a water-mill, and in the water-mill are three wands that have sprouted up. Cut these three wands up from

[p. 230]

below, and strike with them upon their root; an iron door will immediately open into a large vault. In that vault are many people, old and young, rich and poor, small and great, wives and maidens, so that you could settle a populous empire; there, too, are your brothers.' When the pigeon had told him all this, the prince immediately wrung its neck.

The emperor had gone out in person, and posted himself on the hill from which the grooms had viewed the shepherd, and he, too, was a spectator of all that had taken place. After the shepherd had thus obtained the dragon's head, twilight began to approach. He washed himself nicely, took the falcon on his shoulder, the hounds behind him, and the bagpipes under his arm, played as he went, drove the sheep, and proceeded to the emperor's palace, with the damsel at his side still in terror. When they came to the town, all the town assembled as to see a wonder. The emperor, who had seen all his heroism from the hill, called him into his presence, and gave him his daughter, went immediately to church, had them married, and held a wedding festival for a week. After this the prince told him who and whence he was, and the emperor and the whole town rejoiced still more. Then, as the prince was urgent to go to his own home, the emperor gave him a large escort, and equipped him for the journey. When they were in the neighbourhood of the water-mill, the prince halted his attendants, went inside, cut up the three wands, and struck the root with them, and the iron door opened at once. In the vault was a vast multitude of people. The prince ordered them to come out one by one, and go whither each would, and stood himself at the door. They came out thus one after another, and lo! there were his brothers also, whom he embraced and kissed. When the whole multitude had come out, they thanked him for releasing and delivering

[p. 231]

them, and went each to his own home. But he went, to his father's house with his brothers and bride, and there lived and reigned to the end of his days.

Footnotes

^226:* This is intended as an insult. 'Azhdaja,' a dragon, is feminine in Servian.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[44]

  

XLIV.--FATE.

THERE were two brothers living together in a house, one of whom did all the work, while the other did nothing but idle, and eat and drink what was ready at hand. And God gave them prosperity in everything--in cattle, in horses, in sheep, in swine, in bees, and in everything else. The one that worked one day began to think to himself: 'Why should I work for that lazybones as well? It is better that we should separate, and that I should work for myself, and he do as he likes.' So one day he said to his brother: 'Brother, it isn't right. I do all the work, and you don't help in anything, but merely eat and drink what's ready. I have made up my mind that we separate.' The other began to dissuade him: 'Don't, brother; it is good for us to be tenants in common; you have everything in your hands, both your own and mine, and I am content whatever you do.' But the first abode by his determination, so the second gave way, and said to him: 'If it is so, take your own course; make the division yourself, as you know how.' Then he divided everything in order, and took everything that was his before him. The do-nothing engaged a herdsman for his cattle, a horsekeeper for his horses, a shepherd for his sheep, a goatherd for his goats, a swineherd for his swine, a beeman for his bees, and said to them: 'I leave all my property in your hands and God's,' and began to live at home as before. The first took pains about his property himself as before, watched and overlooked, but saw no prosperity, but all loss. From day to day everything

[p. 232]

went worse, till he became so poverty-stricken, that he hadn't shoes to his feet, but went barefoot. Then said he to himself: 'I will go to my brother, and see how it is with him.' He did so, and as he went came to a flock of sheep in a meadow, and with the sheep there was no shepherd, but a very beautiful damsel was sitting there spinning golden thread. He addressed her: 'God help you!' and inquired whose the sheep were. She replied: 'The sheep belong to the person to whom I belong.' He asked her further: 'To whom do you belong?' She answered: 'I am your brother's luck.' He was put out, and said to her: 'And where is my luck?' The damsel answered him: 'Your luck is far from you.' 'But can I find it?' inquired he, and she replied: 'You can; go, seek for it.' When he heard this, and saw that his brother's sheep were good--so good, that they could not be better, he didn't care about going further to see other cattle, but went off straight to his brother. When his brother saw him, he had compassion on him, and began to weep: 'Where have you been so long a time?' Then, seeing him barehead and barefoot, he gave him at once a pair of boots and some money. Afterwards, when they had enjoyed each other's company for some days, the visitor rose up to go to his own house. When he got home, he took a wallet on his back, some bread in it, and a staff in his hand, and went into the world to look for his luck. As he travelled, he came to a large wood, and as he went through it, he saw a gray-haired old maid asleep under a bush, and reached out his staff to give her a push. She barely raised herself up, and, hardly opening her eyes for the rheum, addressed him: 'Thank God that I fell asleep, for, if I had been awake, you wouldn't have obtained even that pair of boots.' Then he said to her: 'Who are you, that I shouldn't even have obtained this pair of boots?' She replied: 'I am your luck.' When he heard this, he began

[p. 233]

to beat his breast: 'If you are my luck, God slay you! Who gave you to me?' She quickly rejoined: 'Fate gave me to you.' He then inquired: 'And where is this Fate?' She answered: 'Go and look for him.' And that instant she disappeared. Then the man went on to look for Fate. As he journeyed, he came to a village, and saw in the village a large farmhouse, and in it a large fire, and said to himself: 'Here there is surely some merry-making or festival,' and went in. When he went in, on the fire was a large caldron, in which supper was cooking, and in front of the fire sat the master of the house. The traveller, on going into the house, addressed the master: 'Good-evening!' The master replied: 'God give you prosperity!' and bade him sit down with him, and then began to ask him whence he came, and whither he was going. He related to him everything: how he had been a master, how he had become impoverished, and how he was now going to Fate to ask him why he was so poor. Then he inquired of the master of the house why he was preparing so large a quantity of food, and the master said to him: 'Well, my brother, I am master here, and have enough of everything, but I cannot anyhow satisfy my people; it is quite as if a dragon were in their stomachs. You'll see, when we begin to sup, what they will do.' When they sat down to sup, everybody snatched and grabbed from everybody else, and that large caldron of food was empty in no time. After supper, a maidservant came in, put all the bones in a heap, and threw them behind the stove; and he began to wonder why the young woman threw the bones behind the stove, till all at once out came two old poverty-stricken spectres, as dry as ghosts, and began to suck the bones. Then he asked the master of the house: 'What's this, brother, behind the stove?' He replied: 'Those, brother, are my father and mother; just as if they were fettered to this world, they 

[p. 234]

not quit it.' The next day, at his departure, the master of the house said to him: 'Brother, remember me, too, if anywhere you find Fate, and ask him what manner of misfortune it is that I cannot satisfy my people, and why my father and mother do not die.' He promised to ask him the question, took leave of him, and went on to look for Fate. As on he went, he came, after a long time, to another village, and begged at a certain house that they would take him in for a night's lodging. They did so, and asked him whither he was going; and he told them all in order, what it was, and how it was. Then they began to say to him: 'In God's name, brother, when you get there, ask him with regard to us too, why our cattle are not productive, but the contrary.' He promised them to ask Fate the question, and the next day went on. As he went, he came to a stream of water, and began to shout: 'Water! water! carry me across.' The water asked him: 'Whither are you going?' He told it whither he was going. Then the water carried him across, and said to him: 'I pray you, brother, ask Fate why I have no offspring.' He promised the stream to ask the question, and then went on. He went on for a long time, and at last came to a wood, where he found a hermit, whom he asked whether he could tell him anything about Fate. The hermit answered: 'Go over the hill yonder, and you will come right in front of his abode; but when you come into Fate's presence, do not say a word, but do exactly what he does, until he questions you himself.' The man thanked the hermit, and went over the hill. When he came to Fate's abode, there was something for him to see. It was just as if it were an emperor's palace; there were men-servants and maid-servants there; everything was in good order, and Fate himself was sitting at a golden dinner-table at supper, When the man saw this, he, too, sat down to table, and began to sup. After supper, Fate lay down to sleep, and he

[p. 235]

lay down too. About midnight a terrible noise arose, and out of the noise a voice was heard: 'Fate! Fate! so many souls have been born to-day; assign them what you will.' Then Fate arose, and opened a chest with money in it, and began to throw nothing but ducats behind him, saying: 'As to me to-day, so to them for life!' When on the morrow day dawned, that large palace was no more, but instead of it a moderate-sized house; but in it again there was enough of everything.

At the approach of evening Fate sat down to supper; and he, too, sat down with him, but neither spoke a single word. After supper they lay down to sleep. About midnight a terrible noise began, and out of the noise was heard a voice: 'Fate! Fate! so many souls have been born to-day; assign them what you will.' Then Fate arose, and opened the money-chest; but there were not ducats in it, but silver coins, with an occasional ducat. Fate began to scatter the coins behind him, saying: 'As to me to-day, so to them for life.' When, on the morrow, day dawned, that house was no more, but instead of it there stood a smaller one. Thus did Fate every night, and his house became smaller every morning, till, finally, nothing remained of it but a little cottage. Fate took a mattock, and began to dig; the man, too, took a mattock and began to dig, and thus they dug all day. When it was eventide, Fate took a piece of bread, broke off half of it, and gave it to him. Thus they supped, and, after supper, lay down to sleep. About midnight, again, a terrible noise began, and out of the noise was heard a voice: 'Fate! Fate! so many souls have been born to-day; assign them what you will.' Then Fate arose, opened the chest, and began to scatter behind him nothing but bits of rag, and here and there a day-labourer's wage-penny, [**] shouting: 'As to me to-day, so to them for life.' When he

[p. 236]

arose on the morrow, the cottage was transformed into a large palace, like that which had been there the first day. Then Fate asked him: 'Why have you come?' He detailed to him all his distress, and said that he had come to ask him why he gave him evil luck. Fate then said to him: 'You saw how the first night I scattered ducats, and what took place afterwards. As it was to me the night when anyone was born, so will it be to him for life. You were born on an unlucky night, you will he poor for life; but your brother I was born on a lucky night, and he will be lucky for life. But, as you have been so resolute, and have taken so much trouble, I will tell you how you may help yourself. Your brother has a daughter, Militza, who is lucky, just as her father is; adopt her, and, whatever you acquire, say that it is all hers.' Then he thanked Fate, and said to him again: 'In such a village there is a wealthy peasant, who has enough of everything; but he is unlucky in this, that his people can never be satisfied: they eat up a caldron full of food at a single meal, and even that is too little for them. And this peasant's father and mother are, as it were, fettered to this world; they are old and discoloured, and dried up like ghosts, but cannot die. He begged me, Fate, when I lodged with him for the night, to ask you why that was the case.' Then Fate replied: 'All that is because he does not honour his father and mother, throwing their food behind the stove; but, if he puts them in the best place at table, and if he gives them the first cup of brandy, and the first cup of wine, his servants would not eat half so much, and his parents' souls would be set at liberty.' After this he again questioned Fate: 'In such a village, when I spent the night in a house, the householder complained to me that his cattle were not productive, but the contrary, and he begged me to ask you why this was the case.' Fate replied: 'That is because on the festival of his name-day he slaughters the

[p. 237]

worst animals; but if he slaughtered the best he has, his cattle would all become productive.' Then he asked him the question about the stream of water: 'Why should it be that that stream of water has no offspring?' Fate replied: 'Because it has never drowned a human being; but don't have any nonsense; don't tell it till it carries you across, for if you tell it, it will immediately drown you.' Then he thanked Fate, and went home. When he came to the water, the water asked him: 'What is the news from Fate?' He replied: 'Carry me over, and then I will tell you.' When the water had carried him over, he ran on a little, and, when he had got a little way off, turned and shouted to the water: 'Water! Water! you have never drowned a human being, therefore you have no offspring.' When the water heard that, it overflowed its banks, and after him; but he ran, and barely escaped. When he came to the man whose cattle were unproductive, he was impatiently waiting for him. 'What news, brother, in God's name? Have you asked Fate the question?' He replied: 'I have; and Fate says when you celebrate the festival of your name-day, you slaughter the worst animals; but if you slaughter the best you have, all your cattle will be productive.' When he heard this, he said to him: 'Stay, brother, with us; it isn't three days to my name-day, and, if it is really true, I will give you an apple.' [**] He stayed till the name-day. When the name-day arrived, the householder slaughtered his best ox, and from that time forth his cattle became productive. After this, the householder presented him with five head of cattle. He thanked him, and proceeded on his way. When he came to the village of the householder who had the insatiable servants, the householder was impatiently expecting him. 'How is it, brother, in God's name? What says Fate?' He replied: 'Fate says you do not

[p. 238]

honour your father and mother, but throw their food behind the stove for them to eat; if you put them in the best place at table, and give them the first cup of brandy, and the first cup of wine, your people will not eat half as much, and your father and mother will be content.' When the house-holder heard this, he told his wife, and she immediately washed and combed her father and mother in law, and put nice shoes on their feet; and, when evening came, the householder put them in the best place at table, and gave them the first cup of brandy and the first cup of wine. From that time forth the household could not eat half what they did before, and on the morrow both the father and the mother departed this life. Then the householder gave him two oxen; he thanked him, and went home. When he came to his place of abode, his acquaintances began to congratulate him, and ask him: 'Whose are these cattle?' He replied to everybody: 'Brother, they are my niece Militza's.' When he got home he immediately went off to his brother, and began to beg and pray him: 'Give me, brother, your daughter Militza to be my daughter. You see that I have no one.' His brother replied: 'It is good, brother; Militza is yours.' He took Militza, and conducted her home, and afterwards acquired much, but said, with regard to everything, that it was Militza's. Once he went out into the field to go round some rye; the rye was beautiful; it could not be better. Thereupon a traveller happened to come up, and asked him: 'Whose is this rye?' He forgot himself, and said: 'Mine.' The moment he said that, the rye caught fire and began to burn. When he saw this, he ran after the man: 'Stop, brother! it is not mine; it belongs to Militza, my niece.' Then the fire in the rye went out, and he remained lucky with Militza.

Footnotes

^235:* A 'marjush,' a small coin with the image of the Virgin Mary on it.

^237:* I.e., a good present.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 239]

  

SERBIAN STORIES FROM BOSNIA.

THE Bosnian stories are not written in the Cyrillic, but in the Latin character. This indicates that the Christian inhabitants of Bosnia belong to the Latin rather than to the Greek Church. The Serbians of the Kingdom of Serbia would, no doubt, gladly absorb Bosnia, but it is very doubtful whether the Bosnians would be equally glad to be absorbed by them. In Bosnia the landed proprietors are extensively Mahometans, and neither they nor the Latin Christians would be very willing to place themselves under the domination of the Orthodox Greek Church, without much stronger guarantees than the Serbians of the kingdom, as at present constituted, are likely to be able or willing to give them.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[45]

  

XLV.--THE BIRDCATCHER.

NEAR Constantinople there lived a man who knew no other occupation but that of catching birds; his neighbours called him the birdcatcher. Some he used to sell, others served him for food, and thus he maintained himself. One day he caught a crow, and wanted to let it go, but then he had nothing to take home. 'If I can't catch anything to-day, I'll take my children the crow, that they may amuse themselves;

[p. 240]

and they have no other birds at hand.' So he intended, and so he did. His wife, on seeing the crow, said: 'What mischief have you brought me? Wring the worthless thing's neck!' The crow, on hearing that sentence, besought the birdcatcher to let her go, and promised to be always at his service. 'I will bring birds to you; through me you will become prosperous.' 'Even if you're lying, it's no great loss,' said the birdcatcher to himself, and set the crow at liberty.

On the morrow the birdcatcher went out birdcatching as usual, and the crow kept her word; she brought him two nightingales; he caught them both, and took them home. The nightingales were not long with the birdcatcher, for the grand vizier heard of them, sent for the birdcatcher, took the two nightingales from him, and placed them in the new mosque. The nightingales were able to sing sweetly and agreeably; the people collected in front of the mosque and listened to their beautiful singing; and the wonder came to the ears of the emperor. The emperor summoned the grand vizier, took the birds from him, and inquired whence he had got them. When the emperor had thought the matter over, he sent his cavasses, and they summoned the birdcatcher. 'It's no joke to go before the emperor! I know why he summons me; no half torture will be mine. I am guilty of nothing, I owe nothing; but the emperor's will, that's my crime!' said the birdcatcher, and went into the emperor's presence all pale with fear. 'Birdcatcher, sirrah! are you the catcher of those nightingales which were at the new mosque.' 'Padishah! both father and mother! where your slipper is, there is my face!--I am.' 'Sirrah!' again said the emperor, 'I wish you to find their mother; doubtless your reward will be forthcoming. But do you hear? You may be quite sure of it; if you don't, there will be no head on your shoulders. I'm not joking.' Now the

[p. 241]

poor fellow went out of the emperor's presence, and how he got home he didn't know; a good two hours afterwards he came to himself and began to lament. 'I'm a fool! I thought my trade led no-whither, and not to misfortune for me; but now see! To find the mother of the birds--none but a fool could imagine it--and to catch her!' To this lamentation there was neither limit nor end. It was getting dark, and his wife summoned him to supper; just then the crow was at the window: 'What's this?' the crow asked. What are these lamentations? What's the distress?' 'Let me alone; don't add to my torture; I'm done for owing to you!' said the birdcatcher, and told her all, what it was and how it was. 'That's easy,' answered she; 'go to the emperor to-morrow, and ask for a thousand loads of wheat; then pile up the corn in one heap, and I will inform the birds that the emperor gives them a feast; they will all assemble; their mother, too, will doubtless come; the one with regard to which I give you a sign is she; bring a cage, put the two nightingales in it; the mother, seeing her two young birds, will fly up; let your snare be ready, and then we shall find and catch her.' As the crow instructed him, so he did. The emperor gave him the corn; he feasted the birds, caught the mother of the nightingales, and took her to the emperor. He received a handsome reward, but he would gladly have gone without such reward when he remembered how many tears he had shed. The crow, too, received a reward, for she persuaded the birdcatcher to give his wife a good beating, which he did, to the satisfaction of the crow, in her presence.

Time after time, behold some of the emperor's cavasses! 'Come, the emperor summons you!' sounded from the door. 'A new misfortune! a new sorrow!' thought the birdcatcher in his heart, and went before the emperor. Do you hear, sirrah? Just now I paid you a good recompense,

[p. 242]

now a greater one awaits you. I wish you to seek the mistress of those birds, otherwise, valah! bilah! your head will be in danger! Do you understand me?' At these words of the emperor the birdcatcher either could not or dared not utter a word; he shrugged his shoulders and went out of his presence. As he went home he talked to himself weeping: 'I see that he is determined to destroy me, and some devil has put it into his head to torture me first.' On arriving at home he found his crow at the window: 'Has some misfortune again occurred to you?' 'Don't ask,' replied the birdcatcher; 'one still blacker and more miserable!' and told her all in detail, what it was and how it was. 'Don't trouble your head much about that,' said the crow. 'Be quick; ask the emperor for a boat full of all manner of wares. Then we will push off on the deep sea; when people hear that the emperor's agent is bringing wares, the people will assemble, and that lady is sure to come; the one on which I perch is she; up anchor and off with the boat!' This the birdcatcher remembered well. What he asked of the emperor, that he gave him, and he pushed the boat over the sea; his bringing wares for sale went from mouth to mouth; people came and purchased the wares. At last came the mistress of the birds also, and began to examine the wares; the crow perched on her shoulder; the anchor was raised, and in a short time the birdcatcher brought the boat to under the emperor's quay. When the birdcatcher brought her before the emperor, the emperor was astounded. He didn't know which to admire most, the birdcatcher's cleverness or her beauty. Her beauty overpowered the emperor's mind; he rewarded the birdcatcher handsomely, and placed the sultana in his house. 'You are the dearest to me of all,' said the emperor several times to her; 'if I were to banish all the sultanas, you should never go out of my seraglio.'

[p. 243]

The birdcatcher was again in evil case. The new sultana was in a perpetual state of irritation, for it was poor luck to be obliged to be affectionate to an elderly longbeard. The emperor comforted her, and asked her what failed her, when she had everything in abundance with him. A woman's revenge is worse than a cat's. Not daring to tell the emperor the truth, she wanted to revenge herself on the poor birdcatcher. 'Dear Padishah, I had a valuable ring on my hand when that birdcatcher deluded me into the boat, and pushed it from the shore. I began to wring my hands in distress, the ring broke, and one half fell into the sea, just where it was my hap to be. But, dear sultan, if I am a little dear to you, send that birdcatcher, let him seek that half for me, that I may unite it to this one.' 'All shall be done,' said the emperor; and the cavasses soon brought the birdcatcher. 'My son,' said the emperor, 'if you do not intend to lose my love and favour, hearken to me once more. At the place where you captured that lady, she broke a ring; it fell into the sea. I know that you can do so--find her that half; your reward will not fail; otherwise, you know . . . .' When the poor fellow got home, a fit of laughter seized him from distress. 'I knew that the devil was teaching him how to torment and torture me before he put me to death. If hell were to open, all the devils wouldn't find it!' 'What's the matter, friend?' said the crow. 'Till now you were weeping and complaining, and now in a rage you are laughing.' He told her all--what it was, and how it was. 'Don't fret yourself,' continued the crow. 'Have you given your wife a good thrashing? I wish you to give her a good hiding again, when we go down to the sea. And now come, ask the emperor for a thousand barrels of oil.' The emperor had stores of oil and felt; he gave him as much as he required. Everybody thought that he was going to trade with the oil. When he arrived at the

[p. 244]

place where he captured the young lady, the crow gave the word of command, and they poured out all the oil into the sea. The sea became violently agitated, the crow darted in, and found the missing fragment of the ring. The bird-catcher took the boat back thence under the emperor's palace, and delivered the ring to the emperor, he passed it on to the lady, and she fitted it to the other half. Both she and the emperor were astonished at the birdcatcher's cleverness, commended him, and sent him home with a present.

The emperor wished by every means to induce the young lady to marry him, and to have a formal wedding. She for a long time declined, but at last said: 'If it is your will, I consent, but only on condition that before our wedding you 'destroy that birdcatcher.' The emperor now found himself between two fires. It was agony to destroy his benefactor, it was worse agony not to he able to withstand his heart, and to give up the love of the young lady. Love is eternal, and is often stronger even than truth. He summoned the birdcatcher, commended him for having so often fulfilled his will, and told him that he deserved to sit in the grand vizier's seat. . . . 'But there is nothing else for it, but you must go home, take leave of your wife, children, and friends, of whom I will undertake the care; in the afternoon come; you must of necessity jump into the fire.' He went home, and the crow came to meet him. He told her all that was to be done with him in the afternoon, and said to her: If you do not help me as usual now, I am done for, not through my fault, nor through the emperor's, but owing to you.' The crow informed him what to do, but before he went, he was to give his wife a thoroughly good beating. His wife departed this life from so many blows. A fire was flaming before the great mosque, the Turks came out of the mosque, the emperor came, the people swarmed round the fire The birdcatcher came cheerfully before the emperor.

[p. 245]

[paragraph continues] Everyone deemed him a malefactor. 'Fortunate Padishah, it is your pleasure to burn me to death. I am happy to be able to be a sacrifice for you. It has occurred to my mind, I am anxious to have a ride on a good horse: permit me so to do before I jump into the fire.' The emperor smiled, and ordered his best horse to be brought for him. He mounted, and made the horse gallop well; when the horse sweated, he dismounted, anointed himself with the horse's foam, remounted, darted up to the fire, then dismounted, and darted into the fire. The people looked on; five times, six times did he cross the flames, sprang out of the fire, and stood before the emperor as a youth of twenty years of age, sound, young, goodly, and handsome. The people cried: 'Mercy, emperor! He has fulfilled his penalty.' And the emperor graciously pardoned him. The emperor now longed to become young and handsome also. He made the birdcatcher grand vizier, merely that he might tell him the secret. He said to him: 'My lord, it is easy. Take a good horse, gallop about an hour as I did, dismount when the horse sweats, anoint yourself with his perspiration, jump into the fire, and you will come out such as I am.' Friday dawned; the emperor's best horse was saddled for him; everybody thought that he was going to the mosque. A fire was burning furiously in front of the mosque. The people said: 'There's somebody going to jump in again,' and they were under no delusion. The emperor darted up to the fire all alone, the people looked on to see what was going to happen. The emperor dismounted with great speed, and sprang into the fire. . . . The people crowded to rescue the emperor--'twas all in vain. The emperor was burned to death. 'He was crazy!' shouted the chief men and soldiers. They conducted the birdcatcher into the mosque, and girt him with the emperor's sword. Then the birdcatcher became emperor, the damsel he selected sultana, and the crow the chief lady at court.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 246] [46]

  

XLVI.--THE TWO BROTHERS.

THERE was a man who had a wife but no sons, a female hound but no puppies, and a mare but no foal. 'What in the world shall I do?' said he to himself. 'Come, let me go away from home to seek my fortune in the world, as I haven't any at home.' As he thought, so he did, and went out by himself into the white world as a bee from flower to flower. One day, when it was about dinner-time, he came to a spring, took down his knapsack, took out his provisions for the journey, and began to eat his dinner. Just then a traveller appeared in front of him, and sat down beside the spring to rest; he invited him to sit down by him that they might eat together. When they had inquired after each other's health and shaken hands, then the second corner asked the first on what business he was travelling about the world. He said to him: 'I have no luck at home, therefore I am going from home; my wife has no children, my hound has no puppies, and my mare has never had a foal; I am going about the white world as a bee from flower to flower.' When they had had a good dinner, and got up to travel further, then the one who had arrived last thanked the first for his dinner, and offered him an apple, saying: 'Here is this apple for you '--if I am not mistaken it was a Frederic pippin--'and return home at once; peel the apple and give the peel to your hound and mare; cut the apple in two, give half to your wife to eat, and eat the other half yourself. What has hitherto been unproductive will hence-forth be productive. And as for the two pips which you will find in the apple, plant them on the top of your house.' The man thanked him for the apple; they rose up and parted, the one going onwards and the other back to his house. He peeled the apple and did everything as the other had instructed him. As time went on his wife became

[p. 247]

the mother of two sons, his hound of two puppies, and his mare of two foals, and, moreover, out of the house grew two apple-trees. While the two brothers were growing up, the young horses grew up, and the hounds became fit for hunting. After a short time the father and mother died, and the two sons, being now left alone like a tree cut down on a hill, agreed to go out into the world to seek their fortune. Even so they did: each brother took a horse and a hound, they cut down the two apple-trees, and made themselves a spear apiece, and went out into the wide world. I can't tell you for certain how many days they travelled together; this I do know, that at the first parting of the road they separated. Here they saw it written up: 'If you go by the upper road you will not see the world for five years; if you go by the lower road, you will not see the world for three years.' Here they parted, one going by the upper and the other by the lower road. The one that went by the lower road, after three years of travelling through another world, came to a lake, beside which there was written on a post: 'If you go in, you will repent it; if you don't go in, you will repent it.' If it is so,' thought he to himself, 'let me take whatever God gives,' and swam across the lake. And lo! a wonder! he, his horse, and his hound were all gilded with gold. After this he speedily arrived at a very large and spacious city. He went up to the emperor's palace and inquired for an inn where he might pass the night. They told him, up there, yon large tower, that was an inn. In front of this tower he dismounted; servants came out and welcomed him, and conducted him into the presence of their master in the courtyard. But it was not an innkeeper, but the king of the province himself. The king welcomed and entertained him handsomely. The next day he began to prepare to set forth on his journey. The evening before, the king's only daughter, when she saw him go in front of her apartments,

[p. 248]

had observed him well, and fixed her eyes upon him. This she did because such a golden traveller had never before arrived, and consequently she was unable to close her eyes the whole night. Her heart thumped, as it were; and it was fortunate that the summer night was brief, for if it had been a winter one, she could hardly have waited for the dawn. It all seemed to her and whirled in her brain as if the king was calling her to receive a ring and an apple; the poor thing would fly to the door, but it was shut and there was nobody at hand. Although the night was a short one, it seemed to her that three had passed one after another. When she observed in the morning that the traveller was getting ready to go, she flew to her father, implored him not to let that traveller quit his court, but to detain him and to give her to him in marriage. The king was good-natured, and could easily be won over by entreaties; what his daughter begged for, she also obtained. The traveller was detained and offered marriage with the king's daughter. The traveller did not hesitate long, kissed the king's hand, presented a ring to the maiden, and she a handkerchief to him, and thus they were betrothed. Methinks they did not wait for publication of banns. Erelong they were wedded; the wedding feast and festival were very prolonged, but came to an end in due course. One morning after all this the bridegroom was looking in somewhat melancholy fashion down on the country through a window in the tower. His young wife asked him what ailed him? He told her that he was longing for a hunt, and she told him to take three servants and go while the dew was still on the grass. Her husband would not take a single servant, but mounting his gilded horse and calling his gilded hound, went down into the country to hunt. The hound soon found scent, and put up a stag with gilded horns. The stag began to run straight for a tower, the hound after him, and the hunter after the

[p. 249]

hound, and he overtook the stag in the gate of the courtyard, and was going to cut off its head. He had drawn his sword, when a damsel cried through the window: 'Don't kill my stag, but come upstairs: let us play at draughts for a wager. If you win, take the stag; if I win, you shall give me the hound.' He was as ready for this as an old woman for a scolding match, went up into the tower, and on to the balcony, staked the hound against the stag, and they began to play. The hunter was on the point of beating her, when some damsels began to sing: 'A king, a king, I've gained a king!' He looked round, she altered the position of the draughtsmen, beat him and took the hound. Again they began to play a second time, she staking the hound and he his horse. She cheated him the second time also. The third time they began to play, she wagered the horse, and he himself. When the game was nearly over, and he was already on the point of beating her, the damsels began to sing this time too, just as they had done the first and second times. He looked round, she cheated and beat him, took a cord, bound him, and put him in a dungeon.

The brother, who went by the upper road, came to the lake, forded it, and came out all golden--himself; his horse, and his hound. He went for a night's lodging to the king's tower; the servants came out and welcomed him. His father-in-law asked him whether he was tired, and whether he had had any success in hunting; but the king's daughter paid special attention to him, frequently kissing and embracing him. He couldn't wonder enough how it was that everybody recognised him; finally, he felt satisfied that it was his brother, who was very like him, that had been there and got married. The king's daughter could not wonder enough, and it was very distressing to her, that her newly-married husband was so soon tired of her, for the more affectionate she was to him, the more did he repulse

[p. 250]

her. When the morrow came, he got ready to go out to look for his brother. The king, his daughter, and all the courtiers, begged him to take a rest. 'Why,' said they to him, you only returned yesterday from hunting, and do you want to go again so soon?' All was in vain; he refused to take the thirty servants whom they offered him, but went down into the country by himself. When he was in the midst of the country, his hound put up a stag, and he after them on his horse, and drove it up to a tower; he raised his sword to kill the stag, but a damsel cried through a window: 'Don't meddle with my stag, but come upstairs that we may have a game at draughts, then let the one that wins take off the stakes, either you my hound, or I yours.' When he went into the basement, in it was a hound and a horse--the hounds and horses recognised each other--and he felt sure that his brother had fallen into prison there. They began the game at draughts, and when the damsel saw that he was going to beat her, some damsels began to sing behind them: 'A king! a king! I've gained a king!' He took no notice, but kept his eye on the draughtsmen; then the damsel, like a she-devil, began to make eyes and wink at the young man. He gave her a flip with his coat behind the ears: 'Play now!' and thus beat her. The second game they both staked a horse. She couldn't cheat him; he took both the hound and the horse from her. The third and last time they played, he staking himself and she herself; and after giving her a slap in her face for her winking and making of eyes, he won the third game. He took possession of her, brought his brother out of the dungeon, and they went to the town.

Now the brother, who had been in prison, began to think within himself: 'He was yesterday with my wife, and who knows whether she does not prefer him to me?' He drew his sword to kill him, but the draught-player defended him.

[p. 251]

[paragraph continues] He darted before his brother into the courtyard, and as he stepped on to the passage from the tower, his wife threw her arms round his neck and began to scold him affectionately for having driven her from him overnight, and conversed so coldly with her. Then he repented of having so foolishly suspected his brother, who had, moreover, released him from prison, and of having wanted to kill him; but his brother was a considerate person and forgave him. They kissed each other and were reconciled. He retained his wife and her kingdom with her, and his brother took the draught-player and her kingdom with her. And thus they attained to greater fortune than they could ever have even hoped for.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 252]

  

SERBIAN STORIES FROM CARNIOLA.

IN these we come to a very singular mythological being, Kurent, who has not, as yet, found a place in the writings of Slavonic mythologists. With respect to Kurent, Professor Krek writes as follows: The question as to the nature of the Slovinish Kurent is very difficult, especially as the tradition about him is, in my judgment, very corrupt. So far as I know, no one has hitherto discussed it scientifically, and what I am now writing to you is my own subjective opinion, rapidly formed. The name itself does not appear to be indigenous, but I think it is of Romance, perhaps of mediaeval Latin origin, though I am not yet able to say what its signification is. In a mythological point of view, there is to be observed in the stories about Kurent a certain mixture of heathen-Slavonic and Christian elements; but I think the basis is entirely indigenous. If I mistake not, Kurent is essentially of Dionysiac signification, which is indicated by the fact that the Slovinish stories connect him closely with the vine-stock, and with wine in general, just as is the case with the Greek Dionysos. It is note-worthy that the Little Russians have the word "Kurent" in the sense of a merry wedding tune (Zhelechovskij, i. 391), and that the Slovinish tradition frequently puts Kurent in the place of "Pust," so that both represent the same mythological idea. With regard to "Pust," there is no doubt

[p. 253]

that, with his orgiastic system, he is just like the Greek Dionysos, although his name is recent, and rests upon alien conceptions; indeed, here the fact is of more decisive import than the name. The name is not connected with the old Slavonic "pust," desertus, but with "pust" in the old Slavonic "mesopust," in Bohemian "masopust," which are identical with the Greek apokreus, in Latin "carnisprivium." Of what original names "Kurent" and "Pust" have occupied the place, it will now never be possible to determine. It is just in mythological matters, that all manner of old traditions are unsatisfactory, as everybody knows who has busied himself at all closely with this subject. Much that is Christian has similarly become mingled with the original pagan conceptions in the case of Kurent also, and it is not easy to separate them from later accretions. I think that the Slovintzes honoured Kurent with a special solemnity or festival at the same time that the other Slavonians celebrated the regeneration of winter, nature, and the birth of the solar deity. This mythological phenomenon has its analogy in the myths of other Ario-European nations, a matter so generally known that there is no need of dilating upon it now. What I wish to draw attention to is this: that the Slovinish "Kurent," as also his representative "Pust" is of Dionysiac signification, and I don't know to what to compare him more properly than to the Greek Dionysos. Circumspection is especially necessary in mythological matters, but I venture to affirm that my opinion will hold its ground before severe criticism. I purpose treating at greater length of this matter at a later time, but I do not think I shall find it necessary to retract any portion of my opinion.'

Mr. Morfill informs me, moreover, that Kurenta grati is given by Zhelikovskij in the sense 'to play the Kurent,' i.e., the air so called.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 254] [47]

  

XLVII.--THE ORIGIN OF MAN.

IN the beginning there was nothing but God, and God slept and dreamed. For ages and ages did this dream last. But it was fated that he should wake up. Having roused himself from sleep, he looked round about him, and every glance transformed itself into a star. God was amazed, and began to travel, to see what he had created with his eyes. He travelled and travelled, but nowhere was there either end or limit. As he travelled, he arrived at our earth also; but he was already weary; sweat clung to his brow. On the earth fell a drop of sweat: the drop became alive, and here you have the first man. He is God's kin, but he was not created for pleasure: he was produced from sweat; already in the beginning it was fated for him to toil and sweat.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[48]

  

XLVIII.--GOD'S COCK.

THE earth was waste: nowhere was there aught but stone. God was sorry for this, and sent his cock to make the earth fruitful, as he knew how to do. The cock came down into a cave in the rock, and fetched out an egg of wondrous power and purpose. The egg chipped, and seven rivers trickled out of it. The rivers irrigated the neighbourhood, and soon all was green: there were all manner of flowers and fruits; the land, without man's labour, produced wheat, the trees not only apples and figs, but also the whitest and sweetest bread. In this paradise men lived without care, working, not from need, but for amusement and merriment. Round the paradise were lofty mountains, so that there was no violence to fear, nor devilish storm to dread. But further: that men, otherwise their own masters, and free, might not, from ignorance, suffer damage, God's cock hovered high in the sky, and crowed to them every day,

[p. 255]

when to get up, when to take their meals, and what to do, and when to do it. The nation was happy, only God's cock annoyed them by his continual crowing. Men began to murmur, and pray God to deliver them from the restless creature: 'Let us now settle for ourselves,' said they, 'when to eat, to work, and to rise.' God hearkened to them; the cock descended from the sky, but crowed to them just once more: 'Woe is me! Beware of the lake!' Men rejoiced, and said that it was never better; no one any more interfered with their freedom. After ancient custom, they ate, worked, and rose, all in the best order, as the cock had taught them. But, little by little, individuals began to think that it was unsuitable for a free people to obey the cock's crowing so slavishly, and began to live after their own fashion, observing no manner of order. Through this arose illnesses, and all kinds of distress; men looked again longingly to the sky, but God's cock was gone for ever. They wished, at any rate, to pay regard to his last words. But they did not know how to fathom their meaning. The cock had warned them to dread the lake, but why? for they hadn't it in their valley; there flowed quietly, in their own channel, the seven rivers which had burst out of the egg. Men therefore conjectured that there was a dangerous lake somewhere on the other side of the mountains, and sent a man every day to the top of a hill to see whether he espied aught. But there was danger from no quarter; the man went in vain, and people calmed themselves again. Their pride became greater and greater; the women made brooms from the wheat-ears, and the men straw mattrasses. They would not go any more to the tree to gather bread, but set it on fire from below, that it might fall, and that they might collect it without trouble. When they had eaten their fill, they lay down by the rivers, conversed, and spoke all manner of blasphemies. One cast his eyes on the water, wagged his

[p. 256]

head, and jabbered: 'Eh! brothers! A wondrous wonder! I should like to know, at any rate, why the water is exactly so much, neither more nor less.' 'This, too,' another answered, 'was a craze of the cock's; it is disgraceful enough for us to be listening to orders to beware of a lake, which never was, and never will be. If my opinion is followed, the watcher will go to-day for the last time. As regards the rivers, I think it would be better if there were more water.' His neighbour at first agreed, but thought, again, that there was water in abundance; if more, there would be too much. A corpulent fellow put in energetically that undoubtedly both were right; it would, therefore, be the most sensible thing to break the egg up, and drive just as much water as was wanted into each man's land, and there was certainly no need of a watchman to look out for the lake. Scarcely had these sentiments been delivered, when an outcry arose in the valley; all rushed to the egg to break it to pieces; all men deplored nothing but this, that the disgraceful look-out could not be put a stop to before the morrow. The people stood round the egg, the corpulent man took up a stone, and banged it against the egg. It split up with a clap of thunder, and so much water burst out of it that almost the whole human race perished. The paradise was filled with water, and became one great lake. God's cock warned truly, but in vain, for the lawless people did not understand him. The flood now reached the highest mountains, just to the place where the watchman was standing, who was the only survivor from the destruction of mankind. Seeing the increasing waters, he began to flee.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[49]

  

XLIX.--KURENT THE PRESERVER.

MANKIND perished by the flood, and there was only one who survived, and this was Kranyatz. Kranyatz fled higher

[p. 257]

and higher, till the water flooded the last mountain. The poor wretch saw how the pines and shrubs were covered; one vine, and one only, was still dry. To it he fled, and quickly seized hold of it, not from necessity, but from excessive terror; but how could it help him, being so slender and weak? Kurent observed this, for the vine was his stick, when he walked through the wide world. It was agreeable to him that man should be thought to seek help from him. It is true that Kurent was a great joker; but he was also of a kindly nature, and was always glad to deliver anyone from distress. Hearing Kranyatz lamenting, he straightened the vine, his stick, and lengthened it more and more, till it became higher than the clouds. After nine years the flood ceased, and the earth became dry again. But Kranyatz preserved himself by hanging on the vine, and nourishing himself by its grapes and wine. When all became dry, he got down, and thanked Kurent as his preserver. But this didn't please Kurent. 'It was the vine that rescued you,' said he to Kranyatz; 'thank the vine, and make a covenant with it, and bind yourself and your posterity, under a curse, that you will always speak its praises and love its wine more than any other food and drink.' Very willingly did the grateful Kranyatz make the engagement for both himself and his posterity, and to this day his descendants still keep faith, according to his promise, loving wine above all things, and joyfully commemorating Kurent, their ancient benefactor.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[50]

  

L.--KURENT AND MAN.

KURENT and man contended which should rule the earth. Neither Kurent would yield to man nor man to Kurent, for he (man) was so gigantic--he wouldn't even have noticed it, if nine of the people of the present day had danced up and

[p. 258]

down his nostrils. 'Come,' said Kurent, 'let us see which is the stronger; whether it is I or you that is to rule the earth. Yonder is a broad sea; the one that springs across it best shall have both the earth and all that is on the other side of the sea, and that is, in faith, a hundred times more valuable than this wilderness.' Man agreed. Kurent took off his coat and jumped across the sea, so that just one foot was wetted when he sprang on to dry land. Now he began to jeer at the man; but the man held his tongue, didn't get out of temper, neither did he take off his coat, but stepped without effort and quite easily over the sea, as over a brook, and came on to dry land without even wetting a foot. 'I'm the stronger,' said man to Kurent; 'see how my foot is dry and yours is wet.' 'The first time you have overcome me,' answered Kurent; 'yours are the plains, yours is the sea, and what is beyond the sea; but that isn't all the earth, there is also some beneath us and above us; come, then, let us see a second time which is the stronger.' Kurent stood on a hollow rock, and stamped on it with his foot, so that it burst with a noise like thunder, and split in pieces. The rock broke up, and a cavern was seen where dragons were brooding. Now the man also stamped, and the earth quaked and broke up right to the bottom, just where pure gold flowed like a broad river, and the dragons fell down and were drowned in the river. This trial, too, is yours,' said Kurent; but I don't acknowledge you emperor till you overpower me in a third fierce contest. Yonder is a very lofty mountain. It rises above the clouds; it reaches to the celestial table, where the cock sits and watches God's provisions. Now, then, take you an arrow and shoot, and so will I; the one which shoots highest is the stronger, and his is the earth, and all that is beneath and above it.' Kurent shot, and his arrow wasn't back for eight days; then the man shot, and his arrow flew for nine days, and when,

[p. 259]

on the tenth day, it fell, the celestial cock that guarded God's provisions fell also, spitted upon it. 'You are emperor,' said cunning Kurent. 'I make obeisance to you, as befits a subject.' But the man was good-natured, and made a covenant of adoptive brotherhood with Kurent, and went off to enjoy his imperial dignity. Kurent, too, went off, but he was annoyed that the man had put him to shame; where he could not prevail by strength, he determined to succeed by craft. 'You are a hero, man,' he would say, 'I am witness thereto; but beware of me, if you are a hero also in simplicity; I go to bring you a gift, that I have devised entirely by myself.'

He said and squeezed the vine, his stick, and pure red wine burst out of it. 'Here's a gift for you; now, then, where are you?' He found the man on the earth the other side of the sea, where he was enjoying a bowl of sweet stir-about. 'What are you doing, my lord?' said Kurent. 'I've mixed a bowl of stirabout from white wheat and red fruit, and, see, here I am eating it and drinking water.' 'My poor lord! you are emperor of the world and drinking water! hand me a cup, that I may present you with better drink, which I, your humble servant, have prepared for you myself.' The man was deceived, took the cup with red wine, and drank some of it. 'Thank you, adopted brother; you are very kind, but your drink is naught.' Kurent was disgusted, went off again, and thought and thought how to cheat the man. Again he squeezed his stick, again red wine burst forth from it, but Kurent did not allow it to remain pure, but the rascal mixed hellebore with it, which Vilas and prophetesses pluck by moonlight to nourish themselves with. A second time he went in search of the man, and found him at the bottom of the earth, where the pure gold was flowing like a broad river. 'What are you doing, my lord?' asked Kurent. 'I am getting myself a

[p. 260]

golden shirt, and I am tired and very thirsty; but there's no water here, and it's a long way to the world--seven years' journey.' 'I am at your service,' said Kurent; 'here's a cup of wine for you; better never saw the red sun.' The man was deceived, took it, and drank it up. 'Thank you, Kurent; you are good, and your drink is good, too.' Kurent, was going to pour him out a fresh cupful, but the man would not allow it, for his nature was still sober and sensible. Kurent was disgusted, and went off to see whether he could not devise something better. For the third time he squeezed his stick; wine burst out more strongly, but this time it did not remain pure nor without sin. The rascal applied an arrow, opened a vein and let some black blood flow into the wine. Again he went in search of the man, and found him on the high mountain at God's table, where he was feasting on roast meat, which had not been roasted for him, but for God himself. 'What are you doing, my lord?' asked Kurent in amazement and joy, when he saw that the man was sinning abominably. 'Here I am, sitting and eating roast meat; but take yourself off, for I am afraid of God, lest he should come up and smite me.' Never fear!' was Kurent's advice; 'how do you like God's roast meat?' 'It's nice, but it's heavy. I can scarcely swallow it.' 'I am at your service,' said Kurent; 'here is wine for you, the like of which isn't on earth or in heaven, but only with me.' The third time the man was deceived, but cruelly. 'Thank you, Kurent,' he said; you are good, but your drink is better; draw me some more, as becomes a faithful servant.' Kurent did so, and the man's eye became dim and his mind became dim, and he thought no more of God, but remained at table. Suddenly God returned, and seeing the man dozing and eating roast meat at his table, became angry, and smote him down the mountain with his mighty hand, where he lay, half dead, for

[p. 261]

many years, all bruised and hurt. When he got well again his strength had diminished; he could neither step across the sea, nor go down to the bottom of the earth, nor up-hill to the celestial table. Thus Kurent ruled the world and man, and mankind have been weak and dwarfed from that time forth.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[51]

  

LI.--THE HUNDRED-LEAVED ROSE.

THE man contended with Kurent for the earth. Unable to decide their dispute by agreement, they seized each other, and struggled together up and down the earth for full seven years; but neither could Kurent overcome the man, nor the man Kurent. At that time they kicked the earth about and broke it up, so that it became such as it now is: where there was formerly nothing but wide plains, they dug out ravines with their heels, and piled up mountains and hills. When they were wearied with fighting, they both fell down like dead corpses, and lay for a hundred and a hundred years; and the mighty Dobrin hastened to the earth, bound both the man and Kurent, and ruled the world. But the two woke up, and, looking about them, observed Dobrin's cords, and wondered who had thrown spider's webs over them. Raising themselves, they broke their bonds as mere spiders' webs, seized Dobrin, bound him with golden fetters, and handed him over to a fiery dragon, to plait the lady-dragon's hair and wash her white hands. Then said Kurent to the man: 'See, by quarrelling we got tired out, and fell asleep, and a good-for-nothing came to us and ruled the world. We have handed him over to the fiery dragon, but if we contend as before, a stronger than Dobrin will come to us, and will conquer both me and you, and we shall suffer like silly Dobrin. But let us give up disputing; you are a hero, and I think I am, too; the hills and abysses are our

[p. 262]

witnesses, when they crashed under our heels. Hear, therefore, and follow my advice. I have a garden, and in my garden is a mysterious plant, the hundred-leaved rose. By the root it is attached to the bottom of the earth, imprisoning a terrible creature--the living fire. In vain does the creature endeavour to release and free itself from its bonds, the roots. But woe to us, if you pull up the hundred-leaved rose out of the earth! The creature 'living-fire' would force its way through, and the earth, and all that is in it, would become nothing but a mighty desert where the water has dried up. Such is the root of the hundred-leaved rose. But don't seize hold of its top, either. It is in your power to pull it off; it is neither too strong nor lofty, but it conceals within it wondrous powers--lightning and thunder. They would knock to pieces both you and the earth, and all that is beneath it and above it; the hundred-leaved rose would alone remain; but a hundred and a hundred of God's years would elapse before a new earth grew up around it, and a living race was again produced. Such is the garden of the hundred-leaved rose. But it also possesses extraordinary petals. I have often sat a day at a time under them, and the petals would comfort me, and sing songs sweeter than even the slender throat of a Vila singing ever uttered. But from the petals there is no danger; pluck them, and next morning they will sprout forth handsomer than ever. But up to the present time I have not injured them, but have noticed in the night, how they fell and raised themselves again; and I easily understood how the stars and the moon go round, for all came up in the sky just like the petals of the hundred-leaved rose. Come, then; let us ask the wondrous plant, and then make peace together. The first petal is yours, the second mine, the third belongs to neither of us, and so on till we pluck all the petals: let him who pulls off the last petal be ruler on the earth, but not for

[p. 263]

ever, for that would be a disgrace to a hero, but for one of God's hours, a hundred terrestrial years; and when the hour passes, let that one rule again to whom that luck does not fall the first time, whether it be I or you, so that we may arrange to succeed each other in a friendly manner without dispute and dangerous discord. But the beginning is difficult; let us have no suspicion, either I as to you, or you as to me, but let all be of goodwill, and without trickery; let us ask the hundred-leaved rose, with whom there is no unrighteousness. The man agreed to what Kurent said; one hero trusted the other. They went off to the garden, and asked the hundred-leaved rose. The man pulled a petal, Kurent pulled one, and the third petal remained unowned. 'I am yours,' 'you are mine,' 'each is his own;' 'I am yours,' 'you are mine,' 'each is his own;' so said both heroes, as they pulled the mysterious petals. But it was not the will of the hundred-leaved rose that one autocrat should rule the earth. There were still three petals, the first belonging to the man, the second to Kurent, and the third to neither, and this was the only one remaining on the hundred-leaved rose. Kurent and the man saw that it was not destined for either to rule or to humble himself; they parted in grief, and roamed through the wide world, each afraid of the other, so that they did not venture even to go to sleep at night. An hour of God, a hundred terrestrial years, elapsed, and then both heroes met again. For the second time they consulted the hundred-leaved rose, and it arranged it so, that Kurent was to humble himself, and the man, who pulled off the last petal, was to rule. The hero humbled himself to him, but the man did not know how to rule, but allowed himself to be deluded, and lay down on a plain to rest and sleep. Thus he lay for a whole hour of God, a hundred terrestrial years, and the wild beasts came up and made game of him: foxes littered in his ear, and

[p. 264]

predaceous kites nested in his thick hair. The man was a great simpleton, but also a mighty hero, as tall, as a plain, the end of which you cannot see, is long, and as shaggy as a wooded mountain. But the hour of God had elapsed, and Kurent came to the sleeper, and woke him up in no agreeable fashion. The man saw that he had slept through his term of rule, and that it was his, according to the agreement, to serve during an hour of God, a hundred terrestrial years. Kurent began to rule, but he didn't go to sleep, but made use of his rule, and exercised his power to the full. He invited the man to dinner, and treated him in a courteous and friendly manner, that he might soon forget his servitude. Kurent kept this in view, and drew him a cup of wine straight from his own vineyard. The simpleton was tricked, and drank it up; but it tasted sour to him, so he grumbled: 'Bad drink at a bad host's!' Kurent did not get angry at this, but drew him a second cup of old red wine: 'Drink, and don't find fault with what is God's.' The second time the man was tricked and drank it up. It did not taste sour to him, but he said: 'Wondrous drink at a wondrous host's!' Kurent drew him a third cup, of wonderful wine, which the first plant, the first planted, yielded, of the first autumn in the first created year. The third time the man was tricked, but for ever. After drinking it up, he threw his arms round Kurent's neck, and cried out: 'Oh, good drink at a good host's! Treat me with this wine, and rule both my body and soul, not only for one hour of God, but from henceforth for evermore.' Kurent was delighted, and plied the man with sweet wine, and the man drank, and cried without ceasing, that he had no need of freedom so long as there was wine to be had with Kurent. Kurent laughed at him, seeing how the man's powers had decayed through wine, and that nobody could any more contend with him for the sovereignty of the earth.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 265]

  

CROATIAN STORIES.

THE Croats are believed to take their name from their former abode in the ancient Chrobatia, north of the Carpathian Mountains, whose name retains the same root, CRB(or P)T. Among them we meet with a wonderful hero, 'Marko' ([*No. 52]), the account of whose buzdovan, or mace, the southern representative of Thor's hammer, may be compared with 'Little Rolling-pea's bulava ([*No. 22]), and that of 'Ivan Popyalof' (Ralston, p. 66). Marko appears to have been a very unprincipled hero, with very slight ideas of honesty and fair-play. He is represented as gaining his vast strength from a superhuman source--a Vila, of whom more anon. In [*No. 53], we are carried into cloudland, and meet with representatives of the 'Clashing Rocks' (Symplegades), through which the good ship Argo had to pass before she could make her way into the Black Sea, and which, till their reappearance in this story, seem to have dropped altogether out of folklore. From this story, and also from several incidents in [*No. 52], we perceive that the Vilas of the South Slavonians are not denizens of the earth, the waters, or the woods, but of the clouds, and thus a journey has to be made into cloudland to find the daughter of their king. [**] [*No. 54] will remind us of Aladdin and his

[p. 266]

wonderful ring and lamp, although animals play a part in it unknown to the Oriental tale. [*No. 55] introduces us to the singular relations supposed to exist between human beings and wolves, and [*No. 56] exhibits a curious mixture of destiny and ingenuity.

Footnotes

^265:* It must also be noticed that the hero is represented as catching the Storm-mare, just as Bellerophon does the horse Pegasus by the fountain Peirene.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[52]

  

LII.--KRALJEVITCH MARKO.

THERE was once upon a time a mother who gave birth to Kraljevitch Marko. She reared him, and placed him in a position to become a hero. When Marko was growing up he was obliged to feed swine, but he was then weakly, and so dwarfish a lad that his comrades were able to beat him, and wanted him to be a sort of servant for them and tend their swine. But he was not willing to do this, so they beat him and lugged him by the hair, so that he was obliged to run away from them. He got away, and went into the fields, and there roamed about, thinking: 'They would be beating me all day, now one, now another of them; but as it is, when I go to them in the evening, they will only beat me once.' As he roamed about, he came up to a baby. He saw that it was a handsome one, and that it was lying in the sun. He made it a cool shade with branches, and went a little way off and sat down. As he thus sat, up came a Vila, and said to herself: 'Gracious God! who has done this? Let him ask me for anything in the world; I will give it him.' He heard this, approached, and said: 'Sister, I have done this for you.' 'You have done it, little brother? Come! what do you ask of me in return, that I may reward you for being so good as to make a cool shade for my baby?' 'Ah, dear sister! what I should ask you, you could not give me.' 'Well, what is such a mighty matter? only tell me.' He was thinking of this, that his comrades might not beat him at the pasture; therefore he said that he should

[p. 267]

wish that they should not beat him. She replied: 'Well, if that is what you wish for, come and suck my breast.' He obeyed her, went and sucked. When he had finished sucking, the Vila said to him: 'Well, go now and heave yon stone, and try whether you can heave it up.' The stone was twelve hundredweight. He went to heave it, but could not stir it from its place. Then the Vila said to him: 'Come and suck again; when you have done sucking, go and heave it. He went to suck, and when he had finished, went to heave it, but only lifted it a little. Then he went again to suck, with such effect that he could already cast it a little way. He went to suck once more. Then he was already able to cast it to a great height and over hills, so that it was no more to be found. Once more she bade him come to suck. He sucked his fill, and then she said to him: 'Go now whithersoever you will; no one will beat you any more--no, not your comrades.' He went merrily to the herdsmen, and they called to him: 'Where have you been that we are obliged to tend your swine?' and rushed upon him to beat him. He only waited for them. When they came up to him, he seized one, knocked them down, and the one who was in his hands was quite squashed, with such force had he taken hold of him. The other shepherds, who saw what he did, ran to the home of those whom he had knocked down, saying: 'Marko has knocked down your son, and so-and-so's, and so-and-so's.' They all went to his mother: 'What manner of son is this that you have reared up?--a brigand, who kills our children!' She was terrified out of her wits, thinking what her son had done. She began to revile him: 'Sonny, never did my eye see that you did anything; wherefore do you thus to me, that other people come to revile me because of your doings? Go! I shall be glad if my eye never sees you more. Why do you put me to shame?' 'Well, then, good! if so you say, I will

[p. 268]

go into the world.' 'Only go that I may never see you.' 'Well, then, good! go I will.'

He went. Now, he thought to himself: 'What shall I do? I am a hero, but I have not what a hero requires.' Then he went to a smith, at whose smithy were five-and-twenty smiths. 'God help you, smith!' 'God help you, Kraljevitch Marko! why have you come to me?' 'I have come to you that you may forge me a sword weighing twelve hundredweight; then you shall also forge me a mace, if you make the sword well; but you must know that it must he stronger than your anvil. If it cuts it through, you shall receive payment; otherwise, not. Have you understood me?" 'Yes.' 'Well, then make it now.' All five-and-twenty smiths went immediately and forged the sword. When it was ready, Marko came. 'Well, smith, have you got it ready?' 'Yes, Marko.' 'Now come, let me see.' Marko struck, but the sword broke into two pieces, and not the anvil. 'Ah! friend smith, you've not done it well; you get no pay.' He went on to another smith. 'God help you, smith!' 'God help you, Kraljevitch Marko! What work do you want done?' 'I have come to you to make me a sword weighing twelve hundredweight, and to make it stronger than your anvil, because, if it cuts through your anvil, you will receive payment; if not, you will get nothing. Have you understood me?' 'Yes.' 'Then make it.' Then up came the thirty smiths, worked at the sword, and worked until they had finished forging it. Marko came: 'Well, smith, is the sword ready?' 'It is, Marko.' 'Show it me that I may see it.' Marko took it, struck, cut through the anvil, and cut right into the block. 'Well, smith, you've made it well. Now that you've made me a sword, make me also a sheath for the sword, and also a club, that is, a mace, weighing twelve hundredweight, then I will pay you all at once. But when I throw the mace, it must not break; if it

[p. 269]

breaks, then you get no payment.' He made him a mace also, but did not make it well. When Marko threw it, he let it fall upon himself, and the mace broke. Then said Marko: 'You have made me the sword well, but not the mace. Reach out your hand that I may pay you for the sword.' The smith reached out his hand, and Marko cut it off with the sword, saying: 'There's your payment, smith, for the sword, that you may no more make such swords for any hero.' Then he went to a third smith, with whom thirty-eight smiths were at work, and said: 'God help you, smith!' 'God requite you, Marko! why have you come to me?' 'I have come to you to make me a club, that is, a mace, weighing twelve hundredweight; I tell you the truth, if I throw it up on high, and it breaks when it falls, you get no payment.' All thirty-eight smiths worked till they forged it. Marko came: 'Well, is the mace ready?' 'It is, Marko.' 'Show it, that I may see it.' When he gave it him, he threw it so high into the air that it was three days and three nights in the sky. When it came down, Marko presented his back; it fell upon him, and cast him to the ground, and blood flowed from his nose and teeth, but the mace remained sound. But Marko sprang up quickly, and said to the smith: 'Ah! dear smith! you've made it well for me; reach out your hand that I may pay you.' He reached out his hand to him, and he cut his hand off with his sword. 'Let this be your payment, smith, that you may no more make such staves for any hero.'

Then he went off to his mother and said to her: 'Mother, you see in me a hero; if you revile me, I shall go about the world.' Then his mother began to scold him: 'Why are you like this? Why don't you live like other people? You have oxen; go, then, on to the green hill and plough the fallows and pastures, and thereby support your old mother.' Marko obeyed her, took the oxen, and went. But he didn't

[p. 270]

go on to the green hill, to plough the fallows and pastures, but he went and ploughed the emperor's highroads. When the Turks saw this, they went to Marko--three hundred Turks, all chosen warriors--and said to him: 'Why, Marko, do you plough the emperor's highroads? you have the fallows and pastures!' Then at him, to cut him down. When Marko saw this, he hadn't with him either his sword or his mace, so seized his plough and felled all three hundred Turks. Then said he: 'Ah! gracious God! a wondrous hero!' Then he took the Turks' gold from them, left his plough, unyoked the oxen, and turned them loose on the green hill: 'Go, little oxen, on to the green hill, and feed and graze from pine to pine, like the cuckoo Marko has not managed to plough with you, and now never will he more.' And home he went singing: 'Here, mother, you have gold enough, live upon it, and I will go into the world, that your eye may see me no more.'

He took his mace and sword, went and came to an inn, where some Turks were drinking red wine and conversing. We should be glad to make the acquaintance of Kraljevitch Marko and see him. We have heard that he is a celebrated hero. His brother Andro is in Stambol here. He is a hero, but they say that he is a still greater hero.' 'In whose service is Andro Kraljevitch?' 'In that of a pasha; he will soon come riding past here.' 'Good; I will wait for him.' Up came Andro Kraljevitch, riding with the pasha. Marko called out to him: 'Eh, adopted brother, Kraljevitch Andro!' 'Thanks, unknown hero, perhaps you are Kraljevitch Marko?' 'Quite true, I am Kraljevitch Marko.' 'Good; let us go into the inn to drink a cup of wine, that love and the fortune of heroes may thus unite us. Now we are not afraid of going into combat against any empire.' So they went on the way to an inn. Kraljevitch Marko said: 'Prithee, sing me a song, Andro.' 'Dear brother, I

[p. 271]

dare not. The Vila of the cloud would shoot me.' 'Don't be afraid; I am here.' Andro obeyed, and sang so that all the branches began to fall. All at once a spear flew against Andro and struck him down. Marko looked about to see whence it came, and espied a Vila in the cloud; he seized his mace and threw it at the Vila, so that it at once struck her to the ground. The Vila began to shriek: 'Let me go, Marko! I will bring Andro back to life, and will give you a wondrous horse, so that you will be able to fly in the air.' Marko agreed, and she took certain grasses, and brought Andro back to life. Marko obtained the wondrous horse, and both rode off to an inn and drank red wine. But in the inn there was a wicked harlot. She became enamoured of Andro, but he would not even look at her. She therefore put sweet honey into his wine, that he might drink the wine. Marko went out for a short time, and the wicked woman murdered Andro. But when Marko came in he seized the wicked woman, and spitted her on his sword: Take that, wretch, for murdering my brother Andro.'

He went on into the world. He roamed hither and thither, and when he met with any hero, he tried the fortune of combat with him, as in his encounter with black Arapin. Arapin built a tower beside the level sea. When he had built it handsomely and raised it high, he said thus to it: 'Handsomely, my tower, handsomely have I built thee, and high have I raised thee, for I have no father nor mother, no brother nor sister, nor even my beloved, to walk about in thee. But I have a love, the daughter of the emperor Soliman. I will write him the leaf of a white book, and send up to him by a black Tatar; for if he will not give her to me, let him meet me in single combat.' He wrote the leaf of a white book and sent it by a black Tatar. When Soliman read over the leaf of the white book, he shed tears abundantly, and his empress Solimanitza came to him and

[p. 272]

questioned him 'Why do you weep, emperor Soliman? Ofttimes have letters come for you, and you have not shed abundant tears; what distress is tormenting you?' He told her this, that black Arapin had written to him, that, if he did not give him his daughter, he must meet him in single combat; and how could he meet him in single combat? She advised him to write the leaf of a white book to Kraljevitch Marko to come, promising to give him three loads of money. He wrote the leaf of a white book and sent it by a black Tatar. When Kraljevitch Marko read over the leaf of the book, he began to laugh greatly: 'Yes, i' faith, emperor Soliman! what will your money do for me, if black Arapin severs my head from my shoulders?' And he said not whether he would go or not go. The emperor Soliman was anxiously expecting the Tatar, who brought to him the words, that Marko neither said that he would come, nor that he would not come. Thereupon the emperor was sorrowful, for he had no such man who would deliver his daughter. There arrived a second letter from black Arapin, that he must give him his daughter; if he did not give her, he must meet him in single combat. As he read it, he shed abundant tears. Thereupon his only daughter came to him and asked him: 'Why do you weep, emperor Soliman? Letters have ofttimes arrived for you, and you have not shed abundant tears.' He replied to her: 'Dear daughter! You see that black Arapin writes to me, that, if I do not give you to him, I must meet him in single combat; and how shall I, poor man that I am, meet him?' You know, dear father, that there is one hero, Kraljevitch Marko. Write to him, that you will give him nine loads of money, if he will come and meet him in single combat.' The emperor Soliman wrote to Kraljevitch Marko the leaf of a white book, and sent it to him by a black Tatar. When he read over the leaf of the white book he laughed greatly:

[p. 273]

[paragraph continues] 'I' faith, emperor Soliman! what will your money be to me, if black Arapin severs my head from my shoulders?' Thereupon he did not say whether he would come or not come. Sorrowful thereat, the emperor did not know what to do. Then came a third letter from black Arapin, that he was coming, and that he must prepare, would he, nould he, to give him his daughter, and that all inns and shops must be shut for fear of him. Thereupon the emperor Soliman shed abundant tears as he read it. His daughter came to him: 'Why do you weep, emperor Soliman? Letters have ofttimes arrived for you, and you have not shed abundant tears. What distress is assailing you?' 'You see, dear daughter, that black Arapin writes to me, that if I don't give you to him, I must meet him in single combat! But how shall I, poor man, meet him?' 'Write, dear father, to Kraljevitch Marko to come, and offer him twelve loads of money, and a shirt which is neither spun nor woven nor bleached, but made of nothing but pure gold, and a serpent that holds a tray in its mouth, and on the tray a golden casket, and in the casket a precious stone, by aid of which you can sup at midnight just as well as at mid-day.' He wrote the leaf of a white book and sent it to Kraljevitch Marko by a black Tatar, and offered him all that his daughter told him. When Marko read the leaf of the white book, he laughed greatly, and said: 'I' faith, emperor Soliman! what will your money do for me, if black Arapin severs my head from my shoulders?' And then, too, he did not say that he would come or not come. Thereupon came the leaf of a white hook from black Arapin, that Arapin had now got ready three hundred heroes, all in silver armour, and all chosen warriors. Then said Kraljevitch Marko to his piebald horse: 'Eh! piebald horse, my pearl! you know well that you must be faithful to me, for, if not, I shall cut off your feet at the knees, and

[p. 274]

that you must bear yourself valiantly.' And the piebald horse replied that he must saddle and mount with speed to go soon, and that black Arapin was already near. Marko saddled and mounted him, and went to the city where the emperor Soliman reigned.

Now, when he had ascertained by which road Arapin's men were coming, he presented himself to a young inn-keeper, and said, knocking at the door: 'Open, and bring some wine.' But he excused himself, saying that he dared not draw any, for all inns and shops were obliged to be shut for fear of black Arapin. But the hero said to him: 'You must bring some for me, or I shall cleave your head to the shoulders.' The innkeeper saw that it could not be otherwise, and was obliged to bring him a cup of wine. Marko drank half; and gave half to his piebald horse. Then he brought two cups, one for Marko, and one for the horse. Meanwhile, Marko went into the garden to look about him. When he got there, he saw by the side of a brook a damsel In sorrow, and wondered what ailed her that she wept so piteously, saying: 'Ah! my rivulet! I would rather abide in you, than lie behind black Arapin's back.' When Marko saw that it was Soliman's daughter, he said: What ails you, damsel, that you weep so piteously?' She replied to him: 'Go hence, unknown hero! As to what you ask me, you cannot aid me.' 'Now, only tell me; maybe I shall aid you.' 'Black Arapin will come, and will take me away from my father and mother; but I had a man, who could have set me free, but he will not. I offered him twelve loads of money, and a shirt, which is neither spun nor bleached, but is made of pure gold; and a serpent, that holds in its mouth a tray, and on the tray a golden casket, and in the casket a precious stone, by aid of which he could sup at midnight, as well as at mid-day; but he won't. The sun has not seen him, neither has the moon thrown its light

[p. 275]

upon him, nor has he seen his mother more, nor has a bird sung to him.' Marko answered her: 'Don't chatter, don't chatter; but go and say that I have arrived. I am Marko; and let him dress and furnish you handsomely, and give you all that is requisite for Arapin, and all that he shall desire.' Then she ran to her father, and told him all that Marko said. Meanwhile, while Marko was conversing with the damsel, Arapin arrived, saw an inn open, and a horse in front of it standing tethered at the entrance. He said: 'Who is this, that is not afraid of my terror?' And thereupon he said that he would soon teach him to be afraid of him. After this, he shouted an order to the bedelija; the bedelija (such is the [Turkish] name for a horse) would not stir. 'Well, I'll go thither; I won't make quarrels; maybe I shall obtain possession of the damsel without any disturbance.' And, in fact, thither he went, obtained possession of the damsel, and all that he needed was given him. Then he went again to the inn, and saw the horse again standing there. Again he was about to go to the innkeeper to slay him; but he shouted to the horse, the horse wouldn't stir. Said Arapin: 'Well, I won't make quarrels, now that I have obtained the damsel without any quarrel.' When Arapin proceeded on his way, Marko came out of the garden, and his piebald horse said to him: 'Where have you been so long, that Arapin might easily have killed me?" 'Now don't fear, my piebald; we shall soon kill him, please God, not he you.' Then he called for one more cup of wine for himself, and one for his piebald. When they had finished drinking, they started on their way, and in pursuit of Arapin. Arapin had already told his chief officer to look round to see whether any dark fog came out behind them. He looked round, but saw nothing. But when he afterwards looked round a second time, he espied a dark fog, and said to Arapin: 'Yes, my lord, a dark foul fog is coming behind

[p. 276]

us.' Scarcely had he said this, when Marko attacked, and began to slaughter, his rearguard. Arapin said to him: Don't be silly, Marko; why are you playing the fool with us? I don't know whether you are jesting, or playing the fool.' 'I am neither jesting nor playing the fool, but am in earnest.' 'Do, then, what you can; throw what you have.' 'I won't; but throw you your mace.' Marko's piebald threw himself down, and Arapin's mace went over Marko's head. Then Marko threw his mace, and felled Arapin to the ground, and the piebald leapt to Arapin, and said to Marko: 'Come, see that you cut off Arapin's head.' When the piebald leapt, Marko, too, struck with his sword, and cut off Arapin's head, and the piebald quickly leapt backwards thirty paces. Then he left Arapin's carcase on the ground, gave the head to the damsel, and said: 'Kiss him, now that he is dead, though you wouldn't when he was living.' They went home, and the emperor caused a great entertainment to be prepared, and all Marko's friends, and his father and mother, to be invited, and Marko obtained his promised reward.

So, too, he tried the fortune of combat with Musa Urbanusa. [**] He had three hearts. Marko fought with him for three nights and three white days without cessation, so that red foam already issued from Marko, while not even white foam came from Musa Urbanusa. Then Kraljevitch Marko shouted: 'Eh! sister Vila!' The Vila replied: 'I cannot help you, because the baby has fallen asleep in my arms; but don't you know your secret weapon?' Then said Kraljevitch Marko: 'Look, Musa Urbanusa, whether the sun is now rising or setting.' Musa looked at the sun, and Marko drew his knife, and ripped Musa up. Musa seized hold of him so powerfully that he barely dug his way out from under Musa, whom he had ripped up. There he

[p. 277]

lay, and Marko pushed himself sideways, and when he had extricated himself, went to look what there was in this man that was so strong. He saw that Musa had three hearts, one was beating, the second was beginning to beat a little, and the third did not yet know aught about it. On the third he saw a snake lying, and the snake said to Marko: Thank God that I didn't know of it; you wouldn't have done what you have done. But open your mouth, Marko, that I may enter into you, that you, too, may be as strong as he was.' Marko became angry, and cut the snake to pieces, saying: 'I don't need such a foul creature as you are.'

Then he proceeded on his way, and went about till firearms were invented. He went up to a shepherd, who was shooting birds. Then Marko asked him: 'What's this that you are doing?' 'Eh! you see, I'm shooting birds; and I could shoot you, also.' 'And how would you kill me with this thing? Heroes have not killed me; could you do so?' Then he reached his hand to him, and said: 'Shoot into my hand here.' He shot, and shot through his hand. Then said Marko: 'It is not worth my while to live any longer in the world; now any cuckoo could slay me; I had rather quit it.' He went into a cavern, and lives there still at the present day. Into this cavern a man was compelled to go, who was let down by a rope in a chest. When he arrived within, the Vila immediately stepped up to him, and said: 'Christian soul, why come you here?' He told her why and how. But Marko heard that somebody was conversing, and immediately asked the Vila who it was that had come in. She told him that a soul from that world had come to see what was in the cavern. Marko immediately said that he must come to him, that he might see how strong people in the world still were, and he must give him his hand. But she gave him a red-hot iron, and Marko took it, and squeezed it in his hands so that water spirted out of it, and

[p. 278]

said: 'Ah, ah I could still live in the world if no one would talk about me for three days.' He also commissioned him to tell the lords that he should come there. He gave him a letter, too, and sealed it with his own hand, and allowed him to go up. He shook the rope, and got into the chest. Then they pulled him up, and he gave the letter to the lords; but, for fear of Marko's coming, the lords did not make the letter public for people to know how Marko had gone into the cavern. The footprints of his horse are still recognised.

Footnotes

^276:* Musa, the Albanian, more properly Arbanasian.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[53]

  

LIII.--THE DAUGHTER OF THE KING OF THE VILAS.

THERE was a mother, who was expecting. As she once upon a time came out of church from mass, her pains fell upon her. Whither should she go? She concealed herself under a bridge, and became the happy mother of a son. The three Royenitzes also came thither. They are hags, who determine by what death every child is to pass from this world. One said: 'Let us kill him at once.' The second said: 'Not so; but when he grows up, then let us kill him, that his mother's sorrow for him may be greater.' But the third said: 'Let us not do so; but if he does not take the daughter of the king of the Vilas to wife, then let us kill him.' And so it was settled.

When he had grown up, he said to his mother: 'Mamma, I should like to marry.' 'Ah, my son, you say that you would like to marry; but there is no one to be married to you.' He asked her: 'Why not?' She told him: 'Yes; the Suyenitzes have pronounced your fate, that if you do not take the daughter of the king of the Vilas to wife, they will put you to death.' He then said: 'Well, I'll go in search of her; but first I'll go to ask a certain old smith; maybe he'll be able to tell me where she is.' The smith said:

[p. 279]

[paragraph continues] 'My son, it will be difficult for you to find out; but go to the mother of the moon; if she can't tell you, 'I don't know who will be better able to tell you than she.' He also gave him three pairs of iron shoes, and sent him off to the mother of the moon. 'Only, when you come to her, take her by the arm, then she will ask you at once what you want, and tell her without delay.' He went off, and just as he was on the point of wearing out the shoes, he came to the moon's mother, and took her by the arm. She asked him immediately what he wanted. He said: 'I want to find the daughter of the king of the Vilas.' She said: 'Well, my son, I don't know; but maybe my son knows. Wait till he comes home, and then you can ask him. But he mustn't find you; he would tear you to pieces at once. When he comes home, he will notice that you are here. I will conceal you, and when he asks for the third time where the Christian soul is, then say to him: "Here I am!" and he won't be able to do anything to you.' The old woman hid him under a trough. The moon came home, and asked: 'Mamma, you have a Christian soul here.' And when he asked for the third time where the Christian soul was, he announced himself: 'Here I am.' And then he could do nothing to him, otherwise he would have crushed him to powder. He asked him what he wanted. He said: 'I want to find the daughter of the king of the Vilas.' The moon: 'I don't know, but if the sun's mother doesn't know, I don't know who else does.' And he showed him the way by which he must go.

He put on the second pair of shoes, and when he was just on the point of wearing them out, he came to the sun's mother, and took her by the arm. She said to him at once: 'What do you want?' He said to her that, if she knew where the Vilas' castles were, he wanted to obtain the daughter of the king of the Vilas. She then said to him: 'Ah, my son, I

[p. 280]

don't know; but if my son doesn't know, I don't know who else does. Wait a little till he comes home.' She, too, concealed him under a trough, and he announced himself the third time that the sun asked: 'Mother, you have a Christian soul here:' saying, 'Here I am.' Neither could the sun do anything to him, but asked him what he wanted. He replied that he was in search of the Vilas' castles, and the daughter of the king of the Vilas. Then the sun said to him: 'Ah, I don't know; but if the storm-mare (that is, the storm or wind) doesn't know, then I don't know who will know.' Then he showed him the road, and said: 'When you come to a meadow where the grass is up to your knees, there the storm-mare is. If you don't find her there, wait for her; she will come to feed. Don't go directly to her, but hide behind a tree or in a hole, and when she comes, take her at once by the bridle, otherwise it will not be good for you.'

He went off; and put on the third pair of shoes, then went and went, and arrived at the meadow. When he got there, the storm-mare was not there till dawn. He hid himself under a bridge, and when she came to the bridge to drink water, he seized her by the bridle, and she asked him what he wanted. He replied that he wanted to find the daughter of the king of the Vilas. She answered him: 'Mount on my back.' He mounted, and she then said to him: 'But you mustn't fall off.' She reared; he almost fell off, but kept himself on with his foot. She reared a second time, and then, too, he almost fell off. A third time she reared, and then, too, he almost fell off, only he kept himself on with his knee. Then she said to him: 'This will be harmful to me.' She went off with him like a bird, and sped and sped up to two steps. When she came near them, the steps split in twain from the gust, but speedily closed again, and tore off a piece of the mare's tail. Then

[p. 281]

the mare said to him: 'You see how you harmed me when you almost fell off.' Then they went on till they arrived at the Vilas' castles. Then she said: 'Don't get drunk or forget, so as not to come to me.' He said that he would come, and went off upwards. They received and entertained him, and he asked them at once to give him the king's daughter. They promised that they would give her to him. Then they feasted, and ate and drank till darkness came on. And when evening arrived, he said that he must go out on his own account, and would return directly. He went off to the storm-mare. They had brought her a hundred quintals of hay. He concealed himself in the mare's tail. They sought him, and couldn't find him; but nevertheless they almost found him at dawn; but a cock began to crow, and then they could do nothing to him. Afterwards he went indoors, and they gave him again to eat and drink, and asked him where he had been. He replied: 'I slept under a hedge; I fell down, and soon fell asleep on the spot.' They gave the mare a hundred quintals of hay and several measures of oats. They enjoyed themselves the whole day till evening. He went out again and hid himself in the mare's mane. They sought him all night long, but couldn't find him; but at dawn an old witch told them that he was in the mane. They would almost have found him there, but the cocks began to crow, and they couldn't kill him now. But afterwards they killed all the cocks in the whole village. He went again into the castle. They gave him what he wanted to 'eat and drink, and the mare, as usual, a hundred quintals of hay and several measures of oats, and said to him: 'You must not go out anywhere in the evening; we will prepare everything for you that you require.' When evening came, they were on friendly terms with him, but nevertheless dispersed. He went out, and went to the mare. Where did she bestow him? She hid

[p. 282]

him under her foot in her shoe, for she had a large foot. They went to seek him again. But during the day he took two eggs, and the mare hatched them by evening in her throat, and they had almost grown up by evening. When they sought him again, they couldn't find him. At dawn they consulted the old witch. She told them that he was under the mare's hoof. They wanted now to take him out, but the cockerels which the mare had hatched in her throat began to crow. They could do nothing to him, but they wrung the two cockerels' necks. Now he said that they must give him the king's daughter, that he might depart. But the king said that he wouldn't give her to him, because he had not slept where he had prepared a bed for him. He declared that he had been drunk and had gone out, had fallen down, and gone to sleep on the spot. But the king would not believe him. Now he begged him to bring his daughter to him, that he might at any rate give her a kiss. But beforehand the mare instructed him that, when she came to kiss him, he was to seize her and pull her on to her (the mare), and they would escape with her. And he was also to take a brush with which horses are cleaned, a comb with which horses are combed, and a glass of water, and make good preparations for himself. But when the king granted his request that his daughter should come for him to kiss her, she stood on his foot in the stirrup, and as she stood to give the kiss, off started the mare, and made her way through the gate, and on and on she went. The king saw this, called for his horse, and after them. They were already far on their way. All of a sudden the mare said: 'Look round to see whether anyone is coming behind us.' He looked round and said: 'There is; he is all but catching you by the tail.' The mare said: 'Throw the brush!' He threw the brush, and a forest placed itself behind them, so that he could scarcely make his way through; the poor king could scarcely get through for thorn bushes. And they

[p. 283]

had meanwhile got a long way forward. The king, however, forced his way through, and again after them with speed, till he was again on the point of catching them. Then the mare said: 'Look round to see whether anyone is coming behind us.' He looked round and saw that he was already near, and the mare was all but caught by the tail, and said: 'He is near, and you are all but caught by the tail.' The mare said: 'Throw the comb.' He threw it, and a great chain of mountains, one after the other, placed itself there; and on they went further, so that they had already gone a great space, and the king with difficulty made his way over the mountains, and again after them, so that he was again on the point of overtaking them. The mare told him to look round to see whether anyone was coming behind them. He said that there was, and that she was all but caught by the tail. The mare said: 'Throw the glass with water.' He threw it, and a great flood of water arose, so that the king could with difficulty get across. And they had already got a long way on. No sooner had the king got out of the water, when on he went with speed, with speed, again after them, and was already on the point of overtaking them, when the mare was already near the steps, and the steps opened from the gust of wind, and the mare sped through, and they closed again, and the king couldn't proceed further through the steps, and shouted loudly: 'Son-in-law, don't go any further; I cannot do so. Let not my daughter complain that I have given her nothing.' Then he somehow threw his girdle over the steps, for he had nought else to give her save that girdle. And the girdle was such that whatsoever its owner wanted, he obtained. Then the king returned, and they remained happy. He thanked the storm-mare courteously, and went home with speed, for he bade the girdle place them at his house. They prepared a grand banquet, for they had plenty, and I was at the banquet and feasted.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 284] [54]

  

LIV.--THE WONDER-WORKING LOCK.

THERE was once upon a time a woman who had one son. This son maintained himself and his mother; he fed their one cow, and brought wood and carried it to the town for sale, and with the money bought bread to support his mother and himself. On one occasion he carried sticks to market, and bought bread and went homewards. As he went homewards with the bread, he went through a wood, came up to Some shepherds, and saw that they were going to kill a puppy, and said to them: 'Don't kill it; the poor animal has done you no wrong; give it rather to me.' The shepherds said to him: 'What will you give us? Give us that loaf' He gave them the loaf, took the dog, and carried it home. When he got home, his mother asked him: 'Have you brought any bread?' 'No, but I have bought a puppy with the bread.' She then said: 'Wherewith shall we support it, when we've nothing to eat ourselves?' 'Well, I'll go gather sticks, sell them, and buy bread.' He went a second time to gather sticks, took them and sold them, then bought bread, went through the wood, and saw where the shepherds were killing a kitten, and said to them: 'Don't kill the animal; it has done you no harm; rather give it to me?' They said to him: 'What will you give us?' He said: 'What should I give you, when I've got nothing?' The shepherds said: 'That loaf of bread.' He gave it them and carried the kitten home. The old woman was again anxiously expecting bread. When he got home his mother said to him: 'Do you bring me any bread?' 'No, but I've bought a kitten with the bread.' The old woman then said: 'You've nothing to eat yourself, much less the cat.' He then said: 'It, too, will be serviceable. I'll go gather sticks, sell them, and buy bread.' He went a third time, gathered and sold sticks, bought bread, and went

[p. 285]

homewards. Going through the wood, he saw the shepherds killing a snake, and said: 'Don't kill the snake, it has done you no harm; why should you kill it?' He begged for it, too, because he compassionated it; it was beautifully marked, and he fancied it. Then said the shepherds: 'What will you give us not to kill it?' He said: 'This little loaf of bread.' He gave it them, and they gave him the snake. He went home with the snake, and the snake said to him: 'Now feed me; when I grow up you shall carry me home.' When he got home his mother said to him: 'Why haven't you brought some bread? Why have you brought this?' He said: 'It, too, will be of service.' Then he went a fourth time to gather sticks, took them to market, sold them, bought four loaves of bread, and brought them home. Then they all ate their fill--the dog, the cat, the snake, his mother, and himself. He maintained the whole set of animals. The snake grew big; he now carried it home. It said to him: 'Do you hear? my mother will offer you gold and silver, but don't take any, but let her give you the lock which hangs behind the door. Whenever you want anything whatever, only knock on the lock; twelve young men will come, who will ask you: "What are your commands?" Only say what you wish for, and you will have it immediately.' When he carried it home, its parents asked him what he wanted for bringing their daughter home. He said according to his instructions: 'Nothing but that look, which hangs behind the door.' They said to him: 'We can't give you that; and what good would you do yourself with the lock? Let us rather give you a quantity of money, as much as you can carry.' He then said: 'I don't wish for your money; only give me the lock.' When they long refused to give it him, he was about to depart. But they saw that he ought not to go away without payment, so gave him the lock. Now, when he had obtained

[p. 286]

the lock, and had gone a little distance from the house, he knocked on the lock, and immediately out came twelve young men, who asked him: 'What are your commands?' 'Only that you place me at home at once.' He immediately stood in front of his cottage, and when his mother saw him, she rejoiced: 'Oh, my son! you have come home; how miserable I have been because you were not at home!' 'Well, mamma, don't talk! we shall now live better than we have done hitherto; I have brought you such a thing, that we shall live with ease.' Then he gently knocked on the lock, and up darted the twelve young men: 'What are your commands?' 'Food and drink for me, my mother, the dog and the cat.' And so it was. This pleased the old woman, and she loved her son still more.

Now it came into his head that he should like to get married, and he said to his mother: 'Mamma, go you to our king, and ask him to give me his daughter to wife.' His mother jeered him: 'What is this nonsense that you are talking?' 'Well, go you to the king and tell him!' The old woman did not venture to go at once; but at last go she did, and told the king that her son wished to marry his daughter. The king said to her: 'Good! provided he performs for me what I shall command him; if he breaks up these hills by to-morrow morning, as far as my eyes can see, so that the best wheat shall grow, and I shall eat a cake from it to-morrow, then it is good; if that shall not be done, he will lose his head.' She went home weeping: 'My son, you have done an evil thing; the king has said to you, you must break up all these hills by to-morrow morning, as far as the king's eyes can see, so that the best wheat shall grow there, and the king shall eat a cake from it to-morrow; and if that be not done, you will lose your head.' 'Well, mamma, if that's all he said, then she will be mine.' 'Ah! my sonny! how can this be? You cannot do it.' 'Don't

[p. 287]

talk, mamma, but let us go to sleep; you will see whether all will be ready to-morrow or no.' They took their supper, and his mother went off to sleep. Then he knocked on the lock, and out sprang the twelve young men. 'What are your commands?' 'I ask that these hills be broken up, as far as the king's eyes can see, and the best wheat must grow there.' It was done. In the morning the old woman went to the king with the cake. The king rose up and saw that it was really accomplished, and the old woman was waiting with the cake. The king came out, and she said to him: 'Good-morning; I have brought it.' Then the king said: 'Good! he has done this; now tell him that by to-morrow he must clear all the woods, as far as he can see, and the best vineyards must be there, and he' (the king) 'must eat grapes and drink new wine to-morrow; and if he does not do this, he will lose his head.' She went again weeping home, and told her son all that the king had said to her. But he only smiled and said: 'Well, well, only go to sleep, you will see whether all will be ready to-morrow or no.' When they had supped, the old woman went off to sleep, and he knocked on the lock, and the twelve young men sprang out: 'What are your commands?' 'I command that these woods be all cleared, and that they produce the best grapes.' This, too, was done. In the morning the king rose up and saw that the change was really effected. The old woman, too, was really waiting for him with grapes and new wine. The king said to her: 'Well, good! tell your son that he must accomplish one thing more, and then he will win my daughter. If he shall have as much cattle, and such a castle as I have, he will win my daughter; if not, he will lose his head.' The old woman went home again, and told him what the king said. Then he knocked on the lock, and immediately out sprang the twelve young men: 'What are your commands?' He ordered that by

[p. 288]

the morrow a better castle must be built than the king had ever seen, and that he must have more cattle than the king, and there must be a covered way from his castle to the king's, and that a better garden must be formed, and in it all kinds of trees, and all sorts of birds to sing in it. This, too, came to pass. On the morrow he caused his six best horses to be harnessed, and went to fetch the king's daughter, to go to the wedding. Then the king said that there should be wedding festivities for five years. They were married, and the wedding festivities took place. Entrance was free to everyone. The festivities had already lasted three years, when the king's resources were exhausted. Then said the young man: 'Now I will entertain for three years.' The king of the sea came, too, to the festivities, and fancied the king's daughter, whom the other had married. Once upon a time he saw how he knocked upon the lock, and that which he wanted immediately presented itself. When they went to sleep, the king of the sea stole the lock, and knocked upon it; up sprang the twelve young men: 'What are your commands?' 'That this castle and this lady be placed on the black sea.' It was done. In the morning the young man and his mother were terrified out of their wits, because they were lying in a simple cottage. But he knew at once that he had lost the lock. Then he went to the king and prayed him to take charge of his mother, that he might go to look for his castle. Well, he went to look for it, with his dog and cat. He approached that sea, saw his castle, and said: 'Cat and dog, do you see our castle? But how shall we get into it?' They went to the sea and sat down. He was weary, and fell asleep as he sat. Then said the dog and the cat: 'Let us go for the lock.' The dog said: 'You can't swim; sit on my back; I will carry you.' They went and came up to the wall. Then said the dog: 'I can't climb up a wall.' The cat said to him:

[p. 289]

[paragraph continues] 'You hang on somehow behind me.' And thus they arrived at the corridor. Now said the cat: 'You, dog, stay outside; I'll go in by myself.' The king of the sea had just such a cat. The cat went to the door and mewed: 'Miau.' Then said the king of the sea: 'Let the cat in.' Then the cat went in and took the lock so neatly that the king of the sea didn't see it; he then went to the door and mewed: 'Miau.' Then said the king of the sea: 'Let the cat out.' The cat went out, and the dog asked it: 'Have you got it?' 'I have; only go.' They went over the wall and into the sea; and when they were already not far from their master, the dog wanted to have hold of the lock, to carry it up to his master, and said to the cat: 'Give me the lock; if you don't, I will throw you into the sea.' Then they squabbled, and the lock fell into the sea, and a fish swallowed it; but the cat seized the fish, and said: 'If you don't give up the lock I will kill you.' The fish said: 'Don't kill me; I'll give you the lock,' and immediately brought the lock up. They went to their master, and carried up the lock. When their master awoke and rose up, he said: 'In what condition have you come?' They said: 'Our master, we have brought the lock.' 'Where is it?' 'Here.' Then he took it and knocked upon it, and out sprang the twelve young men: 'What are your commands?' 'I command that my castle be placed where it was, as well as that king and my wife.' It was done. Then he went into the castle, and she immediately ran to him and they kissed each other. But he caused the king of the sea to be impaled on a spit in the midst of the sea. Thus he obtained his castle back again, and lived happily with his wife, but the king of the sea was destroyed.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 290] [55]

  

LV.--THE SHE-WOLF.

THERE was an enchanted mill, so that no one could stay there, because a she-wolf always haunted it. A soldier went once into the mill to sleep. He made a fire in the parlour, went up into the garret above, bored a hole with an auger in the floor, and peeped down into the parlour. A she-wolf came in and looked about the mill to see whether she could find anything to eat. She found nothing, and then went to the fire, and said: 'Skin down! skin down! skin down!' She raised herself upon her hind-legs, and her skin fell down. She took the skin, and hung it on a peg, and out of the wolf came a damsel. The damsel went to the fire, and fell asleep there. He came down from the garret, took the skin, nailed it fast to the mill-wheel, then came into the mill, shouted over her, and said: 'Good-morning, damsel! how do you do?' She began to scream: 'Skin on me! skin on me! skin on me!' But the skin could not come down, for it was fast nailed. The pair married, and had two children. As soon as the elder son got to know that his mother was a wolf, he said to her: 'Mamma! mamma! I have heard that you are a wolf.' His mother replied: 'What nonsense you are talking! How can you say that I am a wolf?' The father of the two children went one day into the field to plough, and his son said: 'Papa, let me, too, go with you.' His father said: 'Come.' When they had come to the field, the son asked his father: 'Papa, is it true that our mother is a wolf?' His father said: 'It is.' The son inquired: 'And where is her skin?' His father said: 'There it is, on the mill-wheel.' No sooner had the son got home, than he said at once to his mother: 'Mamma! mamma! you are a wolf! I know where your skin is.' His mother asked him: 'Where is my skin?' He said: 'There, on

[p. 291]

the mill-wheel.' His mother said to him: 'Thank you, sonny, for rescuing me.' Then she went away, and was never heard of more.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[56]

  

LVI.--MILUTIN.

A CERTAIN man had two children--one a boy, and the other a girl. This man required his children to relate to him every morning what they had dreamed. Indeed, the girl related her dream, whatever she had dreamed, every morning, but the boy did not, for he dreamed every night what eventually happened to him; he dreamed that he killed a king, took to wife a count's daughter, and became king in the kingdom in which he killed the king. Exasperated at this, his father thought the reason why he did not tell his dream was because he was afraid, and drove him out along a road, and beat him so that he cried piteously. A count was driving past, and heard the child crying. He ordered his servant to go to the man, and tell him not to beat the child, but say how much he should give him to take it away himself. The man said, in reply, that he need only take it away from before his eyes. He immediately took it, and delivered it to the count, and the count took it away home. The count had one daughter, who took a great affection for the boy. It was also a custom with the count that the children were obliged to relate what they dreamed. But he would not reveal his dream to the count, and say what he had dreamed; and he had dreamed the very same dream that he had dreamed at his father's. Then the count became very angry, and caused a vault to be built in his garden, inside which he was to be thrown, and it was to be constructed of such masonry that nobody should be able to give him anything to eat, and that no light should by possibility enter it. But the count's daughter, who was very sorry

[p. 292]

for the boy, went out to the masons, and promised them a purse of money, only to construct it in such a manner that she would be able to give him food at night. This the masons did, in return for the good money. He was seven years inside, and unable to sit or lie.

Now came a time when king sent a staff to the count, and said he would attack him with an army, if he did not tell him on which side the staff opened. Now the damsel came at night, and brought the lad food, saying: 'Now, I have brought you food for the last time, because a king has sent us a staff, and my father must open it if he does not open it, he will attack us with an army. We must perish under the open sky, but you in this vault.' He replied that she was not to frighten herself, 'but go, lie down, and soon jump up and say to your father: "My dear papa, I have dreamt of good luck for us." He will say: "What?" Reply to him: "I dreamt that I should tell you that, if you will open the staff, you need only fill a tub with water, and put the staff in it; the staff will turn with that side up on which it opens."' Even so it came to pass. Her father did so, sealed up the staff on that side, and sent it to the king. The king wrote back to him: 'You have certainly done it, but not with your own stupid head. But you have one hard by your house, of whom you know not; he has done this for you.' Then he wrote a letter again to the count, and said: 'I shall send you three horses all alike, and you must tell me how many years old each is.' And all alike they were. One was one year old, the second two, and the third three years old. Then the damsel took him food, and said to him: 'Now I am bringing you food for the last time; you will have to die here, and we in the open air, for the king has sent us three horses exactly alike, and we must tell him how old each is.' He replied that she must go and lie down, and say that she had dreamt thus: that he must

[p. 293]

prepare three heaps of oats of three different years, and let the horses go to the oats, and they would go of themselves each to his own heap; the one which was one year old would go to the one-year-old oats, the second to the second, and the third to the third heap. She told him this. And it came to pass just as she told him. Then he wrote in reply to the king, and the king to him: 'Certainly, you have done this, but not with your own stupid head; but you have another who does it for you, of whom you are not aware. But I shall send you one thing more. I shall send you, on a given day, at the hour when you will be at dinner, a war-mace, weighing three hundredweight; it will strike the spoon out of your mouth. You must throw it back to me just as I threw it to you.' Indeed, this, too, came to pass. The mace flew in, knocked his spoon out of his hands, and flew off with speed into the cellar, inside which it stuck so fast that a score of soldiers couldn't move, much less throw, it. Now the count assembled, and invited all people, but no one was able to do it. She took him food again, and said to him: 'You have set us free twice, but certainly the third time you will not be able to do so, and now you will die here, and all of us in the open air.' He then asked her what sort of work it was that had to be done. She told him, and he answered: 'Go home and lie down, then get up and say that you have dreamt that no one else but I can do it, so I tell you; but the count will not believe you, yet will think, since you have twice dreamed with success, that possibly now, too, it may be true.' And so it came to pass. The count caused him to be dug out. He saw how weak he was, and said: 'I am stronger than he, but I can't throw it; how, then, can he throw it?' He then said: 'Go to a certain king; he has nine hundred cows, and has them all registered when each was calved. Buy for me one cow, which is neither more nor less than nine years old, and

[p. 294]

whatever he says you are to pay for it, pay. If you pay one kreutzer less, I shall be two hundredweight lighter.' Well, he went thither, and inquired whether he had such a cow. The king answered that he had. Then he asked the price. The king replied: 'Nine thousand pieces of silver.' He paid them, drove it home, and had it slaughtered immediately. The young man then said that he must be three months by himself in a house, without anybody being allowed to go in to him. Now he took at once two pounds of beef, but did not eat the flesh, but only the soup. This lasted for three months. Well, the cook told the count that he would not eat the flesh, in order to serve his own interests. Then the count went himself to him, and asked him why he would not eat the flesh. He replied that something must be brought him to eat. Now he took a piece, threw it upon the wall, and said to the count: 'You see the flesh has fallen down, and the soup has stuck to the wall; and so it is with me: the soup abides with me, and the flesh goes down from me.' Then he went out to look at the mace. He was already able to move it. Then he went in for three months to eat. Then he was able, with his left hand, to throw it two hundred fathoms high into the air. He went in once more to eat for three months. Now he was exceedingly strong, and told the count to write freely to the king, that on such and such a day, at such and such an hour, the mace would arrive, and knock the spoon out of his mouth at dinner. In fact, so it was. He threw it a hundred and twenty-five hours walk into the other kingdom. Now the king saw that he had done this also. Then he wrote to him: 'Certainly you have done all that I told you, but not with your own stupid head, but he has done it for you, whom you caused to be walled up in a vault. But you must send him here to me, that I may see him.' But he wanted to slay him. Now, the count was unwilling to let him go, but,

[p. 295]

nevertheless, he was obliged to do so. 'But do you know what, count? Cause all your people to be summoned hither, and we will select as many as ever we can that resemble me.' There were only nine such, and he was himself the tenth. Now he told him to have exactly similar uniforms made for them all, so that, at any rate, no one would know one to be different from another, and to provide similar horses for all, and then he would go thither. Even so it came to pass. Then the ten went. But before they arrived at the town, he said to them: 'Indeed, you don't know why we are going thither; we are going to be put to death; but I tell you not to be in any wise afraid. This king will give you the word of command when we enter: "Milutin (such was the boy's name), dismount!" Then you must all dismount so that no one is behindhand, but all alike, and at once. Then he will say: "Milutin, go into the house!"--all go into the house. "Milutin, shut the door!"--all off to shut it. "Milutin, take your seat at table!"--all do it at once. "Milutin, go to bed!"--all off to bed at once.' Even so it was. Thus the king could in no wise recognise him, and did not venture to slaughter them, but ordered his servant to conceal himself under a bed, and listen which spoke most wisely, and put a mark upon him. Now they all lay down, and began to converse as to what would come out of this. Milutin then said: 'Doubtless, till now he has not recognised me, and will ride after me, and will overtake us; but never mind that, only kneel down and pray to God. Then notice well: if I first emit fire out of my mouth, kill yourselves; but if he emits it first, have no fear whatever; this signifies to you that human flesh will seethe in human blood.' The man under the bed heard this speech, and cut off a piece from the heel of his boot. Morning arrived, and Milutin told them that each must look well at his clothes: maybe there would be some mark on

[p. 296]

someone's uniform. But all at once he observed that just his boot-heel had been cut off, and said: All give me your boots, that I may cut off each of the heels just as I have mine cut off.' Now the king came to summon them: 'Milutin, come to breakfast!' and they all went at once. And the king saw that they all had a similar mark, and, therefore, did not know which to put to death. Then he reprimanded the servant. Now said the king: 'Milutin, go home!' and they all went homeward at once. But erelong the king recognised Milutin by his horse--for he had the horse from the count--and overtook him. They immediately knelt down, as he had previously bidden them, and he began first to fight on horseback, but nothing came of it. Then they both dismounted from their horses, and fought thus, each leaping against the other so that the earth quaked under them. Thus they fought terribly for some time. But all at once they observed that the king emitted fire out of his mouth, and then Milutin afterwards. Then the king spat pure fire out of his mouth at Milutin, and Milutin also spat fire. The two fought on in this frightful manner; but suddenly Milutin overcame the king, threw him down, cut off his head, and carried it home to the count. Now all was merriment, and Milutin married the count's daughter, took possession of the realm of the king whom he had slain, and there was a grand festival. That's the end.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 297]

  

ILLYRIAN-SLOVENISH STORIES.

I AM afraid that our delightful friend Oliver Goldsmith has preoccupied the British mind with a certain amount of prejudice against the region,

'Where the rude Carinthian boor
 On strangers shuts th' inhospitable door.'

[paragraph continues] But if the said rude and inhospitable person had been addressed in a tongue 'understanded of the people,' his reception of the 'Traveller' might possibly have been very different. Be that as it may, the folk-lore tales of the Styrian and Carinthian Slavonians are full of interest, and in them we certainly find the fullest account of the Vilas, and even a Vila marriage with a human being, which ends in an unfortunate separation, like those in Irish legends between mermaids and men. [*No. 57] gives us a singular variant of 'Cinderella,' in which the circumstances are different down to the conclusion, which is similar to that of the Bulgarian version, [*No. 37]. [*No. 58] carries us completely into wonderland, where several old acquaintances will meet us in new dresses and relations. In [*No. 57] we have a singular legend of a white snake, an animal connected with which there are also superstitions in the Scotch Highlands.

The backwardness of the Slovenes is mainly due to the

[p. 298]

ferocity with which Protestantism was stamped out by Ferdinand II., who, as well as his father, Ferdinand I., wrote his name in blood in the annals of Bohemia. (See Morfill's 'Slavonic Literature,' pp. 176, 177.)

As regards the language, the dual is as fully developed as in Lusatian.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[57]

  

LVII.--THE FRIENDSHIP OF A VILA AND OF THE MONTHS.

A WICKED woman married a poor man, who had already a little daughter named Maritza. Afterwards God gave her a daughter of her own, whom she loved and cherished more than her own eyes. On her stepdaughter, who was a good and very handsome child, she could scarcely bear to cast a look; therefore she drove her about, teased and tormented her, in order as soon as possible to make an end of her; she threw her the poorest remnants of food and everything, just as she would have done to a dog. Indeed, she would have given her a snake's tail to eat, if she had had one at hand; and instead of a bed, she sent her to sleep in an old trough.

When her so-called mother saw that the girl, in spite of all this, was good and patient, and grew handsomer than her daughter, she thought and thought how to find a pretext to get rid of the orphan out of the house, and devised one.

One day she sent her daughter and stepdaughter to wash wool; to her own daughter she gave white wool, to her stepdaughter black, and said to her with sharp threats: 'If you don't wash the black wool as white as my daughter will hers, don't come home any more, or else I shall beat you out of the house.' The poor stepdaughter wept piteously, entreated her, and said that it was impossible for her to do this. But all in vain. Seeing that there was no mercy for

[p. 299]

her, she tied up the wool and went weeping after her half-sister. When they came to the water, they undid their bundles, and began to wash, when a beautiful fair damsel from somewhere joined and saluted them: 'Good luck, friends! do you want any help?' The stepmother's daughter said with a scornful laugh: 'I want no help; my wool will soon be white; but our stepdaughter's yonder will not be so in a hurry.' Thereupon the strange damsel stepped up to the sorrowful Maritza, saying: 'Come! let us see whether that wool will allow itself to be washed white.' Both began immediately to rinse and wash, and in a jiffy the black wool became as white as fresh-fallen snow. When they had finished washing, her fair friend vanished nobody knew whither. The stepmother, seeing the white wool, was amazed and angry, because she had no excuse for driving her stepdaughter away.

Some time after this came sharp cold and snow. The wicked stepmother was continually thinking how best to persecute her unfortunate stepdaughter, and now ordered her: 'Take a basket and go off to the mountain; there gather me ripe strawberries for the new year. If you don't bring me them, it will be better for you to stay on the mountain.' The orphan Maritza wept piteously, entreated her, and said: 'How shall poor I procure ripe strawberries in sharp winter cold?' But all in vain. She was obliged to take the basket and go.

As she was going all in tears over the mountain she met twelve young men, whom she saluted courteously. They received the salutation in a friendly manner, and asked her: 'Whither are you wading, dear girl, in the snow thus in tears?' She told them the whole story prettily. The young men said to her: 'We will help you if you will tell us which month of the whole year is the best?' Maritza said in reply: 'They are all good, but the month of March is the

[p. 300]

best, for it brings us most hope.' They were pleased with her answer, and said: 'Go into the first glen on the sunny side; there you will get as many strawberries as you wish.' And indeed she brought her stepmother a basketful of most excellent strawberries for the new year, and told her that the young men whom she had met on the mountain had shown them to her.

Some days later, when the weather had become milder, the mother said to her own daughter: 'Go now into the mountain for strawberries; maybe you will find those young men, and they will give you similar good fortune, for they have shown themselves so wonderfully kind to our greasy stepdaughter.' The daughter dressed herself grandly, took the basket, and skipped off merrily on to the mountain. When she got there, she did actually meet the twelve young men, to whom she said haughtily: 'Show me where the strawberry-plants grow, as you showed our stepdaughter.' The young men said: 'Good! provided you guess which month is the best of the whole year.' She answered quickly: 'They are all bad, and the month of March is the worst.' But at that speech the whole mountain clouded over in a jiffy, and a storm beat upon her so that she scarcely panted home alive. The young men were the twelve months.

Meanwhile the goodness and beauty of the ill-used step-daughter was noised about in the district, and a young, rich and honourable lord arranged with her stepmother to come on such and such a day with his retinue to betroth the stepdaughter to be his wife. The stepmother, jealous of the orphan, did not tell her a single word of this, but thought to thrust her own daughter surreptitiously into this good fortune.

When the appointed evening came the infamous step-mother packed her stepdaughter off in good time to the trough to sleep, then cleared up the house, prepared supper, dressed out her daughter to the best of her ability, and placed

[p. 301]

her at table with some knitting in her hands. Thereupon up came the betrothal party; the stepmother welcomed them, conducted them into the house, and said to them: 'There is my dear stepdaughter.' But what good was it? For in the house they had a cock, who began with all his might, and without intermission, to crow: 'Kukuriku, pretty Maritza in trough! kukuriku, pretty Maritza in trough!' and so forth. When the betrothal party understood and comprehended the cock's crowing, they insisted that the real stepdaughter must come out of the trough, and when they saw her, they could not sufficiently express their admiration at her beauty and grace, and took her away with them that very evening, and the wicked stepmother and her daughter remained put to shame before all people. Maritza was happy with her husband and with all her house to a great age and an easy death, for a Vila and all the months were her friends.

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[58]

  

LVIII.--THE FISHERMAN'S SON.

ONCE upon a time there was a lord on the Danube who had a fisherman to catch fish for him. This lord was preparing a great banquet, and ordered his fisherman to catch three hundredweight of fish in three days. On the first day the fisherman went early in the morning to catch the fish. But he could not obtain any. The second day he went again very early in the morning. He made the round of the water, but again took none. The third day came. The fisherman went to catch fish, and went on till mid-day, but could not net any. In the afternoon he determined to go home by the waterside, and carried himself as if he were very much out of sorts. Suddenly up sailed a striped boat. In the boat sat a gentleman clad in green. He

[p. 302]

questioned the fisherman saying: 'Man, why are you so sorrowful here by the water?' The fisherman said: 'How should I not be sorrowful? My lord ordered me to catch three hundredweight of fish in three days; to-day is the last day, and I have not obtained any.' Then said the gentleman: 'Promise me that which you don't know that you have, and you shall to-day catch plenty.' The fisherman thought to himself: 'What I don't know that I have, I shall easily do without, if I do promise him.' And the gentleman at the same time added: 'And I will wait twenty years. In twenty years you will be able to fulfil your promise.' 'Agreed,' said the fisherman. He cast his nets and drew them out full of fish. He cast them a second time, and it was just the same. He cast them once more. The gentleman said to him: 'Only send home for them to come with a waggon and four horses.' They came with four horses. They packed the fish in, so that they scarcely drew them with the four horses. But before they went home the gentleman asked the fisherman: 'But do you know what you have promised me?' The fisherman said: 'My lord, I do not. What I don't know that I have, I have promised you, be it what it may.' The gentleman smiled, and said: 'You don't know that your wife will be the mother of a son, and this son you have promised to me. When twenty years have elapsed, you must just bring him here.' Then the fisherman took the fish home. On the one hand he was glad, on the other very downcast. When he brought them home his lord began to grumble, saying: 'You're a thorough fool! Why did a messenger come to me to say that you could not obtain any? Now you have brought me such a quantity that I hardly know where to stow them.' The fisherman excused himself, and related to his lord the whole series of occurrences from beginning to end. Afterwards he put a question to his lord: 'God only knows how it will be now,

[p. 303]

since I have done such an evil thing, that I have promised him my son.' His lord said: 'What of that? Twenty years is a long time. By then all may be changed.'

It came to pass. The fisherman's wife became the mother of a boy. He grew up right handsome. When he became a little older they sent him to school. At school he learnt so well, that at sixteen he had learnt enough to be ordained a priest. But his father and mother said: 'Not a priest, for he is promised. Let us rather place him for four years more in the black school.' When he had completed the course of the black school, he came back to the Danube, with all before him in the future, as if he were about to succeed, and behind in the past, because he had already been successful. Then said he to his father: 'Father, now it is time for us to go.' The father: 'To go? whither?' The son: 'Whither you promised me.' The father: Who promised you any whither?' The son: 'What? don't you know to whom you promised me twenty years ago? Let us go to that piece of water, where you then went to catch fish.' The father became very sorrowful. The son then said: 'Don't be afraid. Only quickly coat over arm and follow me. Only you must do what I instruct you to do. If you obey me, no harm will happen to you and me.' On the way he also instructed his father as follows: 'When we come to that piece of water, the striped boat will sail up just as when you caught the fish. In it will sit the gentleman in green to whom you promised me. The gentleman will push the boat to the shore in shallow water. I shall step on it with one foot, and stand on dry land with the other. Then say: "My son, I commend you to God the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost. May these three always be with you!" When you have uttered these holy words I shall spring into the boat.' Everything happened exactly as the son told his father and instructed him

[p. 304]

on the way. The striped boat sailed up on the water. In it was the gentleman dressed in green. The son stepped with one foot on the boat, and stood with the other on dry land. His father commended him to God the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit. The son sprang on board the boat, and the gentleman pushed it from the shore. All at once all sank, the boat, the gentleman, and the son. The father was terribly frightened, and cried out at the top of his voice: 'Jesus, Maria! my son has gone down to hell!' He then crept home very sorrowful.

His son passed through the water into a town which is called Perdonkorten. [**] In this town all the population was enchanted. He walked and walked about the town, but nowhere was there anybody. Hunger took possession of him, but he could get nothing to eat. He bethought himself of going to catch some fish. He went to the water, caught some, lit a fire, cooked them, and ate his fill. He then went into the shade, laid himself down, and fell asleep. He dreamt that he was told to go to pass the night in a lordly castle, to seat himself at table, to light a taper on each side of him, and wait. He did according as he had dreamt. The clock struck midnight, when suddenly the door opened outside of itself. A huge snake glided into the house. It came up opposite the young man, and besought him: 'Kiss me.' He cursed it, and said: 'Take thyself off from me, Satan! Thou hast no power over me.' The snake retired through the door. Thereupon day broke. The young man walked and walked again about the town. He saw here and there carriages ready harnessed, but no human being. In the afternoon he went again to the water to catch fish. When he had eaten his fill, he went into the shade. He lay down, and soon fell asleep. Erelong he dreamt what would have happened, if he had kissed the snake. He woke up, and thought:

[p. 305]

[paragraph continues] 'This evening I will go back, and will kiss it if it comes. In fact, he went again into the same house, seated himself at table, lit two tapers, and waited. The clock struck twelve. The door opened. Through it glided a very much larger snake, with two heads. It came up the room opposite him, and besought him again: 'Kiss me!' Terror seized him, for it was much more horrible than the one he had seen the preceding night. Therefore he cursed it again: 'Take thyself off from me, Satan! Thou hast no power over me.' The snake again quitted the house. Afterwards day broke. He went again into the town, caught fish, and ate his fill. When he had eaten, he went into the shade, lay down, and fell asleep. Ere long he dreamt again: 'Thou wouldst, nevertheless, have only done rightly if thou hadst kissed the snake.' He woke up, and said: 'This evening I will kiss it, even if it appears still more terrible.' In the evening he went into the same house. He seated himself at table, lit two tapers, and waited. When the tower clock struck twelve, the door opened. A terrible snake glided in. It had three heads, and was still larger than the one he saw the preceding evening. It came puffing opposite him. It began to twine round him, and beseech him: 'Kiss me!' He pressed his lips to it, and kissed it.

As soon as he had kissed it, the snake turned into a beautiful maiden, as beautiful as a damsel could be. The snake was the enchanted daughter of the lord of the castle. After the kiss, all belonging to the castle, and the whole town, were disenchanted. Erelong the father and mother of the disenchanted daughter came into the room. They welcomed him with the greatest joy. The father said to him: 'Friend, I give you my kingdom and my daughter, if she pleases you.' He replied: 'Let us wait a bit, that we may make a little acquaintance with each other.' Thereupon they prepared a grand supper. They supped, and

[p. 306]

did not go to bed till late. In the morning they got up. The young man and the damsel went a walk in the town. The whole town rejoiced over him, and pointed at him, saying: 'That is our deliverer.'

Now the young man was content with all. Only he still felt sorry, when he bethought himself: 'Here am I in such good fortune, while my father on the Danube is thinking that I have fallen into the abyss of hell. If I could only just go to my father on the Danube, to tell him of my luck, I should then be completely content.' Thereupon the damsel. said to him: 'I have something such that you could easily go to your father, if you would but be sure to come back.' He said: 'You know that I shall come. Nowhere have I had such good fortune as here.' Now they agreed that she would wait for him seven years, if he did not return before. The damsel gave him a certain ring, and said: 'Here is this ring, look through it, and think to yourself that you would like to be with your father by the Danube, and you will find yourself there. When you wish to come back to me, look again through the ring, and think to yourself that you would like to be with me, and you will find yourself here with me. But you must not show it to anybody, lest you lose it. If you lose it, it will be very difficult for you ever to come to us.' The young man looked through the ring, thought to himself that he would like to be with his father by the Danube, and in a moment there he was. His father and mother were very, very glad to see him safe and sound once more. They asked him all manner of questions. He related to them how he had darted through the water into an enchanted city, and what had been his hap afterwards. The whole household jumped for joy at hearing how fortunate he had been. Especially rejoiced was his mother, who walked continually on tiptoe for joy. Afterwards his father took him to his lord, for whom he still

[p. 307]

caught fish. There, again, the whole household rejoiced greatly over him. The lord had two daughters. Erelong he said to him: 'Stay with us. I will give you a portion of my kingdom and one daughter, if it pleases you.' He thought to himself: 'There there awaits me a whole kingdom, and a larger one than this. The lady, too, there, is handsomer than this one.' Nevertheless he said within himself: 'Suppose I stay here a day or two. I shall easily go back before the time is out. Seven years don't pass so quickly.'

It came to pass that he went a walk one day with the two daughters. On the road the silly fellow showed them the ring, and told them how he had come back into that country. They thought to themselves: 'Behold! if we could but take that ring from him, then he would be glad to stay with us.' They went a little farther on, and one of them said: 'Let us sit down a bit here in the shade.' They sat down on the grass under a tree. They had not sat there long when one of them said to him: 'Listen! listen! What have you got in your hair?' He: 'I don't know that I've anything.' She: You have something; you have indeed. Let me look at your head.' Now she began to examine and stroke his head till he fell fast asleep. The other, on seeing this, put her hand quickly into his pocket, and took out his ring. They rose up, and prolonged their walk. They walked and walked about the country, when he put his hand into his pocket, and found that the ring was no longer there. He said: 'I've lost my ring. What shall I do now?' They said: 'Let us go back. We will look for it. Maybe we shall find it.' They went back to the selfsame place where they had been sitting. They helped him to look for it carefully. They looked for it in vain, for one of them had got it in her own pocket.

After this, he remained five years more in that house. When the fifth year had elapsed, he said: 'This won't do:

[p. 308]

[paragraph continues] If I remain here, I shall never get to Perdonkorten. Now go I must. There will be two years for me, eventually, to get there.' Once upon a time he was benighted. He went through thickets, where there was no living soul. He espied a light on another hill. He said: 'Thither I must go. There will be people there.' He went thither. There was nobody at home but a woman. He asked whether they would take him in for the night. The woman said to him: 'I would willingly take you in for the night, but I do not advise you to stay here. My three brothers are three thieves. When night is over, they will come home, and will soon put you to death.' He said: 'Never fear! Only bring me a pint of wine, that I may drink and wait for them here at the table.' When night was over, up came the three brothers home. He sat in the house at the table, and busied himself with the wine. They asked him: 'Who are you?' He replied: 'I don't know who I am. I'm a poor fellow who roams hither and thither in the world, wheresoever I must.' They said: 'But to what family do you belong?' He said: 'That also I don't know. All through I am knocking about in the world. Nowhere am I at home.' They said: 'What is your name? How do you write yourself?' He had gone through the course of study at the black school; therefore he knew how they wrote their names, and that they had lost a brother. He therefore told them their surname, and the name of their lost brother. They said: 'You are indeed our own brother, whom we lost many years ago.' He said: 'It is easy to see that I am.' They asked him: 'But are you willing to take up our business?' He said: 'Why not, if your business is honest, and one can easily get one's living from it?' They said:

From our handicraft a living is got right easily. At home we do nothing at all, and have always plenty to eat and plenty to drink.' He inquired: 'What have you gained to-day?'

[p. 309]

[paragraph continues] They replied: 'To-day we have gained more than we ever gained before. We have obtained shoes: whoever puts them on will fly two hundred miles in half an hour. We have obtained a mantle: whoever wraps himself in it, nobody sees him. We have obtained a hat: whoever puts it on his head, and throws it before him, hills open themselves to him, so that he follows it whithersoever he will.' He: 'But is this true?' They: 'It is.' He: Now, then, let's try this dress on me. We'll see how it will fit me.' He put on the shoes, wrapped himself in the mantle, clapped the hat on his head, and stepped a little way from them. He asked them: 'But don't you really see me?' They said: 'Nobody sees you.' Then he gave a jump, so that the earth quaked. They hurried after him, as it were, in the dark; but he escaped them, for nobody saw him.

He then flew to the place where the sun rises. He thought to himself: 'The sun gives light in all regions; he will therefore know the way to Perdonkorten.' When he came to the sun's house, he asked the servant: 'Is my lord the sun at home?' The servant: 'He is not; he is gone to give light on the earth. He will come home in the evening. You must wait for him if you want to speak with him. Only I tell you that when he comes home, there will be such a heat, that you will curl up like a rasher of bacon, if you don't hide yourself.' The traveller: 'If it is so, I will bury myself in the ground. When the sun comes home, come and call me.' He went, and did bury himself deep in the ground. When the sun came home and flew down, the servant came to call him. Now, then, my lord the sun is at home.' He got up and went to the sun. When he came into the house the sun asked him: 'What have you got to say?' He said: 'I have come to ask you the road to the city of Perdonkorten. You enlighten all lands; surely you know the way thither.' The sun: 'I

[p. 310]

don't know the way thither. It must be somewhere among hills and narrow dales, where I never go. The moon gives light more in hollow places; you must go where she rises.'

He went. He leaped, and was at once at the place where the moon rises. Neither was she at home. He asked her lady's maid: 'Whither has my lady moon gone that she is not at home?' The maid: 'She is gone to give light on the earth.' He: 'I will wait, then.' The maid: 'It is dangerous to wait. When she flies faintly shining home, such a frost will be caused that you will stiffen like an icicle.' He: 'I'll bury myself therefore in the ashes. When she returns home, come and call me.' Towards morning the moon came freezing home. He shivered in the ashes, but didn't stiffen. When the moon had put herself to rights, her maid went to call him, and said: 'Now come; the moon is at home.' He rose out of the ashes, shivered a little, and went to the moon. When he entered the house, the moon asked him: 'What do you want? What have you got to say?' He said: 'Nothing wrong, my lady moon--nothing wrong. I have come to ask you the road to the city of Perdonkorten. You throw light into all dark holes; therefore, you surely know which way to go thither.' The moon: 'I don't know that. It must be among such hills that I never get there. If you wish to learn it, you must go where the wind rises. He flies over all abysses, therefore he will surely be able to indicate you the way thither.'

In a jiffy he was there. The wind was just then at home. He asked him: 'My lord the wind, do you know the way to the city of Perdonkorten?' The wind: 'Of course I do. Anyhow, I'm going thither to-morrow morning at three. The king's daughter there is betrothed, and I am going to blow for them at the wedding, that it may not be

[p. 311]

too warm. But I shall go through such abysses and such rocks, that I don't know whether you will be able to follow me.' The traveller: 'My lord the wind, never fear. No rock will stop me. I have such a hat, that if I throw it, the ground opens and I go after it whithersoever I will.' The wind: 'Well, then, let us go.' They went at three. They came to a terrible rock. The wind roared, and made his way by a hole through the terrible rock. He could not follow him. Therefore he took off his hat and threw it against the rock. The rock opened. The wind glided on in front and he followed quickly behind.

When it was half-past four in the morning, they had made their way to the city of Perdonkorten. The wind went to blow at the wedding that it mightn't be too warm for them. He went into the church, seated himself on a bench, and waited for the wedding-party. At eleven music was heard, and fifty couples of wedding guests came into the church. One was more handsomely dressed than the rest. His reverence the chaplain proceeded to say mass for them. After mass he began to take the marriage service. He was sitting on a bench, but nobody saw him, because he had that mantle on. Suddenly he rose from the bench, and gave a thump on the chaplain's books, so that they fell with a bang on the floor. The chaplain said: One of you two must have such a sin upon him, that you are unfit to receive this sacrament.' Now the bride began to relate how someone had once come to deliver them. With this person a mutual engagement had been made that she would wait for him seven years, etc. The chaplain: 'How much time has elapsed?' She: 'Five years and a half.' The chaplain: Now you two must wait a year and a half more. If in that time nothing is heard of him, then you may marry.' The chaplain, moreover, asked her: 'Which would you rather have, this one or that other?' The lady: 'I should prefer

[p. 312]

the other, should he come. But I know that I shall never see him again.'

He heard these words, and they pleased him. Now they went home from the church. He who had thumped the books walked amidst the wedding-party, but nobody saw him, because he had the mantle on. The damsel's father thought it hard thus to send the wedding guests away home, therefore he gave them several cups of wine. The guests drank the wine, and lie went up and down in the house, but nobody saw him. When all the wedding guests had taken themselves off home, he doffed his mantle, hung it on a peg, and they recognised him as their deliverer. The beautiful damsel met him in the middle of the house. She threw her arms round his neck, and said: 'Behold! to-day I should have been married to another husband, if God had not protected me.'

Hereupon they soon prepared a marriage with this new bridegroom. They went to the wedding. The wedding passed off successfully. They got ready a right handsome wedding-feast for them. They had plenty of everything--plenty to drink, and plenty to eat. Moreover, they gave me wine to drink out of a sieve, and bread to eat out of a glass, and one on the back with a shovel. After that I took myself off.

Footnotes

^304:* German, 'Wundergarten.'

     
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[59]

  

LIX.--THE WHITE SNAKE.

ONCE upon a time snakes multiplied so prodigiously in the district of Osojani (Ossiach), that every place swarmed with them. The peasants in that district were in evil case. The snakes crept into the parlours, the churches, the dairies, and the beds. People had not even quiet at table, for the hungry snakes made their way into the dish. But the greatest terror was caused by a frightfully large white snake,

[p. 313]

which was several times seen attacking the cattle at Ososcica (Gorlitz Alpe). The peasants did not know how to help themselves; they instituted processions, and went on pilgrimages, that God might please to remove that terrible scourge from them. But neither did that help them.

When the poor people were in the greatest distress, and knew not how to act to rid themselves of this plague, one day an unknown man came into the district, who promised to put an end to every one of the snakes, provided they could assure him that they had seen no great white snake. 'We have not seen one at all,' was the reply of some of the number that had collected round the stranger.

Then he caused a great pile to be constructed round a tall fir, and when he had climbed to the top of the fir, he ordered them to set the whole pile on fire on all sides, and afterwards to run quickly aside.

When the flame had risen on all sides against the tall fir, the unknown man took a bone pipe out of his pocket, and began to blow it so powerfully that everybody's ears tingled. Quickly up rushed and crowded from all quarters a vast number of snakes, lizards, and salamanders to the pile, and, driven by some strange force, all sprang into the fire and perished there. But all at once a mightier and shriller hiss was heard from Ososcica, so that all present were seized with fear and dread. The man on the fir, at hearing it, trembled with terror: 'Woe is me! there is no help for me!' so said he. 'I have heard a white snake hiss; why did you thus mislead me? But be so compassionate as not to forget every year to give alms to the poor on my behalf.'

Scarcely had the poor man uttered these words, when a terrible snake wound its way up with a great noise, like a furious torrent, over the sharp rocks, and plunged into the lake, so that the foam flew up. It soon swam to the other

[p. 314]

side of the lake, and, all exasperated, rushed to the burning pile, reared itself up against the fir, and pushed the poor man into the fire. The snake itself struggled and hissed terribly in the fire, but the strong fire soon overpowered it.

Thus perished, along with the whole lizard race, the monstrous snake which had done so much harm to the cattle. The peasants were again able without fear to carry on their occupations, and the shepherds at Ososcica to pasture their cattle without anxiety. The grateful people have not up to the present time forgotten the promise of their ancestors, and every year on that selfsame day distribute gifts of corn to the poor.

    
Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, by A.H. Wratislaw, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

[60]

  

LX.--THE VILA.

ONE warm summer day a tall and handsome young man of Veprim was going over the hill Uczka, and found by the path on the grass a beautiful maiden, dressed in white, with a sun-kerchief, and was astounded on beholding the beauty of her countenance. Not wishing to awaken her, he tore off a large branch, and fixed it quietly in the ground, to form a shade for her. Erelong she woke up, saw the branch which had been planted, herself in the shade, and the young man standing by her. She asked him: 'Are you, young man, the person who set up this shade for me?' He replied: 'I am; for your appearance pleased me, and I was afraid that the sun would scorch you.' She said to him further: 'What do you want for this kindness?' The young man replied merrily: 'Allow me to behold your most beautiful countenance, and to take you to wife.' 'Good! I am content to take you for my husband,' said she; 'but you must know that I am a Vila. But you must never utter my name; if you speak my name Vila, I must quit you at once.' He promised that he would not, conducted

[p. 315]

her home, told his parents all that had happened, and how it had happened, only did not tell them that his bride was a Vila. She pleased them, and they willingly consented to the match. Erelong they were wedded. The two lived for some years in cheerful happiness; domestic prosperity continued in every shape and form, and she bore him a little daughter, beautiful as an angel.

Some years afterwards the young man one summer morning heard it thundering quite early. He got up, went to the window, saw that a terrible storm was brewing, and said to his wife: 'Wife, it is a pity and a great misfortune that we haven't cut our wheat; the hail will beat it all down.' She said to him: 'Never fear; it won't beat ours down.' After saying this she rose and went in front of the door. When she came back a terrible hailstorm began to fall. Her husband said reproachfully: 'I told you we should lose all our wheat.' She laughed at him, and said in reply: 'Go to the threshing-floor; you'll see that it hasn't beaten it down for us.' When the hail ceased, the husband did go to the threshing-floor, and there saw all the wheat nicely put together in sheaves, and, on returning, called out in utter astonishment: 'Ah, she is a Vila! she is a Vila!' But that moment she vanished. Her husband remained sad and sorrowful with his little daughter without his Vila wife.

The Vila mother still came back from time to time, visible only to her little daughter, helping her in all needs, as the most careful mother, until she grew up to a marriageable age. When the Vila's daughter came to the proper time of life, she married and was the ancestress of the present family of Polharski.--So the story.

 

 

THE END.

 

 

Elliot Stock, Paternoster Row, London.

 

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: sglt.txt =====



The Story of the Glittering Plain, by William Morris, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

THE STORY OF THE GLITTERING PLAIN

OR THE LAND OF LIVING MEN

by William Morris

Longmans, Green and Co.

[1913]

Originally published Kelmscott Press

[1891]

The Story of the Glittering Plain, by William Morris, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

CONTENTS

[*Chapter I. Of Those Three Who Came to the House of the Raven]

[*Chapter II. Evil Tidings Come to Hand at Cleveland]

[*Chapter III. The Warriors of the Raven Search the Seas]

[*Chapter IV. Now Hallblithe Taketh the Sea]

[*Chapter V. They Come unto the Isle of Ransom]

[*Chapter VI. Of A Dwelling of Man on the Isle of Ransom]

[*Chapter VII. A Feast in the Isle of Ransom]

[*Chapter VIII. Hallblithe Taketh Ship Again Away from the Isle of Ransom]

[*Chapter IX. They Come to the Land of the Glittering Plain]

[*Chapter X. They Hold Converse with Folk of the Glittering Plain]

[*Chapter XI. The Sea-Eagle Reneweth His Life]

[*Chapter XII. They Look on the King of the Glittering Plain]

[*Chapter XIII. Hallblithe Beholdeth the Woman who Loveth Him]

[*Chapter XIV. Hallblithe has Speech with the King Again]

[*Chapter XV. Yet Hallblithe Speaketh with the King]

[*Chapter XVI. Those Three Go Their Ways to the Edge of the Glittering Plain]

[*Chapter XVII. Hallblithe Amongst the Mountains]

[*Chapter XVIII. Hallblithe Dwelleth in the Wood Alone]

[*Chapter XIX. Hallblithe Builds Him A Skiff]

[*Chapter XX. So Now Saileth Hallblithe Away From the Glittering Plain]

[*Chapter XXI. Of the Fight of the Champions in the Hall of the Ravagers]

[*Chapter XXII. They go from the Isle of Ransom and Come to Cleveland by the Sea]

The Story of the Glittering Plain, by William Morris, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[f01]

CHAPTER I: OF THOSE THREE WHO CAME TO THE HOUSE OF THE RAVEN

It has been told that there was once a young man of free kindred and whose name was Hallblithe:  he was fair, strong, and not untried in battle; he was of the House of the Raven of old time.

This man loved an exceeding fair damsel called the Hostage, who was of the House of the Rose, wherein it was right and due that the men of the Raven should wed.

She loved him no less, and no man of the kindred gainsaid their love, and they were to be wedded on Midsummer Night.

But one day of early spring, when the days were yet short and the nights long, Hallblithe sat before the porch of the house smoothing an ash stave for his spear, and he heard the sound of horse-hoofs drawing nigh, and he looked up and saw folk riding toward the house, and so presently they rode through the garth gate; and there was no man but he about the house, so he rose up and went to meet them, and he saw that they were but three in company:  they had weapons with them, and their horses were of the best; but they were no fellowship for a man to be afraid of; for two of them were old and feeble, and the third was dark and sad, and drooping of aspect:  it seemed as if they had ridden far and fast, for their spurs were bloody and their horses all a-sweat.

Hallblithe hailed them kindly and said:  "Ye are way-worn, and maybe ye have to ride further; so light down and come into the house, and take bite and sup, and hay and corn also for your horses; and then if ye needs must ride on your way, depart when ye are rested; or else if ye may, then abide here night-long, and go your ways to-morrow, and meantime that which is ours shall be yours, and all shall be free to you."

Then spake the oldest of the elders in a high piping voice and said: "Young man, we thank thee; but though the days of the springtide are waxing, the hours of our lives are waning; nor may we abide unless thou canst truly tell us that this is the Land of the Glittering Plain:  and if that be so, then delay not, lead us to thy lord, and perhaps he will make us content."

Spake he who was somewhat less stricken in years than the first: "Thanks have thou! but we need something more than meat and drink, to wit the Land of Living Men.  And Oh! but the time presses."

Spake the sad and sorry carle:  "We seek the Land where the days are many:  so many that he who hath forgotten how to laugh, may learn the craft again, and forget the days of Sorrow."

Then they all three cried aloud and said:

"Is this the Land?  Is this the Land?"

But Hallblithe wondered, and he laughed and said:  "Wayfarers, look under the sun down the plain which lieth betwixt the mountains and the sea, and ye shall behold the meadows all gleaming with the spring lilies; yet do we not call this the Glittering Plain, but Cleveland by the Sea.  Here men die when their hour comes, nor know I if the days of their life be long enough for the forgetting of sorrow; for I am young and not yet a yokefellow of sorrow; but this I know, that they are long enough for the doing of deeds that shall not die.  And as for Lord, I know not this word, for here dwell we, the sons of the Raven, in good fellowship, with our wives that we have wedded, and our mothers who have borne us, and our sisters who serve us.  Again I bid you light down off your horses, and eat and drink, and be merry; and depart when ye will, to seek what land ye will."

They scarce looked on him, but cried out together mournfully:

"This is not the Land!  This is not the Land!"

No more than that they said, but turned about their horses and rode out through the garth gate, and went clattering up the road that led to the pass of the mountains.  But Hallblithe hearkened wondering, till the sound of their horse-hoofs died away, and then turned back to his work:  and it was then two hours after high-noon.

The Story of the Glittering Plain, by William Morris, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[f02]

CHAPTER II: EVIL TIDINGS COME TO HAND AT CLEVELAND

Not long had he worked ere he heard the sound of horsehoofs once more, and he looked not up, but said to himself, "It is but the lads bringing back the teams from the acres, and riding fast and driving hard for joy of heart and in wantonness of youth."

But the sound grew nearer and he looked up and saw over the turf wall of the garth the flutter of white raiment; and he said:

"Nay, it is the maidens coming back from the seashore and the gathering of wrack."

So he set himself the harder to his work, and laughed, all alone as he was, and said:  "She is with them:  now I will not look up again till they have ridden into the garth, and she has come from among them, and leapt off her horse, and cast her arms about my neck as her wont is; and it will rejoice her then to mock me with hard words and kind voice and longing heart; and I shall long for her and kiss her, and sweet shall the coming days seem to us:  and the daughters of our folk shall look on and be kind and blithe with us."

Therewith rode the maidens into the garth, but he heard no sound of laughter or merriment amongst them, which was contrary to their wont; and his heart fell, and it was as if instead of the maidens' laughter the voices of those wayfarers came back upon the wind crying out, "Is this the Land?  Is this the Land?"

Then he looked up hastily, and saw the maidens drawing near, ten of the House of the Raven, and three of the House of the Rose; and he beheld them that their faces were pale and woe-begone, and their raiment rent, and there was no joy in them.  Hallblithe stood aghast while one who had gotten off her horse (and she was the daughter of his own mother) ran past him into the hall, looking not at him, as if she durst not:  and another rode off swiftly to the horse-stalls. But the others, leaving their horses, drew round about him, and for a while none durst utter a word; and he stood gazing at them, with the spoke-shave in his hand, he also silent; for he saw that the Hostage was not with them, and he knew that now he was the yokefellow of sorrow.

At last he spoke gently and in a kind voice, and said:  "Tell me, sisters, what evil hath befallen us, even if it be the death of a dear friend, and the thing that may not be amended."

Then spoke a fair woman of the Rose, whose name was Brightling, and said:  "Hallblithe, it is not of death that we have to tell, but of sundering, which may yet be amended.  We were on the sand of the sea nigh the Ship-stead and the Rollers of the Raven, and we were gathering the wrack and playing together; and we saw a round-ship nigh to shore lying with her sheet slack, and her sail beating the mast; but we deemed it to be none other than some bark of the Fish-biters, and thought no harm thereof, but went on running and playing amidst the little waves that fell on the sand, and the ripples that curled around our feet.  At last there came a small boat from the side of the round-ship, and rowed in toward shore, and still we feared not, though we drew a little aback from the surf and let fall our gown-hems.  But the crew of that boat beached her close to where we stood, and came hastily wading the surf towards us; and we saw that they were twelve weaponed men, great, and grim, and all clad in black raiment.  Then indeed were we afraid, and we turned about and fled up the beach; but now it was too late, for the tide was at more than half ebb and long was the way over the sand to the place where we had left our horses tied among the tamarisk-bushes.  Nevertheless we ran, and had gotten up to the pebble-beach before they ran in amongst us:  and they caught us, and cast us down on to the hard stones.

"Then they made us sit in a row on a ridge of the pebbles; and we were sore afraid, yet more for defilement at their hands than for death; for they were evil-looking men exceeding foul of favour.  Then said one of them:  'Which of all you maidens is the Hostage of the House of the Rose?'

"Then all we kept silence, for we would not betray her.  But the evil man spake again:  'Choose ye then whether we shall take one, or all of you across the waters in our black ship.'  Yet still we others spake not, till arose thy beloved, O Hallblithe, and said:

"'Let it be one then, and not all; for I am the Hostage.'

"'How shalt thou make us sure thereof?' said the evil carle.

"She looked on him proudly and said:  'Because I say it.'

"'Wilt thou swear it?' said he.

"'Yea,' said she, 'I swear it by the token of the House wherein I shall wed; by the wings of the Fowl that seeketh the Field of Slaying.'

"'It is enough,' said the man, 'come thou with us.  And ye maidens sit ye there, and move not till we have made way on our ship, unless ye would feel the point of the arrow.  For ye are within bowshot of the ship, and we have shot weapons aboard.'

"So the Hostage departed with them, and she unweeping, but we wept sorely.  And we saw the small boat come up to the side of the round-ship, and the Hostage going over the gunwale along with those evil men, and we heard the hale and how of the mariners as they drew up the anchor and sheeted home; and then the sweeps came out and the ship began to move over the sea.  And one of those evil-minded men bent his bow and shot a shaft at us, but it fell far short of where we sat, and the laugh of those runagates came over the sands to us. So we crept up the beach trembling, and then rose to our feet and got to our horses, and rode hither speedily, and our hearts are broken for thy sorrow."

At that word came Hallblithe's own sister out from the hall; and she bore weapons with her, to wit Hallblithe's sword and shield and helm and hauberk.  As for him he turned back silently to his work, and set the steel of the spear on the new ashen shaft, and took the hammer and smote the nail in, and laid the weapon on a round pebble that was thereby, and clenched the nail on the other side.  Then he looked about, and saw that the other damsel had brought him his coal-black war-horse ready saddled and bridled; then he did on his armour, and girt his sword to his side and leapt into the saddle, and took his new-shafted spear in hand and shook the rein.  But none of all those damsels durst say a word to him or ask him whither he went, for they feared his face, and the sorrow of his heart.  So he got him out of the garth and turned toward the sea-shore, and they saw the glitter of his spear-point a minute over the turf-wall, and heard the clatter of his horse-hoofs as he galloped over the hard way; and thus he departed.

The Story of the Glittering Plain, by William Morris, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[f03]

CHAPTER III: THE WARRIORS OF THE RAVEN SEARCH THE SEAS

Then the women bethought them, and they spake a word or two together, and then they sundered and went one this way and one that, to gather together the warriors of the Raven who were a-field, or on the way, nigh unto the house, that they might follow Hallblithe down to the sea-shore and help him; after a while they came back again by one and two and three, bringing with them the wrathful young men; and when there was upward of a score gathered in the garth armed and horsed, they rode their ways to the sea, being minded to thrust a long-ship of the Ravens out over the Rollers into the sea, and follow the strong-thieves of the waters and bring a-back the Hostage, so that they might end the sorrow at once, and establish joy once more in the House of the Raven and the House of the Rose.  But they had with them three lads of fifteen winters or thereabouts to lead their horses back home again, when they should have gone up on to the Horse of the Brine.

Thus then they departed, and the maidens stood in the garth-gate till they lost sight of them behind the sandhills, and then turned back sorrowfully into the house, and sat there talking low of their sorrow.  And many a time they had to tell their tale anew, as folk came into the hall one after another from field and fell.  But the young men came down to the sea, and found Hallblithe's black horse straying about amongst the tamarisk-bushes above the beach; and they looked thence over the sand, and saw neither Hallblithe nor any man: and they gazed out seaward, and saw neither ship nor sail on the barren brine.  Then they went down on to the sand, and sundered their fellowship, and went half one way, half the other, betwixt the sandhills and the surf, where now the tide was flowing, till the nesses of the east and the west, the horns of the bay, stayed them. Then they met together again by the Rollers, when the sun was within an hour of setting.  There and then they laid hand to that ship which is called the Seamew, and they ran her down over the Rollers into the waves, and leapt aboard and hoisted sail, and ran out the oars and put to sea; and a little wind was blowing seaward from the gates of the mountains behind them.

So they quartered the sea-plain, as the kestrel doth the water-meadows, till the night fell on them, and was cloudy, though whiles the wading moon shone out; and they had seen nothing, neither sail nor ship, nor aught else on the barren brine, save the washing of waves and the hovering of sea-fowl.  So they lay-to outside the horns of the bay and awaited the dawning.  And when morning was come they made way again, and searched the sea, and sailed to the out-skerries, and searched them with care; then they sailed into the main and fared hither and thither and up and down:  and this they did for eight days, and in all that time they saw no ship nor sail, save three barks of the Fish-biters nigh to the Skerry which is called Mew-stone.

So they fared home to the Raven Bay, and laid their keel on the Rollers, and so went their ways sadly, home to the House of the Raven:  and they deemed that for this time they could do no more in seeking their valiant kinsman and his fair damsel.  And they were very sorry; for these two were well-beloved of all men.  But since they might not amend it, they abode in peace, awaiting what the change of days might bring them.

The Story of the Glittering Plain, by William Morris, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[f04]

CHAPTER IV: NOW HALLBLITHE TAKETH THE SEA

Now must it be told of Hallblithe that he rode fiercely down to the sea-shore, and from the top of the beach he gazed about him, and there below him was the Ship-stead and Rollers of his kindred, whereon lay the three long-ships, the Seamew, and the Osprey and the Erne.  Heavy and huge they seemed to him as they lay there, black-sided, icy-cold with the washing of the March waves, their golden dragon-heads looking seaward wistfully.  But first had he looked out into the offing, and it was only when he had let his eyes come back from where the sea and sky met, and they had beheld nothing but the waste of waters, that he beheld the Ship-stead closely; and therewith he saw where a little to the west of it lay a skiff, which the low wave of the tide lifted and let fall from time to time.  It had a mast, and a black sail hoisted thereon and flapping with slackened sheet.  A man sat in the boat clad in black raiment, and the sun smote a gleam from the helm on his head.  Then Hallblithe leapt off his horse, and strode down the sands shouldering his spear; and when he came near to the man in the boat he poised his spear and shook it and cried out:  "Man, art thou friend or foe?"

Said the man:  "Thou art a fair young man:  but there is grief in thy voice along with wrath.  Cast not till thou hast heard me, and mayst deem whether I may do aught to heal thy grief."

"What mayst thou do?" said Hallblithe; "art thou not a robber of the sea, a harrier of the folks that dwell in peace?"

The man laughed:  "Yea," said he, "my craft is thieving and carrying off the daughters of folk, so that we may have a ransom for them. Wilt thou come over the waters with me?"

Hallblithe said wrathfully:

"Nay, rather, come thou ashore here!  Thou seemest a big man, and belike shall be good of thine hands.  Come and fight with me; and then he of us who is vanquished, if he be unslain, shall serve the other for a year, and then shalt thou do my business in the ransoming."

The man in the boat laughed again, and that so scornfully that he angered Hallblithe beyond measure:  then he arose in the boat and stood on his feet swaying from side to side as he laughed.  He was passing big, long-armed and big-headed, and long hair came from under his helm like the tail of a red horse; his eyes were grey and gleaming, and his mouth wide.

In a while he stayed his laughter and said:  "O Warrior of the Raven, this were a simple game for thee to play; though it is not far from my mind, for fighting when I needs must win is no dull work.  Look you, if I slay or vanquish thee, then all is said; and if by some chance stroke thou slayest me, then is thine only helper in this matter gone from thee.  Now to be short, I bid thee come aboard to me if thou wouldst ever hear another word of thy damsel betrothed.  And moreover this need not hinder thee to fight with me if thou hast a mind to it thereafter; for we shall soon come to a land big enough for two to stand on.  Or if thou listest to fight in a boat rocking on the waves, I see not but there may be manhood in that also."

Now was the hot wrath somewhat run off Hallblithe, nor durst he lose any chance to hear a word of his beloved; so he said:  "Big man, I will come aboard.  But look thou to it, if thou hast a mind to bewray me; for the sons of the Raven die hard."

"Well," said the big man, "I have heard that their minstrels are of many words, and think that they have tales to tell.  Come aboard and loiter not."  Then Hallblithe waded the surf and lightly strode over the gunwale of the skiff and sat him down.  The big man thrust out into the deep and haled home the sheet; but there was but little wind.

Then said Hallblithe:  "Wilt thou have me row, for I wot not whitherward to steer?"

Said the red carle:  "Maybe thou art not in a hurry; I am not:  do as thou wilt."  So Hallblithe took the oars and rowed mightily, while the alien steered, and they went swiftly and lightly over the sea, and the waves were little.

The Story of the Glittering Plain, by William Morris, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[f05]

CHAPTER V: THEY COME UNTO THE ISLE OF RANSOM

So the sun grew low, and it set; the stars and the moon shone a while and then it clouded over.  Hallblithe still rowed and rested not, though he was weary; and the big man sat and steered, and held his peace.  But when the night was grown old and it was not far from the dawn, the alien said:  "Youngling of the Ravens, now shalt thou sleep and I will row."

Hallblithe was exceeding weary; so he gave the oars to the alien and lay down in the stern and slept.  And in his sleep he dreamed that he was lying in the House of the Raven, and his sisters came to him and said, "Rise up now, Hallblithe! wilt thou be a sluggard on the day of thy wedding?  Come thou with us to the House of the Rose that we may bear away the Hostage."  Then he dreamed that they departed, and he arose and clad himself:  but when he would have gone out of the hall, then was it no longer daylight, but moonlight, and he dreamed that he had dreamed:  nevertheless he would have gone abroad, but might not find the door; so he said he would go out by a window; but the wall was high and smooth (quite other than in the House of the Raven, where were low windows all along one aisle), nor was there any way to come at them.  But he dreamed that he was so abashed thereat, and had such a weakness on him, that he wept for pity of himself:  and he went to his bed to lie down; and lo! there was no bed and no hall; nought but a heath, wild and wide, and empty under the moon.  And still he wept in his dream, and his manhood seemed departed from him, and he heard a voice crying out, "Is this the Land?  Is this the Land?"

Therewithal he awoke, and as his eyes cleared he beheld the big man rowing and the black sail flapping against the mast; for the wind had fallen dead and they were faring on over a long smooth swell of the sea.  It was broad daylight, but round about them was a thick mist, which seemed none the less as if the sun were ready to shine through it.

As Hallblithe caught the red man's eye, he smiled and nodded on him and said:  "Now has the time come for thee first to eat and then to row.  But tell me what is that upon thy cheeks?"

Hallblithe, reddening somewhat, said:  "The night dew hath fallen on me."

Quoth the sea-rover, "It is no shame for thee a youngling to remember thy betrothed in thy sleep, and to weep because thou lackest her. But now bestir thee, for it is later than thou mayest deem."

Therewith the big man drew in the oars and came to the afterpart of the boat, and drew meat and drink out of a locker thereby; and they ate and drank together, and Hallblithe grew strong and somewhat less downcast; and he went forward and gat the oars into his hands.

Then the big red man stood up and looked over his left shoulder and said:  "Soon shall we have a breeze and bright weather."

Then he looked into the midmost of the sail and fell a-whistling such a tune as the fiddles play to dancing men and maids at Yule-tide, and his eyes gleamed and glittered therewithal, and exceeding big he looked.  Then Hallblithe felt a little air on his cheek, and the mist grew thinner, and the sail began to fill with wind till the sheet tightened:  then, lo! the mist rising from the face of the sea, and the sea's face rippling gaily under a bright sun.  Then the wind increased, and the wall of mist departed and a few light clouds sped over the sky, and the sail swelled and the boat heeled over, and the seas fell white from the prow, and they sped fast over the face of the waters.

Then laughed the red-haired man, and said:  "O croaker on the dead branch, now is the wind such that no rowing of thine may catch up with it:  so in with the oars now, and turn about, and thou shalt see whitherward we are going."

Then Hallblithe turned about on the thwart and looked across the sea, and lo! before them the high cliffs and crags and mountains of a new land which seemed to be an isle, and they were deep blue under the sun, which now shone aloft in the mid heaven.  He said nought at all, but sat looking and wondering what land it might be; but the big man said:  "O tomb of warriors, is it not as if the blueness of the deep sea had heaved itself up aloft, and turned from coloured air into rock and stone, so wondrous blue it is?  But that is because those crags and mountains are so far away, and as we draw nigher to them, thou shalt see them as they verily are, that they are coal-black; and yonder land is an isle, and is called the Isle of Ransom.  Therein shall be the market for thee where thou mayst cheapen thy betrothed. There mayst thou take her by the hand and lead her away thence, when thou hast dealt with the chapman of maidens and hast pledged thee by the fowl of battle, and the edge of the fallow blade to pay that which he will have of thee."

As the big man spoke there was a mocking in his voice and his face and in his whole huge body, which made the sword of Hallblithe uneasy in his scabbard; but he refrained his wrath, and said:  "Big man, the longer I look, the less I can think how we are to come up on to yonder island; for I can see nought but a huge cliff, and great mountains rising beyond it."

"Thou shalt the more wonder," said the alien, "the nigher thou drawest thereto; for it is not because we are far away that thou canst see no beach or strand, or sloping of the land seaward, but because there is nought of all these things.  Yet fear not! am I not with thee? thou shalt come ashore on the Isle of Ransom."

Then Hallblithe held his peace, and the other spake not for a while, but gave a short laugh once or twice; and said at last in a big voice, "Little Carrion-biter, why dost thou not ask me of my name?"

Now Hallblithe was a tall man and a fell fighter; but he said: "Because I was thinking of other things and not of thee."

"Well," said the big man, in a voice still louder, "when I am at home men call me the Puny Fox."

Then Hallblithe said:  "Art thou a Fox?  It may well be that thou shalt beguile me as such beasts will but look to it, that if thou dost I shall know how to avenge me."

Then rose up the big man from the helm, and straddled wide in the boat, and cried out in a great roaring voice:  "Crag-nester, I am one of seven brethren, and the smallest and weakest of them.  Art thou not afraid?"

"No," said Hallblithe, "for the six others are not here.  Wilt thou fight here in boat, O Fox?"

"Nay," said Fox, "rather we will drink a cup of wine together."

So he opened the locker again and drew out thence a great horn of some huge neat of the outlands, which was girthed and stopped with silver, and also a golden cup, and he filled the cup from the horn and gave it into Hallblithe's hand and said:  "Drink, O black-fledged nestling!  But call a health over the cup if thou wilt."  So Hallblithe raised the cup aloft and cried:  "Health to the House of the Raven and to them that love it! an ill day to its foemen!"  Then he set his lips to the cup and drank; and that wine seemed to him better and stronger than any he had ever tasted.  But when he had given the cup back again to Fox, that red one filled it again, and cried over it, "The Treasure of the Sea! and the King that dieth not!"  Then he drank, and filled again for Hallblithe, and steered with his knees meanwhile; and thus they drank three cups each, and Fox smiled and was peaceful and said but little, but Hallblithe sat wondering how the world was changed for him since yesterday.

But now was the sky blown all clear of clouds and the wind piped shrill behind them, and the great waves rose and fell about them, and the sun glittered on them in many colours.  Fast flew the boat before the wind as though it would never stop, and the day was waning, and the wind still rising; and now the Isle of Ransom uphove huge before them, and coal-black, and no beach and no haven was to be seen therein; and still they ran before the wind towards that black cliff-wall, against which the sea washed for ever, and no keel ever built by man might live for one moment 'twixt the surf and the cliff of that grim land.  The sun grew low, and sank red under the sea, and that world of stone swallowed up half the heavens before them, for they were now come very nigh thereto; nor could Hallblithe see aught for it, but that they must be dashed against the cliff and perish in a moment of time.

Still the boat flew on; but now when the twilight was come, and they had just opened up along reach of the cliff that lay beyond a high ness, Hallblithe thought he saw down by the edge of the sea something darker than the face of the rock-wall, and he deemed it was a cave: they came a little nearer and he saw it was a great cave high enough to let a round-ship go in with all her sails set.

"Son of the Raven," quoth Fox, "hearken, for thy heart is not little. Yonder is the gate into the Isle of Ransom, and if thou wilt, thou mayst go through it.  Yet it may be that if thou goest ashore on to the Isle something grievous shall befall thee, a trouble more than thou canst bear:  a shame it may be.  Now there are two choices for thee:  either to go up on to the Isle and face all; or to die here by my hand having done nothing unmanly or shameful:  What sayest thou?"

"Thou art of many words when time so presses, Fox," said Hallblithe. "Why should I not choose to go up on to the Island to deliver my trothplight maiden?  For the rest, slay me if thou canst, if we come alive out of this cauldron of waters."

Said the big red man:  "Look on then, and note Fox how he steereth, as it were through a needle's eye."

Now were they underneath the black shadow of the black cliff and amidst the twilight the surf was tossed about like white fire.  In the lower heavens the stars were beginning to twinkle and the moon was bright and yellow, and aloft all was peaceful, for no cloud sullied the sky.  One moment Hallblithe saw all this hanging above the turmoil of thundering water and dripping rock and the next he was in the darkness of the cave, the roaring wind and the waves still making thunder about him, though of a different voice from the harsh hubbub without.  Then he heard Fox say:  "Sit down now and take the oars, for presently shall we be at home at the landing place."

So Hallblithe took the oars and rowed, and as they went up the cave the sea fell, and the wind died out into the aimless gustiness of hollow places; and for a little while was all as dark as dark might be.  Then Hallblithe saw that the darkness grew a little greyer, and he looked over his shoulder and saw a star of light before the bows of the boat, and Fox cried out:  "Yea, it is like day; bright will the moon be for such as needs must be wayfaring to-night!  Cease rowing, O Son of the coal-blue fowl, for there is way enough on her."

Then Hallblithe lay on his oars, and in a minute the bows smote the land; then he turned about and saw a steep stair of stone, and up the sloping shaft thereof the moonlit sky and the bright stars.  Then Fox arose and came forward and leapt out of the boat and moored her to a big stone:  then he leapt back again and said:  "Bear a hand with the victuals; we must bring them out of the boat unless thou wilt sleep supperless, as I will not.  For to-night must we be guests to ourselves, since it is far to the dwelling of my people, and the old man is said to be a skin-changer, a flit-by-night.  And as to this cave, it is deemed to be nowise safe to sleep therein, unless the sleeper have a double share of luck.  And thy luck, meseemeth, O Son of the Raven, is as now somewhat less than a single share.  So to-night we shall sleep under the naked heaven."

Hallblithe yea-said this, and they took the meat and drink, such as they needed, from out the boat, and climbed the steep stair no little way, and so came out on to a plain place, which seemed to Hallblithe bare and waste so far as he saw it by the moonlight; for the twilight was gone now, and nought was left of the light of day save a glimmer in the west.

This Hallblithe deemed wonderful, that no less out on the open heath and brow of the land than in the shut-in cave, all that tumult of the wind had fallen, and the cloudless night was calm, and with a little air blowing from the south and the landward.

Therewithal was Fox done with his loud-voiced braggart mood, and spoke gently and peaceably like to a wayfarer, who hath business of his to look to as other men.  Now he pointed to certain rocks or low crags that a little way off rose like a reef out of the treeless plain; then said he:  "Shipmate, underneath yonder rocks is our resting-place for to-night; and I pray thee not to deem me churlish that I give thee no better harbour.  But I have a charge over thee to bring thee safe thus far on thy quest; and thou wouldst find it hard to live among such housemates as thou wouldst find up yonder amongst our folks to-night.  But tomorrow shalt thou come to speech with him who will deal with thee concerning the ransom."

"It is enough," said Hallblithe, "and I thank thee for thy leading: and as for thy rough and uncomely words which thou hast given me, I pardon thee for them:  for I am none the worse of them:  forsooth, if I had been, my sword would have had a voice in the matter."

"I am well content as it is, Son of the Raven," quoth Fox; "I have done my bidding and all is well."

"Tell me then who it is hath bidden thee bring me hither?"

"I may not tell thee," said Fox; "thou art here, be content, as I am."

And he spake no more till they had come to the reef aforesaid, which was some two furlongs from the place where they had come from out of the cave.  There then they set forth their supper on the stones, and ate what they would, and drank of that good strong wine while the horn bare out.  And now was Fox of few words, and when Hallblithe asked him concerning that land, he had little to say.  And at last when Hallblithe asked him of that so perilous house and those who manned it, he said to him:

"Son of the Raven, it avails not asking of these matters; for if I tell thee aught concerning them I shall tell thee lies.  Once again let it be enough for thee that thou hast passed over the sea safely on thy quest; and a more perilous sea it is forsooth than thou deemest.  But now let us have an end of vain words, and make our bed amidst these stones as best we may; for we should be stirring betimes in the morning."  Hallblithe said little in answer, and they arrayed their sleeping places cunningly, as the hare doth her form, and like men well used to lying abroad.

Hallblithe was very weary and he soon fell asleep; and as he lay there, he dreamed a dream, or maybe saw a vision; whether he were asleep when he saw it, or between sleeping and waking, I know not. But this was his dream or his vision; that the Hostage was standing over him, and she as he had seen her but yesterday, bright-haired and ruddy-cheeked and white-skinned, kind of hand and soft of voice, and she said to him:  "Hallblithe, look on me and hearken, for I have a message for thee."  And he looked and longed for her, and his soul was ravished by the sweetness of his longing, and he would have leapt up and cast his arms about her, but sleep and the dream bound him, and he might not.  Then the image smiled on him and said:  "Nay, my love, lie still, for thou mayst not touch me:  here is but the image of the body which thou desirest.  Hearken then.  I am in evil plight, in the hands of strong-thieves of the sea, nor know I what they will do with me, and I have no will to be shamed; to be sold for a price from one hand to another, yet to be bedded without a price, and to lie beside some foe-man of our folk, and he to cast his arms about me, will I, will I not:  this is a hard case.  Therefore to-morrow morning at daybreak while men sleep, I think to steal forth to the gunwale of the black ship and give myself to the gods, that they and not these runagates may be masters of my life and my soul, and may do with me as they will:  for indeed they know that I may not bear the strange kinless house, and the love and caressing of the alien house-master, and the mocking and stripes of the alien house-mistress. Therefore let the Hoary One of the sea take me and look to my matters, and carry me to life or death, which-so he will.  Thin now grows the night, but lie still a little yet, while I speak another word.

"Maybe we shall meet alive again, and maybe not:  and if not, though we have never yet lain in one bed together, yet I would have thee remember me:  yet not so that my image shall come between thee and thy speech-friend and bed-fellow of the kindred, that shall lie where I was to have lain.  Yet again, if I live and thou livest, I have been told and have heard that by one way or other I am like to come to the Glittering Plain, and the Land of Living Men.  O my beloved, if by any way thou mightest come thither also, and we might meet there, and we two alive, how good it were!  Seek that land then, beloved! seek it, whether or no we once more behold the House of the Rose, or tread the floor of the Raven dwelling.  And now must even this image of me sunder from thee.  Farewell!"

Therewith was the dream done and the vision departed; and Hallblithe sat up full of anguish and longing; and he looked about him over the dreary land, and it was somewhat light and the sky was grown grey and cloudy, and he deemed that the dawn was come.  So he leapt to his feet and stooped down over Fox, and took him by the shoulder, and shook him and said:  "Faring-fellow, awake! the dawn is come, and we have much to do."

Fox sat up and growled like a dog, and rubbed his eyes and looked about him and said:  "Thou hast waked me for nought:  it is the false dawn of the moon that shineth now behind the clouds and casteth no shadow; it is but an hour after midnight.  Go to sleep again, and let me be, else will I not be a guide to thee when the day comes."  And he lay down and was asleep at once.  Then Hallblithe went and lay down again full of sorrow:  Yet so weary was he that he presently fell asleep, and dreamed no more.

The Story of the Glittering Plain, by William Morris, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[f06]

CHAPTER VI: OF A DWELLING OF MAN ON THE ISLE OF RANSOM

When he awoke again the sun shone on him, and the morning was calm and windless.  He sat up and looked about him, but could see no signs of Fox save the lair wherein he had lain.  So he arose to his feet and sought for him about the crannies of the rocks, and found him not; and he shouted for him, and had no answer.  Then he said, "Belike he has gone down to the boat to put a thing in, or take a thing out."  So he went his ways to the stair down into the water-cave, and he called on Fox from the top of the stair, and had no answer.

So he went down that long stair with a misgiving in his heart, and when he came to the last step there was neither man nor boat, nor aught else save the water and the living rock.  Then was he exceeding wroth, for he knew that he had been beguiled, and he was in an evil case, left alone on an Isle that he knew not, a waste and desolate land, where it seemed most like he should die of famine.

He wasted no breath or might now in crying out for Fox, or seeking him; for he said to himself:  "I might well have known that he was false and a liar, whereas he could scarce refrain his joy at my folly and his guile.  Now is it for me to strive for life against death."

Then he turned and went slowly up the stair, and came out on to the open face of that Isle, and he saw that it was waste indeed, and dreadful:  a wilderness of black sand and stones and ice-borne rocks, with here and there a little grass growing in the hollows, and here and there a dreary mire where the white-tufted rushes shook in the wind, and here and there stretches of moss blended with red-blossomed sengreen; and otherwhere nought but the wind-bitten creeping willow clinging to the black sand, with a white bleached stick and a leaf or two, and again a stick and a leaf.  In the offing looking landward were great mountains, some very great and snow-capped, some bare to the tops; and all that was far away, save the snow, was deep-blue in the sunny morning.  But about him on the heath were scattered rocks like the reef beneath which he had slept the last night, and peaks, and hammers, and knolls of uncouth shapes.

Then he went to the edge of the cliffs and looked down on the sea which lay wrinkled and rippling on toward the shore far below him, and long he gazed thereon and all about, but could see neither ship nor sail, nor aught else save the washing of waves and the hovering of sea fowl.

Then he said:  "Were it not well if I were to seek that house-master of whom Fox spake?  Might he not flit me at least to the Land of the Glittering Plain?  Woe is me! now am I of that woful company, and I also must needs cry out, Where is the land?  Where is the land?"

Therewith he turned toward the reef above their lair, but as he went he thought and said:  "Nay, but was not this Stead a lie like the rest of Fox's tale? and am I not alone in this sea-girt wilderness? Yea, and even that image of my Beloved which I saw in the dream, perchance that also was a mere beguiling; for now I see that the Puny Fox was in all ways wiser than is meet and comely."  Yet again he said:  "At least I will seek on, and find out whether there be another man dwelling on this hapless Isle, and then the worst of it will be battle with him, and death by point and edge rather than by hunger; or at the best we may become friends and fellows and deliver each other."  Therewith he came to the reef, and with much ado climbed to the topmost of its rocks and looked down thence landward: and betwixt him and the mountains, and by seeming not very far off, he saw smoke arising:  but no house he saw, nor any other token of a dwelling.  So he came down from the stone and turned his back upon the sea and went toward that smoke with his sword in its sheath, and his spear over his shoulder.  Rough and toilsome was the way:  three little dales he crossed amidst the mountain necks, each one narrow and bare, with a stream of water amidst, running seaward, and whether in dale or on ridge, he went ever amidst sand and stones, and the weeds of the wilderness, and saw no man, or man-tended beast.

At last, after he had been four hours on the way, but had not gone very far, he topped a stony bent, and from the brow thereof beheld a wide valley grass-grown for the more part, with a river running through it, and sheep and kine and horses feeding up and down it. And amidst this dale by the stream-side, was a dwelling of men, a long hall and other houses about it builded of stone.

Then was Hallblithe glad, and he strode down the bent speedily, his war-gear clashing upon him:  and as he came to the foot thereof and on to the grass of the dale, he got amongst the pasturing horses, and passed close by the horse-herd and a woman that was with him.  They scowled at him as he went by, but meddled not with him in any way. Although they were giant-like of stature and fierce of face, they were not ill-favoured:  they were red-haired, and the woman as white as cream where the sun had not burned her skin; they had no weapons that Hallblithe might see save the goad in the hand of the carle.

So Hallblithe passed on and came to the biggest house, the hall aforesaid:  it was very long, and low as for its length, not over shapely of fashion, a mere gabled heap of stones.  Low and strait was the door thereinto, and as Hallblithe entered stooping lowly, and the fire of the steel of his spear that he held before him was quenched in the mirk of the hall, he smiled and said to himself:  "Now if there were one anigh who would not have me enter alive, and he with a weapon in his hand, soon were all the tale told."  But he got into the hall unsmitten, and stood on the floor thereof, and spake:  "The sele of the day to whomsoever is herein!  Will any man speak to the new comer?"

But none answered or gave him greeting; and as his eyes got used to the dusk of the hall, he looked about him, and neither on the floor or the high seat nor in any ingle could he see a man; and there was silence there, save for the crackling of the flickering flame on the hearth amidmost, and the running of the rats behind the panelling of the walls.

On one side of the hall was a row of shut-beds, and Hallblithe deemed that there might be men therein; but since none had greeted him he refrained him from searching them for fear of a trap, and he thought, "I will abide amidst the floor, and if there be any that would deal with me, friend or foe, let him come hither to me."

So he fell to walking up and down the hall from buttery to dais, and his war-gear rattled upon him.  At last as he walked he thought he heard a small thin peevish voice, which yet was too husky for the squeak of a rat.  So he stayed his walk and stood still, and said: "Will any man speak to Hallblithe, a newcomer, and a stranger in this Stead?"

Then that small voice made a word and said:  "Why paceth the fool up and down our hall, doing nothing, even as the Ravens flap croaking about the crags, abiding the war-mote and the clash of the fallow blades?"

Said Hallblithe, and his voice sounded big in the hall:  "Who calleth Hallblithe a fool and mocketh at the sons of the Raven?"

Spake the voice:  "Why cometh not the fool to the man that may not go to him?"

Then Hallblithe bent forward to hearken, and he deemed that the voice came from one of the shut-beds, so he leaned his spear against a pillar, and went into the shut-bed he had noted, and saw where there lay along in it a man exceeding old by seeming, sore wasted, with long hair as white as snow lying over the bed-clothes.

When the elder saw Hallblithe, he laughed a thin cracked laugh as if in mockery and said:  "Hail newcomer! wilt thou eat?"

"Yea," said Hallblithe.

"Go thou into the buttery then," said the old carle, "and there shalt thou find on the cupboard cakes and curds and cheese:  eat thy fill, and when thou hast done, look in the ingle, and thou shalt see a cask of mead exceeding good, and a stoup thereby, and two silver cups; fill the stoup and bring it hither with the cups; and then may we talk amidst of drinking, which is good for an old carle.  Hasten thou! or I shall deem thee a double fool who will not fare to fetch his meat, though he be hungry."

Then Hallblithe laughed, and went down the hall into the buttery and found the meat, and ate his fill, and came away with the drink back to the Long-hoary man, who chuckled as he came and said:  "Fill up now for thee and for me, and call a health to me and wish me somewhat."

"I wish thee luck," said Hallblithe, and drank.  Said the elder: "And I wish thee more wits; is luck all that thou mayst wish me? What luck may an outworn elder have?"

"Well then," quoth Hallblithe, "what shall I wish thee?  Wouldst thou have me wish thee youth?"

"Yea, certes," said the Long-hoary, "that and nought else."

"Youth then I wish thee, if it may avail thee aught," said Hallblithe, and he drank again therewith.

"Nay, nay," said the old carle peevishly, "take a third cup, and wish me youth with no idle words tacked thereto."

Said Hallblithe raising the cup:  "Herewith I wish thee youth!" and he drank.

"Good is the wish," said the elder; "now ask thou the old carle whatso thou wilt."

Said Hallblithe:  "What is this land called?"

"Son," said the other, "hast thou heard it called the Isle of Ransom?"

"Yea," said Hallblithe, "but what wilt thou call it?"

"By no other name," said the hoary carle.

"It is far from other lands?" said Hallblithe.

"Yea," said the carle, "when the light winds blow, and the ships sail slow."

"What do ye who live here?" said Hallblithe.  "How do ye live, what work win ye?"

"We win diverse work," said the elder, "but the gainfullest is robbing men by the high hand."

"Is it ye who have stolen from me the Hostage of the Rose?" said Hallblithe.

Said the Long-hoary, "Maybe; I wot not; in diverse ways my kinsmen traffic, and they visit many lands.  Why should they not have come to Cleveland also?"

"Is she in this Isle, thou old runagate?" said Hallblithe.

"She is not, thou young fool," said the elder.  Then Hallblithe flushed red and spake:  "Knowest thou the Puny Fox?"

"How should I not?" said the carle, "since he is the son of one of my sons."

"Dost thou call him a liar and a rogue?" said Hallblithe.

The elder laughed; "Else were I a fool," said he; "there are few bigger liars or bigger rogues than the Puny Fox!"

"Is he here in this Isle?" said Hallblithe; "may I see him?"

The old man laughed again, and said:  "Nay, he is not here, unless he hath turned fool since yesterday:  why should he abide thy sword, since he hath done what he would and brought thee hither?"

Then he laughed, as a hen cackles a long while, and then said:  "What more wilt thou ask me?"

But Hallblithe was very wroth:  "It availeth nought to ask," he said; "and now I am in two minds whether I shall slay thee or not."

"That were a meet deed for a Raven, but not for a man," said the carle, "and thou that hast wished me luck!  Ask, ask!"

But Hallblithe was silent a long while.  Then the carle said, "Another cup for the longer after youth!"

Hallblithe filled, and gave to him, and the old man drank and said: "Thou deemest us all liars in the Isle of Ransom because of thy beguiling by the Puny Fox:  but therein thou errest.  The Puny Fox is our chiefest liar, and doth for us the more part of such work as we need:  therefore, why should we others lie.  Ask, ask!"

"Well then," said Hallblithe, "why did the Puny Fox bewray me, and at whose bidding?"

Said the elder:  "I know, but I will not tell thee.  Is this a lie?"

"Nay, I deem it not," said Hallblithe:  "But, tell me, is it verily true that my trothplight is not here, that I may ransom her?"

Said the Long-hoary:  "I swear it by the Treasure of the Sea, that she is not here:  the tale was but a lie of the Puny Fox."

The Story of the Glittering Plain, by William Morris, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[f07]

CHAPTER VII: A FEAST IN THE ISLE OF RANSOM

Hallblithe pondered his answer awhile with downcast eyes and said at last:  "Have ye a mind to ransom me, now that I have walked into the trap?"

"There is no need to talk of ransom," said the elder; "thou mayst go out of this house when thou wilt, nor will any meddle with thee if thou strayest about the Isle, when I have set a mark on thee and given thee a token:  nor wilt thou be hindered if thou hast a mind to leave the Isle, if thou canst find means thereto; moreover as long as thou art in the Isle, in this house mayst thou abide, eating and drinking and resting with us."

"How then may I leave this Isle?" said Hallblithe.

The elder laughed:  "In a ship," said he.

"And when," said Hallblithe, "shall I find a ship that shall carry me?"

Said the old carle, "Whither wouldest thou my son?"  Hallblithe was silent a while, thinking what answer he should make; then he said: "I would go to the land of the Glittering Plain."

"Son, a ship shall not be lacking thee for that voyage," said the elder.  "Thou mayst go to-morrow morn.  And I bid thee abide here to-night, and thy cheer shall not be ill.  Yet if thou wilt believe my word, it will be well for thee to say as little as thou mayst to any man here, and that little as little proud as maybe:  for our folk are short of temper and thou knowest there is no might against many. Indeed it is not unlike that they will not speak one word to thee, and if that be so, thou hast no need to open thy mouth to them.  And now I will tell thee that it is good that thou hast chosen to go to the Glittering Plain.  For if thou wert otherwise minded, I wot not how thou wouldest get thee a keel to carry thee, and the wings have not yet begun to sprout on thy shoulders, raven though thou be.  Now I am glad that thou art going thy ways to the Glittering Plain to-morrow; for thou wilt be good company to me on the way:  and I deem that thou wilt be no churl when thou art glad."

"What," said Hallblithe, "art thou wending thither, thou old man?"

"Yea," said he, "nor shall any other be on the ship save thou and I, and the mariners that waft us; and they forsooth shall not go aland there.  Why should not I go, since there are men to bear me aboard?"

Said Hallblithe, "And when thou art come aland there, what wilt thou do?"

"Thou shalt see, my son," said the Long-hoary.  "It may be that thy good wishes shall be of avail to me.  But now since all this may only be if I live through this night, and since my heart hath been warmed by the good mead, and thy fellowship, and whereas I am somewhat sleepy, and it is long past noon, go forth into the hall, and leave me to sleep, that I may be as sound as eld will let me to-morrow. And as for thee, folk, both men and women, shall presently come into the hall, and I deem not that any shall meddle with thee; but if so be that any challenge thee, whatsoever may be his words, answer thou to him, 'THE HOUSE OF THE UNDYING,' and there will be an end of it. Only look thou to it that no naked steel cometh out of thy scabbard. Go now, and if thou wilt, go out of doors; yet art thou safer within doors and nigher unto me."

So Hallblithe went back into the main hall, and the sun had gotten round now, and was shining into the hall, through the clerestory windows, so that he saw clearly all that was therein.  And he deemed the hall fairer within than without; and especially over the shut-beds were many stories carven in the panelling, and Hallblithe beheld them gladly.  But of one thing he marvelled, that whereas he was in an island of the strong-thieves of the waters, and in their very home and chiefest habitation, there were no ships or seas pictured in that imagery, but fair groves and gardens, with flowery grass and fruited trees all about.  And there were fair women abiding therein, and lovely young men, and warriors, and strange beasts and many marvels, and the ending of wrath and beginning of pleasure and the crowning of love.  And amidst these was pictured oft and again a mighty king with a sword by his side and a crown on his head; and ever was he smiling and joyous, so that Hallblithe, when he looked on him, felt of better heart and smiled back on the carven image.

So while Hallblithe looked on these things, and pondered his case carefully, all alone as he was in that alien hall, he heard a noise without of talking and laughter, and presently the pattering of feet therewith, and then women came into the hall, a score or more, some young, some old, some fair enough, and some hard-featured and uncomely, but all above the stature of the women whom he had seen in his own land.

So he stood amidst the hall-floor and abided them; and they saw him and his shining war-gear, and ceased their talking and laughter, and drew round about him, and gazed at him; but none said aught till an old crone came forth from the ring, and said "Who art thou, standing under weapons in our hall?"

He knew not what to answer, and held his peace; and she spake again: "Whither wouldest thou, what seekest thou?"

Then answered Hallblithe:  "THE HOUSE OF THE UNDYING."

None answered, and the other women all fell away from him at once, and went about their business hither and thither through the hall. But the old crone took him by the hand, and led him up to the dais, and set him next to the midmost high-seat.  Then she made as if she would do off his war-gear, and he would not gainsay her, though he deemed that foes might be anear; for in sooth he trusted in the old carle that he would not bewray him, and moreover he deemed it would be unmanly not to take the risks of the guesting, according to the custom of that country.

So she took his armour and his weapons and bore them off to a shut-bed next to that wherein lay the ancient man, and she laid the gear within it, all save the spear, which she laid on the wall-pins above; and she made signs to him that therein he was to lie; but she spake no word to him.  Then she brought him the hand-washing water in a basin of latten, and a goodly towel therewith, and when he had washed she went away from him, but not far.

This while the other women were busy about the hall; some swept the floor down, and when it was swept strawed thereon rushes and handfuls of wild thyme:  some went into the buttery and bore forth the boards and the trestles:  some went to the chests and brought out the rich hangings, the goodly bankers and dorsars, and did them on the walls: some bore in the stoups and horns and beakers, and some went their ways and came not back a while, for they were busied about the cooking.  But whatever they did, none hailed him, or heeded him more than if he had been an image, as he sat there looking on.  None save the old woman who brought him the fore-supper, to wit a great horn of mead, and cakes and dried fish.

So was the hall arrayed for the feast very fairly, and Hallblithe sat there while the sun westered and the house grew dim, and dark at last, and they lighted the candles up and down the hall.  But a little after these were lit, a great horn was winded close without, and thereafter came the clatter of arms about the door, and exceeding tall weaponed men came in, one score and five, and strode two by two up to the foot of the dais, and stood there in a row.  And Hallblithe deemed their war-gear exceeding good; they were all clad in ring-locked byrnies, and had steel helms on their heads with garlands of gold wrought about them and they bore spears in their hands, and white shields hung at their backs.  Now came the women to them and unarmed them; and under their armour their raiment was black; but they had gold rings on their arms, and golden collars about their necks.  So they strode up to the dais and took their places on the high-seat, not heeding Hallblithe any more than if he were an image of wood.  Nevertheless that man sat next to him who was the chieftain of all and sat in the midmost high-seat; and he bore his sheathed sword in his hand and laid it on the board before him, and he was the only man of those chieftains who had a weapon.

But when these were set down there was again a noise without, and there came in a throng of men armed and unarmed who took their places on the end-long benches up and down the hall; with these came women also, who most of them sat amongst the men, but some busied them with the serving:  all these men were great of stature, but none so big as the chieftains on the high-seat.

Now came the women in from the kitchen bearing the meat, whereof no little was flesh-meat, and all was of the best.  Hallblithe was duly served like the others, but still none spake to him or even looked on him; though amongst themselves they spoke in big, rough voices so that the rafters of the hall rang again.

When they had eaten their fill the women filled round the cups and the horns to them, and those vessels were both great and goodly.  But ere they fell to drinking uprose the chieftain who sat furthest from the midmost high-seat on the right and cried a health:  "THE TREASURE OF THE SEA!"  Then they all stood up and shouted, women as well as men, and emptied their horns and cups to that health.  Then stood up the man furthest on the left and cried out, "Drink a health to the Undying King!"  And again all men rose up and shouted ere they drank. Other healths they drank, as the "Cold Keel," the "Windworn Sail," the "Quivering Ash" and the "Furrowed Beach."  And the wine and mead flowed like rivers in that hall of the Wild Men.  As for Hallblithe, he drank what he would but stood not up, nor raised his cup to his lips when a health was drunk; for he knew not whether these men were his friends or his foes, and he deemed it would be little-minded to drink to their healths, lest he might be drinking death and confusion to his own kindred.

But when men had drunk a while, again a horn blew at the nether end of the hall, and straightway folk arose from the endlong tables, and took away the boards and trestles, and cleared the floor and stood against the wall; then the big chieftain beside Hallblithe arose and cried out:  "Now let man dance with maid, and be we merry!  Music, strike up!"  Then flew the fiddle-bows and twanged the harps, and the carles and queens stood forth on the floor; and all the women were clad in black raiment, albeit embroidered with knots and wreaths of flowers.  A while they danced and then suddenly the music fell, and they all went back to their places.  Then the chieftain in the high-seat arose and took a horn from his side, and blew a great blast on it that filled the hall; then he cried in a loud voice:  "Be we merry!  Let the champions come forth!"

Men shouted gleefully thereat, and straightway ran into the hall from out the screens three tall men clad all in black armour with naked swords in their hands, and stood amidst the hall-floor, somewhat on one side, and clashed their swords on their shields and cried out: "Come forth ye Champions of the Raven!"

Then leapt Hallblithe from his seat and set his hand to his left side, but no sword was there; so he sat down again, remembering the warning of the Elder, and none heeded him.

Then there came into the hall slowly and mournfully three men-at-arms, clad and weaponed like the warriors of his folk, with the image of the Raven on their helms and shields.  So Hallblithe refrained him, for besides that this seemed like to be a fair battle of three against three, he doubted some snare, and he determined to look on and abide.

So the champions fell to laying on strokes that were no child's play, though Hallblithe doubted if the edges bit, and it was but a little while before the Champions of the Raven fell one after another before the Wild Men, and folk drew them by the heels out into the buttery. Then arose great laughter and jeering, and exceeding wroth was Hallblithe; howbeit he refrained him because he remembered all he had to do.  But the three Champions of the Sea strode round the hall, tossing up their swords and catching them as they fell, while the horns blew up behind them.

After a while the hall grew hushed, and the chieftain arose and cried:  "Bring in now some sheaves of the harvest we win, we lads of the oar and the arrow!"  Then was there a stir at the screen doors, and folk pressed forward to see, and, lo, there came forward a string of women, led in by two weaponed carles; and the women were a score in number, and they were barefoot and their hair hung loose and their gowns were ungirt, and they were chained together wrist to wrist; yet had they gold at arm and neck:  there was silence in the hall when they stood amidst of the floor.

Then indeed Hallblithe could not refrain himself, and he leapt from his seat and on to the board, and over it, and ran down the hall, and came to those women and looked them in the face one by one, while no man spake in the hall.  But the Hostage was not amongst them; nay forsooth, they none of them favoured of the daughters of his people, though they were comely and fair; so that again Hallblithe doubted if this were aught but a feast-hall play done to anger him; whereas there was but little grief in the faces of those damsels, and more than one of them smiled wantonly in his face as he looked on them.

So he turned about and went back to his seat, having said no word, and behind him arose much mocking and jeering; but it angered him little now; for he remembered the rede of the elder and how that he had done according to his bidding, so that he deemed the gain was his.  So sprang up talk in the hall betwixt man and man, and folk drank about and were merry, till the chieftain arose again and smote the board with the flat of his sword, and cried out in a loud and angry voice, so that all could hear:  "Now let there be music and minstrelsy ere we wend bedward!"

Therewith fell the hubbub of voices, and there came forth three men with great harps, and a fourth man with them, who was the minstrel; and the harpers smote their harps so that the roof rang therewith, and the noise, though it was great, was tuneable, and when they had played thus a little while, they abated their loudness somewhat, and the minstrel lifted his voice and sang:

The land lies black
 With winter's lack,
 The wind blows cold
 Round field and fold;
 All folk are within,
 And but weaving they win.
 Where from finger to finger the shuttle flies fast,
 And the eyes of the singer look fain on the cast,
 As he singeth the story of summer undone
 And the barley sheaves hoary ripe under the sun.

Then the maidens stay
 The light-hung sley,
 And the shuttles bide
 By the blue web's side,
 While hand in hand
 With the carles they stand.
 But ere to the measure the fiddles strike up,
 And the elders yet treasure the last of the cup,
 There stand they a-hearkening the blast from the lift,
 And e'en night is a-darkening more under the drift.

There safe in the hall
 They bless the wall,
 And the roof o'er head,
 Of the valiant stead;
 And the hands they praise
 Of the olden days.
 Then through the storm's roaring the fiddles break out,
 And they think not of warring, but cast away doubt,
 And, man before maiden, their feet tread the floor,
 And their hearts are unladen of all that they bore.

But what winds are o'er-cold
 For the heart of the bold?
 What seas are o'er-high
 For the undoomed to die?
 Dark night and dread wind,
 But the haven we find.
 Then ashore mid the flurry of stone-washing surf!
 Cloud-hounds the moon worry, but light lies the turf;
 Lo the long dale before us! the lights at the end,
 Though the night darkens o'er us, bid whither to wend.

Who beateth the door
 By the foot-smitten floor?
 What guests are these
 From over the seas?
 Take shield and sword
 For their greeting-word.
 Lo, lo, the dance ended!  Lo, midst of the hall
 The fallow blades blended!  Lo, blood on the wall!
 Who liveth, who dieth?  O men of the sea,
 For peace the folk crieth; our masters are ye.

Now the dale lies grey
 At the dawn of day;
 And fair feet pass
 O'er the wind-worn grass;
 And they turn back to gaze
 On the roof of old days.
 Come tread ye the oaken-floored hall of the sea!
 Be your hearts yet unbroken; so fair as ye be,
 That kings are abiding unwedded to gain
 The news of our riding the steeds of the main.

Much shouting and laughter arose at the song's end; and men sprang up and waved their swords above the cups, while Hallblithe sat scowling down on their merriment.  Lastly arose the chieftain and called out loudly for the good-night cup, and it went round and all men drank. Then the horn blew for bed, and the chieftains went to their chambers, and the others went to the out-bowers or laid them down on the hall-floor, and in a little while none stood upright thereon.  So Hallblithe arose, and went to the shut-bed appointed for him, and laid him down and slept dreamlessly till the morning.

The Story of the Glittering Plain, by William Morris, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[f08]

CHAPTER VIII: HALLBLITHE TAKETH SHIP AGAIN AWAY FROM THE ISLE OF RANSOM

When he awoke, the sun shone into the hall by the windows above the buttery, and there were but few folk left therein.  But so soon as Hallblithe was clad, the old woman came to him, and took him by the hand, and led him to the board, and signed to him to eat of what was thereon; and he did so; and by then he was done, came folk who went into the shut-bed where lay the Long-hoary, and they brought him forth bed and all and bare him out a-doors.  Then the crone brought Hallblithe his arms and he did on byrny and helm, girt his sword to his side, took his spear in his hand and went out a-doors; and there close by the porch lay the Long-hoary upon a horse-litter.  So Hallblithe came up to him and gave him the sele of the day:  and the elder said:  "Good morrow, son, I am glad to see thee.  Did they try thee hard last night?"

And Hallblithe saw two of the carles that had borne out the elder, that they were talking together, and they looked on him and laughed mockingly; so he said to the elder:  "Even fools may try a wise man, and so it befell last night.  Yet, as thou seest, mumming hath not slain me."

Said the old man:  "What thou sawest was not all mumming; it was done according to our customs; and well nigh all of it had been done, even hadst thou not been there.  Nay, I will tell thee; at some of our feasts it is not lawful to eat either for the chieftains or the carles, till a champion hath given forth a challenge, and been answered and met, and the battle fought to an end.  But ye men, what hindereth you to go to the horses' heads and speed on the road the chieftain who is no longer way-worthy?"

So they ran to the horses and set down the dale by the riverside, and just as Hallblithe was going to follow afoot, there came a swain from behind the house leading a red horse which he brought to Hallblithe as one who bids mount.  So Hallblithe leapt into the saddle and at once caught up with the litter of the Long-hoary down along the river.  They passed by no other house, save here and there a cot beside some fold or byre; they went easily, for the way was smooth by the river-side; so in less than two hours they came where the said river ran into the sea.  There was no beach there, for the water was ten fathom deep close up to the lip of the land; but there was a great haven land-locked all but a narrow outgate betwixt the sheer black cliffs.  Many a great ship might have lain in that haven; but as now there was but one lying there, a round-ship not very great, but exceeding trim and meet for the sea.

There without more ado the carles took the elder from the litter and bore him aboard, and Hallblithe followed him as if he had been so appointed.  They laid the old man adown on the poop under a tilt of precious web, and so went aback by the way that they had come; and Hallblithe went and sat down beside the Long-hoary, who spake to him and said:  "Seest thou, son, how easy it is for us twain to be shipped for the land whither we would go?  But as easy as it is for thee to go thither whereas we are going, just so hard had it been for thee to go elsewhere.  Moreover I must tell thee that though many an one of the Isle of Ransom desireth to go this voyage, there shall none else go, till the world is a year older, and he who shall go then shall be likest to me in all ways, both in eld and in feebleness, and in gibing speech, and all else; and now that I am gone, his name shall be the same as that whereby ye may call me to-day, and that is Grandfather.  Art thou glad or sorry, Hallblithe?"

"Grandfather," said Hallblithe, "I can scarce tell thee:  I move as one who hath no will to wend one way or other.  Meseems I am drawn to go thither whereas we are going; therefore I deem that I shall find my beloved on the Glittering Plain:  and whatever befalleth afterward, let it be as it will!"

"Tell me, my son," said the Grandfather, "how many women are there in the world?"

"How may I tell thee?" said Hallblithe.

"Well, then," said the elder, "how many exceeding fair women are there?"

Said Hallblithe, "Indeed I wot not."

"How many of such hast thou seen?" said the Grandfather.

"Many," said Hallblithe; "the daughters of my folk are fair, and there will be many other such amongst the aliens."

Then laughed the elder, and said:  "Yet, my son, he who had been thy fellow since thy sundering from thy beloved, would have said that in thy deeming there is but one woman in the world; or at least one fair woman:  is it not so?"

Then Hallblithe reddened at first, as though he were angry; then he said:  "Yea, it is so."

Said the Grandfather in a musing way:  "I wonder if before long I shall think of it as thou dost."

Then Hallblithe gazed at him marvelling, and studied to see wherein lay the gibe against himself; and the Grandfather beheld him, and laughed as well as he might, and said:  "Son, son; didst thou not wish me youth?"

"Yea," said Hallblithe, "but what ails thee to laugh so?  What is it I have said or done?"

"Nought, nought," said the elder, laughing still more, "only thou lookest so mazed.  And who knoweth what thy wish may bring forth?"

Thereat was Hallblithe sore puzzled; but while he set himself to consider what the old carle might mean, uprose the hale and how of the mariners; they cast off the hawsers from the shore, ran out the sweeps, and drave the ship through the haven-gates.  It was a bright sunny day; within, the green water was oily-smooth, without the rippling waves danced merrily under a light breeze, and Hallblithe deemed the wind to be fair; for the mariners shouted joyously and made all sail on the ship; and she lay over and sped through the waves, casting off the seas from her black bows.  Soon were they clear of those swart cliffs, and it was but a little afterwards that the Isle of Ransom was grown deep blue behind them and far away.

The Story of the Glittering Plain, by William Morris, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[f09]

CHAPTER IX: THEY COME TO THE LAND OF THE GLITTERING PLAIN

As in the hall, so in the ship, Hallblithe noted that the folk were merry and of many words one with another, while to him no man cast a word save the Grandfather.  As to Hallblithe, though he wondered much what all this betokened, and what the land was whereto he was wending, he was no man to fear an unboded peril; and he said to himself that whatever else betid, he should meet the Hostage on the Glittering Plain; so his heart rose and he was of good cheer, and as the Grandfather had foretold, he was a merry faring-fellow to him. Many a gibe the old man cast at him, and whiles Hallblithe gave him back as good as he took, and whiles he laughed as the stroke went home and silenced him; and whiles he understood nought of what the elder said.  So wore the day and still the wind held fair, though it was light; and the sun set in a sky nigh cloudless, and there was nowhere any forecast of peril.  But when night was come, Hallblithe lay down on a fair bed, which was dight for him in the poop, and he soon fell asleep and dreamed not save such dreams as are but made up of bygone memories, and betoken nought, and are not remembered.

When he awoke, day lay broad on the sea, and the waves were little, the sky had but few clouds, the sun shone bright, and the air was warm and sweet-breathed.

He looked aside and saw the old man sitting up in his bed, as ghastly as a dead man dug up again:  his bushy eyebrows were wrinkled over his bleared old eyes, the long white hair dangled forlorn from his gaunt head:  yet was his face smiling and he looked as happy as the soul within him could make the half-dead body.  He turned now to Hallblithe and said:

"Thou art late awake:  hadst thou been waking earlier, the sooner had thine heart been gladdened.  Go forward now, and gaze thy fill and come and tell me thereof."

"Thou art happy, Grandfather," said Hallblithe, "what good tidings hath morn brought us?"

"The Land! the Land!" said the Long-hoary; "there are no longer tears in this old body, else should I be weeping for joy."

Said Hallblithe:  "Art thou going to meet some one who shall make thee glad before thou diest, old man?"

"Some one?" said the elder; "what one?  Are they not all gone? burned, and drowned, and slain and died abed?  Some one, young man? Yea, forsooth some one indeed!  Yea, the great warrior of the Wasters of the Shore; the Sea-eagle who bore the sword and the torch and the terror of the Ravagers over the coal-blue sea.  It is myself, MYSELF that I shall find on the Land of the Glittering Plain, O young lover!"

Hallblithe looked on him wondering as he raised his wasted arms towards the bows of the ship pitching down the slope of the sunlit sea, or climbing up it.  Then again the old man fell back on his bed and muttered:  "What fool's work is this! that thou wilt draw me on to talk loud, and waste my body with lack of patience.  I will talk with thee no more, lest my heart swell and break, and quench the little spark of life within me."

Then Hallblithe arose to his feet, and stood looking at him, wondering so much at his words, that for a while he forgat the land which they were nearing, though he had caught glimpses of it, as the bows of the round-ship fell downward into the hollow of the sea.  The wind was but light, as hath been said, and the waves little under it, but there was still a smooth swell of the sea which came of breezes now dead, and the ship wallowed thereon and sailed but slowly.

In a while the old man opened his eyes again, and said in a low peevish voice:  "Why standest thou staring at me? why hast thou not gone forward to look upon the land?  True it is that ye Ravens are short of wits."

Said Hallblithe:  "Be not wrath, chieftain; I was wondering at thy words, which are exceeding marvellous; tell me more of this land of the Glittering Plain."

Said the Grandfather:  "Why should I tell it thee? ask of the mariners.  They all know more than thou dost."

"Thou knowest," said Hallblithe, "that these men speak not to me, and take no more heed of me than if I were an image which they were carrying to sell to the next mighty man they may hap on.  Or tell me, thou old man," said he fiercely, "is it perchance a thrall-market whereto they are bringing me?  Have they sold her there, and will they sell me also in the same place, but into other hands."

"Tush!" said the Grandfather somewhat feebly, "this last word of thine is folly; there is no buying or selling in the land whereto we are bound.  As to thine other word, that these men have no fellowship with thee, it is true:  thou art my fellow and the fellow of none else aboard.  Therefore if I feel might in me, maybe I will tell thee somewhat."

Then he raised his head a little and said:  "The sun grows hot, the wind faileth us, and slow and slow are we sailing."

Even as he spoke there was a stir amidships, and Hallblithe looked and beheld the mariners handling the sweeps, and settling themselves on the rowing-benches.  Said the elder:  "There is noise amidships, what are they doing?"

The old man raised himself a little again, and cried out in his shrill voice:  "Good lads! brave lads!  Thus would we do in the old time when we drew anear some shore, and the beacons were sending up smoke by day, and flame benights; and the shore-abiders did on their helms and trembled.  Thrust her through, lads!  Thrust her along!" Then he fell back again, and said in a weak voice:  "Make no more delay, guest, but go forward and look upon the land, and come back and tell me thereof, and then the tale may flow from me.  Haste, haste!"  So Hallblithe went down from the poop, and in to the waist, where now the rowers were bending to their oars, and crying out fiercely as they tugged at the quivering ash; and he clomb on to the forecastle and went forward right to the dragon-head, and gazed long upon the land, while the dashing of the oar-blades made the semblance of a gale about the ship's black sides.  Then he came back again to the Sea-eagle, who said to him:  "Son, what hast thou seen?"

"Right ahead lieth the land, and it is still a good way off.  High rise the mountains there, but by seeming there is no snow on them; and though they be blue they are not blue like the mountains of the Isle of Ransom.  Also it seemed to me as if fair slopes of woodland and meadow come down to the edge of the sea.  But it is yet far away."

"Yea," said the elder, "is it so?  Then will I not wear myself with making words for thee.  I will rest rather, and gather might.  Come again when an hour hath worn, and tell me what thou seest; and may happen then thou shalt have my tale!"  And he laid him down therewith and seemed to be asleep at once.  And Hallblithe might not amend it; so he waited patiently till the hour had worn, and then went forward again, and looked long and carefully, and came back and said to the Sea-eagle, "The hour is worn."

The old chieftain turned himself about and said "What hast thou seen?

Said Hallblithe:  "The mountains are pale and high, and below them are hills dark with wood, and betwixt them and the sea is a fair space of meadowland, and methought it was wide."

Said the old man:  "Sawest thou a rocky skerry rising high out of the sea anigh the shore?"

"Nay," said Hallblithe, "if there be, it is all blended with the meadows and the hills."

Said the Sea-eagle:  "Abide the wearing of another hour, and come and tell me again, and then I may have a gainful word for thee."  And he fell asleep again.  But Hallblithe abided, and when the hour was worn, he went forward and stood on the forecastle.  And this was the third shift of the rowers, and the stoutest men in the ship now held the oars in their hands, and the ship shook through all her length and breadth as they drave her over the waters.

So Hallblithe came aft to the old man and found him asleep; so he took him by the shoulder, and shook him and said:  "Awake, faring-fellow, for the land is a-nigh."

So the old man sat up and said:  "What hast thou seen?"

Said Hallblithe:  "I have seen the peaks and cliffs of the far-off mountains; and below them are hills green with grass and dark with woods, and thence stretch soft green meadows down to the sea-strand, which is fair and smooth, and yellow."

"Sawest thou the skerry?" said the Sea-eagle.

"Yea, I saw it," said Hallblithe, "and it rises sheer from out the sea about a mile from the yellow strand; but its rocks are black, like the rocks of the Isle of Ransom."

"Son," said the elder, "give me thine hands and raise me up a little."  So Hallblithe took him and raised him up, so that he sat leaning against the pillows; and he looked not on Hallblithe, but on the bows of the ship, which now pitched but a little up and down, for the sea was laid quiet now.  Then he cried in his shrill, piping voice:  "It is the Land!  It is the Land!"

But after a little while he turned to Hallblithe and spake:  "Short is the tale to tell:  thou hast wished me youth, and thy wish hath thriven; for to-day, ere the sun goes down, thou shalt see me as I was in the days when I reaped the harvest of the sea with sharp sword and hardy heart.  For this is the land of the Undying King, who is our lord and our gift-giver; and to some he giveth the gift of youth renewed, and life that shall abide here the Gloom of the Gods.  But none of us all may come to the Glittering Plain and the King Undying without turning the back for the last time on the Isle of Ransom: nor may any men of the Isle come hither save those who are of the House of the Sea-eagle, and few of those, save the chieftains of the House, such as are they who sat by thee on the high-seat that even. Of these once in a while is chosen one of us, who is old and spent and past battle, and is borne to this land and the gift of the Undying.  Forsooth some of us have no will to take the gift, for they say they are liefer to go to where they shall meet more of our kindred than dwell on the Glittering Plain and the Acre of the Undying; but as for me I was ever an overbearing and masterful man, and meseemeth it is well that I meet as few of our kindred as may be: for they are a strifeful race."

Hereat Hallblithe marvelled exceedingly, and he said:  "And what am I in all this story?  Why am I come hither with thy furtherance?"

Said the Sea-eagle:  "We had a charge from the Undying King concerning thee, that we should bring thee hither alive and well, if so be thou camest to the Isle of Ransom.  For what cause we had the charge, I know not, nor do I greatly heed."

Said Hallblithe:  "And shall I also have that gift of undying youth, and life while the world of men and gods endureth?"

"I must needs deem so," said the Sea-eagle, "so long as thou abidest on the Glittering Plain; and I see not how thou mayst ever escape thence."

Now Hallblithe heard him, how he said "escape," and thereat he was somewhat ill at ease, and stood and pondered a little.  At last he said:  "Is this then all that thou hast to tell me concerning the Glittering Plain?"

"By the Treasure of the Sea!" said the elder, "I know no more of it. The living shall learn.  But I suppose that thou mayst seek thy troth-plight maiden there all thou wilt.  Or thou mayst pray the Undying King to have her thither to thee.  What know I?  At least, it is like that there shall be no lack of fair women there:  or else the promise of youth renewed is nought and vain.  Shall this not be enough for thee?"

"Nay," said Hallblithe.

"What," said the elder, "must it be one woman only?"

"One only," said Hallblithe.

The old man laughed his thin mocking laugh, and said:  "I will not assure thee but that the land of the Glittering Plain shall change all that for thee so soon as it touches the soles of thy feet."

Hallblithe looked at him steadily and smiled, and said:  "Well is it then that I shall find the Hostage there; for then shall we be of one mind, either to sunder or to cleave together.  It is well with me this day."

"And with me it shall be well ere long," said the Sea-eagle.

But now the rowers ceased rowing and lay on their oars, and the shipmen cast anchor; for they were but a bowshot from the shore, and the ship swung with the tide and lay side-long to the shore.  Then said the Sea-eagle:  "Look forth, shipmate, and tell me of the land."

And Hallblithe looked and said:  "The yellow beach is sandy and shell-strewn, as I deem, and there is no great space of it betwixt the sea and the flowery grass; and a bowshot from the strand I see a little wood amidst which are fair trees blossoming."

"Seest thou any folk on the shore?" said the old man.  "Yea," said Hallblithe, "close to the edge of the sea go four; and by seeming three are women, for their long gowns flutter in the wind.  And one of these is clad in saffron colour, and another in white, and another in watchet; but the carle is clad in dark red; and their raiment is all glistening as with gold and gems; and by seeming they are looking at our ship as though they expected somewhat."

Said the Sea-eagle:  "Why now do the shipmen tarry and have not made ready the skiff?  Swillers and belly-gods they be; slothful swine that forget their chieftain."

But even as he spake came four of the shipmen, and without more ado took him up, bed and all, and bore him down into the waist of the ship, whereunder lay the skiff with four strong rowers lying on their oars.  These men made no sign to Hallblithe, nor took any heed of him; but he caught up his spear, and followed them and stood by as they lowered the old man into the boat.  Then he set his foot on the gunwale of the ship and leapt down lightly into the boat, and none hindered or helped him; and he stood upright in the boat, a goodly image of battle with the sun flashing back from his bright helm, his spear in his hand, his white shield at his back, and thereon the image of the Raven; but if he had been but a salt-boiling carle of the sea-side none would have heeded him less.

The Story of the Glittering Plain, by William Morris, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[f10]

CHAPTER X: THEY HOLD CONVERSE WITH FOLK OF THE GLITTERING PLAIN

Now the rowers lifted the ash-blades, and fell to rowing towards shore:  and almost with the first of their strokes, the Sea-eagle moaned out:

"Would we were there, oh, would we were there!  Cold groweth eld about my heart.  Raven's Son, thou art standing up; tell me if thou canst see what these folk of the land are doing, and if any others have come thither?"

Said Hallblithe:  "There are none others come, but kine and horses are feeding down the meadows.  As to what those four are doing, the women are putting off their shoon, and girding up their raiment, as if they would wade the water toward us; and the carle, who was barefoot before, wendeth straight towards the sea, and there he standeth, for very little are the waves become."

The old man answered nothing, and did but groan for lack of patience; but presently when the water was yet waist deep the rowers stayed the skiff, and two of them slipped over the gunwale into the sea, and between them all they took up the chieftain on his bed and got him forth from the boat and went toward the strand with him; and the landsfolk met them where the water was shallower, and took him from their hands and bore him forth on to the yellow sand, and laid him down out of reach of the creeping ripple of the tide.  Hallblithe withal slipped lightly out of the boat and waded the water after them.  But the shipmen rowed back again to their ship, and presently Hallblithe heard the hale and how, as they got up their anchor.

But when Hallblithe was come ashore, and was drawn near the folk of the land, the women looked at him askance, and they laughed and said: "Welcome to thee also, O young man!"  And he beheld them, and saw that they were of the stature of the maidens of his own land; they were exceeding fair of skin and shapely of fashion, so that the nakedness of their limbs under their girded gowns, and all glistening with the sea, was most lovely and dainty to behold.  But Hallblithe knelt by the Sea-eagle to note how he fared, and said:  "How is it with thee, O chieftain?"

The old man answered not a word, and he seemed to be asleep, and Hallblithe deemed that his cheeks were ruddier and his skin less wasted and wrinkled than aforetime.  Then spake one of those women: "Fear not, young man; he is well and will soon be better."  Her voice was as sweet as a spring bird in the morning; she was white-skinned and dark-haired, and full sweetly fashioned; and she laughed on Hallblithe, but not mockingly; and her fellows also laughed, as though it was strange for him to be there.  Then they did on their shoon again, and with the carle laid their hands to the bed whereon the old man lay, and lifted him up, and bore him forth on to the grass, turning their faces toward the flowery wood aforesaid; and they went a little way and then laid him down again and rested; and so on little by little, till they had brought him to the edge of the wood, and still he seemed to be asleep.  Then the damsel who had spoken before, she with the dark hair, said to Hallblithe, "Although we have gazed on thee as if with wonder, this is not because we did not look to meet thee, but because thou art so fair and goodly a man: so abide thou here till we come back to thee from out of the wood."

Therewith she stroked his hand, and with her fellows lifted the old man once more, and they bore him out of sight into the thicket.

But Hallblithe went to and fro a dozen paces from the wood, and looked across the flowery meads and deemed he had never seen any so fair.  And afar off toward the hills he saw a great roof arising, and thought he could see men also; and nigher to him were kine pasturing, and horses also, whereof some drew anear him and stretched out their necks and gazed at him; and they were goodly after their kind; and a fair stream of water came round the corner out of the wood and down the meadows to the sea; and Hallblithe went thereto and could see that there was but little ebb and flow of the tide on that shore; for the water of the stream was clear as glass, and the grass and flowers grew right down to its water; so he put off his helm and drank of the stream and washed his face and his hands therein, and then did on his helm again and turned back again toward the wood, feeling very strong and merry; and he looked out seaward and saw the Ship of the Isle of Ransom lessening fast; for a little land wind had arisen and they had spread their sails to it; and he laid down on the grass till the four folk of the country came out of the wood again, after they had been gone somewhat less than an hour, but the Sea-eagle was not with them: and Hallblithe rose up and turned to them, and the carle saluted him and departed, going straight toward that far-away roof he had seen; and the women were left with Hallblithe, and they looked at him and he at them as he stood leaning on his spear.

Then said the black-haired damsel:  "True it is, O Spearman, that if we did not know of thee, our wonder would be great that a man so young and lucky-looking should have sought hither."

"I wot not why thou shouldest wonder," said Hallblithe; "I will tell thee presently wherefore I come hither.  But tell me, is this the Land of the Glittering Plain?"

"Even so," said the damsel, "dost thou not see how the sun shineth on it?  Just so it shineth in the season that other folks call winter."

"Some such marvel I thought to hear of," said he; "for I have been told that the land is marvellous; and fair though these meadows be, they are not marvellous to look on now:  they are like other lands, though it maybe, fairer."

"That may be," she said; "we have nought but hearsay of other lands. If we ever knew them we have forgotten them."

Said Hallblithe, "Is this land called also the Acre of the Undying?"

As he spake the words the smile faded from the damsel's face; she and her fellows grew pale, and she said:  "Hold thy peace of such words! They are not lawful for any man to utter here.  Yet mayst thou call it the Land of the Living."

He said:  "I crave pardon for the rash word."

Then they smiled again, and drew near to him, and caressed him with their hands, and looked on him lovingly; but he drew a little aback from them and said:  "I have come hither seeking something which I have lost, the lack whereof grieveth me."

Quoth the damsel, drawing nearer to him again, "Mayst thou find it, thou lovely man, and whatsoever else thou desirest."

Then he said:  "Hath a woman named the Hostage been brought hither of late days?  A fair woman, bright-haired and grey-eyed, kind of countenance, soft of speech, yet outspoken and nought timorous; tall according to our stature, but very goodly of fashion; a woman of the House of the Rose, and my troth-plight maiden."

They looked on each other and shook their heads, and the black-haired damsel spake:  "We know of no such a woman, nor of the kindred which thou namest."

Then his countenance fell, and became piteous with desire and grief, and he bent his brows upon them, for they seemed to him light-minded and careless, though they were lovely.

But they shrank from him trembling, and drew aback; for they had all been standing close to him, beholding him with love, and she who had spoken most had been holding his left hand fondly.  But now she said: "Nay, look not on us so bitterly!  If the woman be not in the land, this cometh not of our malice.  Yet maybe she is here.  For such as come hither keep not their old names, and soon forget them what they were.  Thou shalt go with us to the King, and he shall do for thee what thou wilt; for he is exceeding mighty."

Then was Hallblithe appeased somewhat; and he said:  "Are there many women in the land?"

"Yea, many," said that damsel.

"And many that are as fair as ye be?" said he.  Then they laughed and were glad, and drew near to him again and took his hands and kissed them; and the black-haired damsel said:  "Yea, yea, there be many as fair as we be, and some fairer," and she laughed.

"And that King of yours," said he, "how do ye name him?"

"He is the King," said the damsel.

"Hath he no other name?" said Hallblithe.

"We may not utter it," she said; "but thou shalt see him soon, that there is nought but good in him and mightiness."

The Story of the Glittering Plain, by William Morris, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[f11]

CHAPTER XI: THE SEA-EAGLE RENEWETH HIS LIFE

But while they spake together thus, came a man from out of the wood very tall of stature, red-bearded and black-haired, ruddy-cheeked, full-limbed, most joyous of aspect; a man by seeming of five and thirty winters.  He strode straight up to Hallblithe, and cast his arms about him, and kissed his cheek, as if he had been an old and dear friend newly come from over seas.

Hallblithe wondered and laughed, and said:  "Who art thou that deemest me so dear?"

Said the man:  "Short is thy memory, Son of the Raven, that thou in so little space hast forgotten thy shipmate and thy faring-fellow; who gave thee meat and drink and good rede in the Hall of the Ravagers."  Therewith he laughed joyously and turned about to the three maidens and took them by the hands and kissed their lips, while they fawned upon him lovingly.

Then said Hallblithe:  "Hast thou verily gotten thy youth again, which thou badest me wish thee?"

"Yea, in good sooth," said the red-bearded man; "I am the Sea-eagle of old days; and I have gotten my youth, and love therewithal, and somewhat to love moreover."

Therewith he turned to the fairest of the damsels, and she was white-skinned and fragrant as the lily, rose-cheeked and slender, and the wind played with the long locks of her golden hair, which hung down below her knees; so he cast his arms about her and strained her to his bosom, and kissed her face many times, and she nothing loth, but caressing him with lips and hand.  But the other two damsels stood by smiling and joyous:  and they clapped their hands together and kissed each other for joy of the new lover; and at last fell to dancing and skipping about them like young lambs in the meadows of Spring-tide. But amongst them all, stood up Hallblithe leaning on his spear with smiling lips and knitted brow; for he was pondering in his mind in what wise he might further his quest.

But after they had danced a while the Sea-eagle left his love that he had chosen and took a hand of either of the two damsels, and led them tripping up to Hallblithe, and cried out:  "Choose thou, Raven's baby, which of these twain thou wilt have to thy mate; for scarcely shalt thou see better or fairer."

But Hallblithe looked on them proudly and sternly, and the black-haired damsel hung down her head before him and said softly:  "Nay, nay, sea-warrior; this one is too lovely to be our mate.  Sweeter love abides him, and lips more longed for."

Then stirred Hallblithe's heart within him and he said:  "O Eagle of the Sea, thou hast thy youth again:  what then wilt thou do with it? Wilt thou not weary for the moonlit main, and the washing of waves and the dashing of spray, and thy fellows all glistening with the brine?  Where now shall be the alien shores before thee, and the landing for fame, and departure for the gain of goods?  Wilt thou forget the ship's black side, and the dripping of the windward oars, as the squall falleth on when the sun hath arisen, and the sail tuggeth hard on the sheet, and the ship lieth over and the lads shout against the whistle of the wind?  Has the spear fallen from thine hand, and hast thou buried the sword of thy fathers in the grave from which thy body hath escaped?  What art thou, O Warrior, in the land of the alien and the King?  Who shall heed thee or tell the tale of thy glory, which thou hast covered over with the hand of a light woman, whom thy kindred knoweth not, and who was not born in a house wherefrom it hath been appointed thee from of old to take the pleasure of woman?  Whose thrall art thou now, thou lifter of the spoil, thou scarer of the freeborn?  The bidding of what lord or King wilt thou do, O Chieftain, that thou mayst eat thy meat in the morning and lie soft in thy bed in the evening?"

"O Warrior of the Ravagers, here stand I, Hallblithe of the Raven, and I am come into an alien land beset with marvels to seek mine own, and find that which is dearest to mine heart; to wit, my troth-plight maiden the Hostage of the Rose, the fair woman who shall lie in my bed, and bear me children, and stand by me in field and fold, by thwart and gunwale, before the bow and the spear, by the flickering of the cooking-fire, and amidst the blaze of the burning hall, and beside the bale-fire of the warrior of the Raven.  O Sea-eagle, my guester amongst the foemen, my fellow-farer and shipmate, say now once for all whether thou wilt help me in my quest, or fall off from me as a dastard?"

Again the maidens shrank before his clear and high-raised voice, and they trembled and grew pale.

But the Sea-eagle laughed from a countenance kind with joy, and said: "Child of the Raven, thy words are good and manly:  but it availeth nought in this land, and I wot not how thou wilt fare, or why thou hast been sent amongst us.  What wilt thou do?  Hadst thou spoken these words to the Long-hoary, the Grandfather, yesterday, his ears would have been deaf to them; and now that thou speakest them to the Sea-eagle, this joyous man on the Glittering Plain, he cannot do according to them, for there is no other land than this which can hold him.  Here he is strong and stark, and full of joy and love; but otherwhere he would be but a gibbering ghost drifting down the wind of night.  Therefore in whatsoever thou mayst do within this land I will stand by thee and help thee; but not one inch beyond it may my foot go, whether it be down into the brine of the sea, or up into the clefts of the mountains which are the wall of this goodly land.

"Thou hast been my shipmate and I love thee, I am thy friend; but here in this land must needs be the love and the friendship.  For no ghost can love thee, no ghost may help thee.  And as to what thou sayest concerning the days gone past and our joys upon the tumbling sea, true it is that those days were good and lovely; but they are dead and gone like the lads who sat on the thwart beside us, and the maidens who took our hands in the hall to lead us to the chamber. Other days have come in their stead, and other friends shall cherish us.  What then?  Shall we wound the living to pleasure the dead, who cannot heed it?  Shall we curse the Yuletide, and cast foul water on the Holy Hearth of the winter feast, because the summer once was fair and the days flit and the times change?  Now let us be glad!  For life liveth."

Therewith he turned about to his damsel and kissed her on the mouth. But Hallblithe's face was grown sad and stern, and he spake slowly and heavily:  "So is it, shipmate, that whereas thou sayest that the days flit, for thee they shall flit no more; and the day may come for thee when thou shalt be weary, and know it, and long for the lost which thou hast forgotten.  But hereof it availeth nought for me to speak any longer, for thine ears are deaf to these words, and thou wilt not hear them.  Therefore I say no more save that I thank thee for thy help whatsoever it may be; and I will take it, for the day's work lieth before me, and I begin to think that it may be heavy enough."

The women yet looked downcast, and as if they would be gone out of earshot; but the Sea-eagle laughed as one who is well content, and said:  "Thou thyself wilt make it hard for thyself after the wont of thy proud and haughty race; but for me nothing is hard any longer; neither thy scorn nor thy forebodings of evil.  Be thou my friend as much as thou canst, and I will be thine wholly.  Now ye women, whither will ye lead us?  For I am ready to see any new thing ye will show us."

Said his damsel:  "We will take you to the King, that your hearts may be the more gladdened.  And as for thy friend the Spearman, O Sea-warrior, let not his heart be downcast.  Who wotteth but that these two desires, the desire of his heart, and the desire of a heart for him, may not be one and the same desire, so that he shall be fully satisfied?"  As she spoke she looked sidelong at Hallblithe, with shy and wheedling eyes; and he wondered at her word, and a new hope sprang up in his heart that he was presently to be brought face to face with the Hostage, and that this was that love, sweeter than their love, which abode in him, and his heart became lighter, and his visage cleared.

The Story of the Glittering Plain, by William Morris, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[f12]

CHAPTER XII: THEY LOOK ON THE KING OF THE GLITTERING PLAIN

So now the women led them along up the stream, and Hallblithe went side by side by the Sea-eagle; but the women had become altogether merry again, and played and ran about them as gamesome as young goats; and they waded the shallows of the clear bright stream barefoot to wash their limbs of the sea-brine, and strayed about the meadows, plucking the flowers and making them wreaths and chaplets, which they did upon themselves and the Sea-eagle; but Hallblithe they touched not, for still they feared him.  They went on as the stream led them up toward the hills, and ever were the meads about them as fair and flowery as might be.  Folk they saw afar off, but fell in with none for a good while, saving a man and a maid clad lightly as for mid-summer days, who were wandering together lovingly and happily by the stream-side, and who gazed wonderingly on the stark Sea-eagle, and on Hallblithe with his glittering spear.  The black-haired damsel greeted these twain and spake something to them, and they laughed merrily, and the man stooped down amongst the grasses and blossoms of the bank, and drew forth a basket, and spread dainty victuals on the grass under a willow-tree, and bade them be his guests that fair afternoon.  So they sat down there above the glistering stream and ate and drank and were merry.  Thereafter the new-comers and their way-leaders departed with kind words, and still set their faces towards the hills.

At last they saw before them a little wooded hill, and underneath it something red and shining, and other coloured things gleaming in the sun about it.  Then said the Sea-eagle:  "What have we yonder?"

Said his damsel:  "That is the pavilion of the King; and about it are the tents and tilts of our folk who are of his fellowship:  for oft he abideth in the fields with them, though he hath houses and halls as fair as the heart of man can conceive."

"Hath he no foemen to fear?" said the Sea-eagle.

"How should that be?" said the damsel.  "If perchance any came into this land to bring war upon him, their battle-anger should depart when once the bliss of the Glittering Plain had entered into their souls, and they would ask for nought but leave to abide here and be happy.  Yet I trow that if he had foemen he could crush them as easily as I set my foot on this daisy."

So as they went on they fell in with many folk, men and women, sporting and playing in the fields; and there was no semblance of eld on any of them, and no scar or blemish or feebleness of body or sadness of countenance; nor did any bear a weapon or any piece of armour.  Now some of them gathered about the new-corners, and wondered at Hallblithe and his long spear and shining helm and dark grey byrny; but none asked concerning them, for all knew that they were folk new come to the bliss of the Glittering Plain.  So they passed amidst these fair folk little hindered by them, and into Hallblithe's thoughts it came how joyous the fellowship of such should be and how his heart should be raised by the sight of them, if only his troth-plight maiden were by his side.

Thus then they came to the King's pavilion, where it stood in a bight of the meadow-land at the foot of the hill, with the wood about it on three sides.  So fair a house Hallblithe deemed he had never seen; for it was wrought all over with histories and flowers, and with hems sewn with gold, and with orphreys of gold and pearl and gems.

There in the door of it sat the King of the Land in an ivory chair; he was clad in golden gown, girt with a girdle of gems, and had his crown on his head and his sword by his side.  For this was the hour wherein he heard what any of his folk would say to him, and for that very end he sat there in the door of his tent, and folk were standing before him, and sitting and lying on the grass round about; and now one, now another, came up to him and spoke before him.

His face shone like a star; it was exceeding beauteous, and as kind as the even of May in the gardens of the happy, when the scent of the eglantine fills all the air.  When he spoke his voice was so sweet that all hearts were ravished, and none might gainsay him.

But when Hallblithe set eyes on him, he knew at once that this was he whose carven image he had seen in the Hall of the Ravagers, and his heart beat fast, and he said to himself:  "Hold up thine head now, O Son of the Raven, strengthen thine heart, and let no man or god cow thee.  For how can thine heart change, which bade thee go to the house wherefrom it was due to thee to take the pleasure of woman, and there to pledge thy faith and troth to her that loveth thee most, and hankereth for thee day by day and hour by hour, so that great is the love that we twain have builded up."

Now they drew nigh, for folk fell back before them to the right and left, as before men who are new come and have much to do; so that there was nought between them and the face of the King.  But he smiled upon them so that he cheered their hearts with the hope of fulfilment of their desires, and he said:  "Welcome, children!  Who be these whom ye have brought hither for the increase of our joy? Who is this tall, ruddy-faced, joyous man so meet for the bliss of the Glittering Plain?  And who is this goodly and lovely young man, who beareth weapons amidst our peace, and whose face is sad and stern beneath the gleaming of his helm?

Said the dark-haired damsel:  "O King!  O Gift-giver and assurer of joy! this tall one is he who was once oppressed by eld, and who hath come hither to thee from the Isle of Ransom, according to the custom of the land."

Said the King:  "Tall man, it is well that thou art come.  Now are thy days changed and thou yet alive.  For thee battle is ended, and therewith the reward of battle, which the warrior remembereth not amidst the hard hand-play:  peace hath begun, and thou needest not be careful for the endurance thereof:  for in this land no man hath a lack which he may not satisfy without taking aught from any other.  I deem not that thine heart may conceive a desire which I shall not fulfil for thee, or crave a gift which I shall not give thee."

Then the Sea-eagle laughed for joy, and turned his head this way and that, so that he might the better take to him the smiles of all those that stood around.

Then the King said to Hallblithe:  "Thou also art welcome; I know thee who thou art:  meseemeth great joy awaiteth thee, and I will fulfil thy desire to the uttermost."

Said Hallblithe:  "O great King of a happy land, I ask of thee nought save that which none shall withhold from me uncursed."

"I will give it to thee," said the King, "and thou shalt bless me. But what is it which thou wouldst?  What more canst thou have than the Gifts of the land?"

Said Hallblithe:  "I came hither seeking no gifts, but to have mine own again; and that is the bodily love of my troth-plight maiden. They stole her from me, and me from her; for she loved me.  I went down to the sea-side and found her not, nor the ship which had borne her away.  I sailed from thence to the Isle of Ransom, for they told me that there I should buy her for a price; neither was her body there.  But her image came to me in a dream of the night, and bade me seek to her hither.  Therefore, O King, if she be here in the land, show me how I shall find her, and if she be not here, show me how I may depart to seek her otherwhere.  This is all my asking."

Said the King:  "Thy desire shall be satisfied; thou shalt have the woman who would have thee, and whom thou shouldst have."

Hallblithe was gladdened beyond measure by that word; and now did the King seem to him a comfort and a solace to every heart, even as he had deemed of his carven image in the Hall of the Ravagers; and he thanked him, and blessed him.

But the King bade him abide by him that night, and feast with him. "And on the morrow," said he, "thou shalt go thy ways to look on her whom thou oughtest to love."

Therewith was come the eventide and beginning of night, warm and fragrant and bright with the twinkling of stars, and they went into the King's pavilion, and there was the feast as fair and dainty as might be; and Hallblithe had meat from the King's own dish, and drink from his cup; but the meat had no savour to him and the drink no delight, because of the longing that possessed him.

And when the feast was done, the damsels led Hallblithe to his bed in a fair tent strewn with gold about his head like the starry night, and he lay down and slept for sheer weariness of body.

The Story of the Glittering Plain, by William Morris, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[f13]

CHAPTER XIII: HALLBLITHE BEHOLDETH THE WOMAN WHO LOVETH HIM

But on the morrow the men arose, and the Sea-eagle and his damsel came to Hallblithe; for the other two damsels were departed, and the Sea-eagle said to him:

"Here am I well honoured and measurelessly happy; and I have a message for thee from the King."

"What is it?" said Hallblithe; but he deemed that he knew what it would be, and he reddened for the joy of his assured hope.

Said the Sea-eagle:  "Joy to thee, O shipmate!  I am to take thee to the place where thy beloved abideth, and there shalt thou see her, but not so as she can see thee; and thereafter shalt thou go to the King, that thou mayst tell him if she shall accomplish thy desire."

Then was Hallblithe glad beyond measure, and his heart danced within him, and he deemed it but meet that the others should be so joyous and blithe with him, for they led him along without any delay, and were glad at his rejoicing; and words failed him to tell of his gladness.

But as he went, the thoughts of his coming converse with his beloved curled sweetly round his heart, so that scarce anything had seemed so sweet to him before; and he fell a-pondering what they twain, he and the Hostage, should do when they came together again; whether they should abide on the Glittering Plain, or go back again to Cleveland by the Sea and dwell in the House of the Kindred; and for his part he yearned to behold the roof of his fathers and to tread the meadow which his scythe had swept, and the acres where his hook had smitten the wheat.  But he said to himself, "I will wait till I hear her desire hereon."

Now they went into the wood at the back of the King's pavilion and through it, and so over the hill, and beyond it came into a land of hills and dales exceeding fair and lovely; and a river wound about the dales, lapping in turn the feet of one hill-side or the other; and in each dale (for they passed through two) was a goodly house of men, and tillage about it, and vineyards and orchards.  They went all day till the sun was near setting, and were not weary, for they turned into the houses by the way when they would, and had good welcome and meat and drink and what they would of the folk that dwelt there.  Thus anigh sunset they came into a dale fairer than either of the others, and nigh to the end where they had entered it was an exceeding goodly house.  Then said the damsel:

"We are nigh-hand to our journey's end; let us sit down on the grass by this river-side whilst I tell thee the tale which the King would have thee know."

So they sat down on the grass beside the brimming river, scant two bowshots from that fair house, and the damsel said, reading from a scroll which she drew from her bosom:

"O Spearman, in yonder house dwelleth the woman foredoomed to love thee:  if thou wouldst see her, go thitherward, following the path which turneth from the river-side by yonder oak-tree, and thou shalt presently come to a thicket of bay-trees at the edge of an apple-orchard, whose trees are blossoming; abide thou hidden by the bay-leaves, and thou shalt see maidens come into the orchard, and at last one fairer than all the others.  This shall be thy love fore-doomed, and none other; and thou shalt know her by this token, that when she hath set her down on the grass beside the bay-tree, she shall say to her maidens 'Bring me now the book wherein is the image of my beloved, that I may solace myself with beholding it before the sun goes down and the night cometh.'"

Now Hallblithe was troubled when she read out these words, and he said:  "What is this tale about a book?  I know not of any book that lieth betwixt me and my beloved."

"O Spearman," said the damsel, "I may tell thee no more, because I know no more.  But keep up thine heart!  For dost thou know any more than I do what hath befallen thy beloved since thou wert sundered from her? and why should not this matter of the book be one of the things that hath befallen her?  Go now with joy, and come again blessing us."

"Yea, go, faring-fellow," said the Sea-eagle, "and come back joyful, that we may all be merry together.  And we will abide thee here."

Hallblithe foreboded evil, but he held his peace and went his ways down the path by the oak-tree; and they abode there by the water-side, and were very merry talking of this and that (but no whit of Hallblithe), and kissing and caressing each other; so that it seemed but a little while to them ere they saw Hallblithe coming back by the oak-tree.  He went slowly, hanging his head like a man sore-burdened with grief:  thus he came up to them, and stood there above them as they lay on the fragrant grass, and he saying no word and looking so sad and sorry, and withal so fell, that they feared his grief and his anger, and would fain have been away from him; so that they durst not ask him a question for a long while, and the sun sank below the hill while they abided thus.

Then all trembling the damsel spake to the Sea-eagle:  "Speak to him, dear friend, else must I flee away, for I fear his silence."

Quoth the Sea-eagle:  "Shipmate and friend, what hath betided?  How art thou?  May we hearken, and mayhappen amend it?"

Then Hallblithe cast himself adown on the grass and said:  "I am accursed and beguiled; and I wander round and round in a tangle that I may not escape from.  I am not far from deeming that this is a land of dreams made for my beguiling.  Or has the earth become so full of lies, that there is no room amidst them for a true man to stand upon his feet and go his ways?"

Said the Sea-eagle:  "Thou shalt tell us of what hath betid, and so ease the sorrow of thy soul if thou wilt.  Or if thou wilt, thou shalt nurse thy sorrow in thine heart and tell no man.  Do what thou wilt; am I not become thy friend?"

Said Hallblithe:  "I will tell you twain the tidings, and thereafter ask me no more concerning them.  Hearken.  I went whereas ye bade me, and hid myself in the bay-tree thicket; and there came maidens into the blossoming orchard and made a resting-place with silken cushions close to where I was lurking, and stood about as though they were looking for some one to come.  In a little time came two more maidens, and betwixt them one so much fairer than any there, that my heart sank within me:  whereas I deemed because of her fairness that this would be the fore-doomed love whereof ye spake, and lo, she was in nought like to my troth-plight maiden, save that she was exceeding beauteous:  nevertheless, heart-sick as I was, I determined to abide the token that ye told me of.  So she lay down amidst those cushions, and I beheld her that she was sad of countenance; and she was so near to me that I could see the tears welling into her eyes, and running down her cheeks; so that I should have grieved sorely for her had I not been grieving so sorely for myself.  For presently she sat up and said 'O maiden, bring me hither the book wherein is the image of my beloved, that I may behold it in this season of sunset wherein I first beheld it; that I may fill my heart with the sight thereof before the sun is gone and the dark night come.'

"Then indeed my heart died within me when I wotted that this was the love whereof the King spake, that he would give to me, and she not mine own beloved, yet I could not choose but abide and look on a while, and she being one that any man might love beyond measure.  Now a maiden went away into the house and came back again with a book covered with gold set with gems; and the fair woman took it and opened it, and I was so near to her that I saw every leaf clearly as she turned the leaves.  And in that book were pictures of many things, as flaming mountains, and castles of war, and ships upon the sea, but chiefly of fair women, and queens, and warriors and kings; and it was done in gold and azure and cinnabar and minium.  So she turned the leaves, till she came to one whereon was pictured none other than myself, and over against me was the image of mine own beloved, the Hostage of the Rose, as if she were alive, so that the heart within me swelled with the sobbing which I must needs refrain, which grieved me like a sword-stroke.  Shame also took hold of me as the fair woman spoke to my painted image, and I lying well-nigh within touch of her hand; but she said:  'O my beloved, why dost thou delay to come to me?  For I deemed that this eve at least thou wouldst come, so many and strong as are the meshes of love which we have cast about thy feet.  Oh come to-morrow at the least and latest, or what shall I do, and wherewith shall I quench the grief of my heart?  Or else why am I the daughter of the Undying King, the Lord of the Treasure of the Sea?  Why have they wrought new marvels for me, and compelled the Ravagers of the Coasts to serve me, and sent false dreams flitting on the wings of the night?  Yea, why is the earth fair and fruitful, and the heavens kind above it, if thou comest not to-night, nor to-morrow, nor the day after?  And I the daughter of the Undying, on whom the days shall grow and grow as the grains of sand which the wind heaps up above the sea-beach.  And life shall grow huger and more hideous round about the lonely one, like the ling-worm laid upon the gold, that waxeth thereby, till it lies all around about the house of the queen entrapped, the moveless unending ring of the years that change not.'

"So she spake till the weeping ended her words, and I was all abashed with shame and pale with anguish.  I stole quietly from my lair unheeded of any, save that one damsel said that a rabbit ran in the hedge, and another that a blackbird stirred in the thicket.  Behold me, then, that my quest beginneth again amidst the tangle of lies whereinto I have been entrapped."

The Story of the Glittering Plain, by William Morris, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[f14]

CHAPTER XIV: HALLBLITHE HAS SPEECH WITH THE KING AGAIN

He stood up when he had made an end, as a man ready for the road; but they lay there downcast and abashed, and had no words to answer him. For the Sea-eagle was sorry that his faring-fellow was hapless, and was sorry that he was sorry; and as for the damsel, she had not known but that she was leading the goodly Spearman to the fulfilment of his heart's desire.  Albeit after a while she spake again and said:

"Dear friends, day is gone and night is at hand; now to-night it were ill lodging at yonder house; and the next house on our backward road is over far for wayworn folk.  But hard by through the thicket is a fair little wood-lawn, by the lip of a pool in the stream wherein we may bathe us to-morrow morning; and it is grassy and flowery and sheltered from all winds that blow, and I have victual enough in my wallet.  Let us sup and rest there under the bare heaven, as oft is the wont of us in this land; and on the morrow early we will arise and get us back again to Wood-end, where yet the King abideth, and there shalt thou talk to him again, O Spearman."

Said Hallblithe:  "Take me whither ye will; but now nought availeth. I am a captive in a land of lies, and here most like shall I live betrayed and die hapless."

"Hold thy peace, dear friend, of such words as those last," said she, "or I must needs flee from thee, for they hurt me sorely.  Come now to this pleasant place."

She took him by the hand and looked kindly on him, and the Sea-eagle followed him, murmuring an old song of the harvest-field, and they went together by a path through a thicket of white-thorn till they came unto a grassy place.  There then they sat them down, and ate and drank what they would, sitting by the lip of the pool till a waning moon was bright over their heads.  And Hallblithe made no semblance of content; but the Sea-eagle and his damsel were grown merry again, and talked and sang together like autumn stares, with the kissing and caressing of lovers.

So at last those twain lay down amongst the flowers, and slept in each other's arms; but Hallblithe betook him to the brake a little aloof, and lay down, but slept not till morning was at hand, when slumber and confused dreams overtook him.

He was awaked from his sleep by the damsel, who came pushing through the thicket all fresh and rosy from the river, and roused him, and said:

"Awake now, Spearman, that we may take our pleasure in the sun; for he is high in the heavens now, and all the land laughs beneath him."

Her eyes glittered as she spoke, and her limbs moved under her raiment as though she would presently fall to dancing for very joy. But Hallblithe arose wearily, and gave her back no smile in answer, but thrust through the thicket to the water, and washed the night from off him, and so came back to the twain as they sat dallying together over their breakfast.  He would not sit down by them, but ate a morsel of bread as he stood, and said:  "Tell me how I can soonest find the King:  I bid you not lead me thither, but let me go my ways alone.  For with me time presses, and with you meseemeth time is nought.  Neither am I a meet fellow for the happy."

But the Sea-eagle sprang up, and swore with a great oath that he would nowise leave his shipmate in the lurch.  And the damsel said: "Fair man, I had best go with thee; I shall not hinder thee, but further thee rather, so that thou shalt make one day's journey of two."

And she put forth her hand to him, and caressed him smiling, and fawned upon him, and he heeded it little, but hung not aback from them since they were ready for the road:  so they set forth all three together.

They made such diligence on the backward road that the sun was not set by then they came to Wood-end; and there was the King sitting in the door of his pavilion.  Thither went Hallblithe straight, and thrust through the throng, and stood before the King; who greeted him kindly, and was no less sweet of face than on that other day.

Hallblithe hailed him not, but said:  "King, look on my anguish, and if thou art other than a king of dreams and lies, play no longer with me, but tell me straight out if thou knowest of my troth-plight maiden, whether she is in this land or not."

Then the King smiled on him and said:  "True it is that I know of her; yet know I not whether she is in this land or not."

"King," said Hallblithe, "wilt thou bring us together and stay my heart's bleeding?"

Said the King:  "I cannot, since I know not where she is."

"Why didst thou lie to me the other day?" said Hallblithe.

"I lied not," said the King; "I bade bring thee to the woman that loved thee, and whom thou shouldst love; and that is my daughter. And look thou!  Even as I may not bring thee to thine earthly love, so couldst thou not make thyself manifest before my daughter, and become her deathless love.  Is it not enough?"

He spake sternly for all that he smiled, and Hallblithe said:  "O King, have pity on me!"

"Yea," said the King; "pity thee I do:  but I will live despite thy sorrow; my pity of thee shall not slay me, or make thee happy.  Even in such wise didst thou pity my daughter."

Said Hallblithe:  "Thou art mighty, O King, and maybe the mightiest. Wilt thou not help me?"

"How can I help thee?" said the King, "thou who wilt not help thyself.  Thou hast seen what thou shouldst do:  do it then and be holpen."

Then said Hallblithe:  "Wilt thou not slay me, O King, since thou wilt not do aught else?"

"Nay," said the King, "thy slaying wilt not serve me nor mine:  I will neither help nor hinder.  Thou art free to seek thy love wheresoever thou wilt in this my realm.  Depart in peace!"

Hallblithe saw that the King was angry, though he smiled upon him; yet so coldly, that the face of him froze the very marrow of Hallblithe's bones:  and he said within himself:  "This King of lies shall not slay me, though mine anguish be hard to bear:  for I am alive, and it may be that my love is in this land, and I may find her here, and how to reach another land I know not."

So he turned from before the face of the King as the sun was setting, and he went down the land southward betwixt the mountains and the sea, not heeding whether it were night or day; and he went on till it was long past midnight, and then for mere weariness laid him down under a tree, not knowing where he was, and fell asleep.

And in the morning he woke up to the bright sun, and found folk standing round about him, both men and women, and their sheep were anigh them, for they were shepherd folk.  So when they saw that he was awake, they greeted him, and were blithe with him and made much of him:  and they took him home to their house, and gave him to eat and to drink, and asked him what he would that they might serve him. And they seemed to him to be kind and simple folk, and though he loathed to speak the words, so sick at heart he was, yet he told them how he was seeking his troth-plight maiden, his earthly love, and asked them to say if they had seen any woman like her.

They heard him kindly and pitied him, and told him how they had heard of a woman in the land, who sought her beloved even as he sought his. And when he heard that, his heart leapt up, and he asked them to tell him more concerning this woman.  Then they said that she dwelt in the hill-country in a goodly house, and had set her heart on a lovely man, whose image she had seen in a book, and that no man but this one would content her; and this, they said, was a sad and sorry matter, such as was unheard of hitherto in the land.

So when Hallblithe heard this, as heavily as his heart fell again, he changed not countenance, but thanked the kind folk and departed, and went on down the land betwixt the mountains and the sea, and before nightfall he had been into three more houses of folk, and asked there of all comers concerning a woman who was sundered from her beloved; and at none of them gat he any answer to make him less sorry than yesterday.  At the last of the three he slept, and on the morrow early there was the work to begin again; and the next day was the same as the last, and the day after differed not from it.  Thus he went on seeking his beloved betwixt the mountains and the plain, till the great rock-wall came down to the side of the sea and made an end of the Glittering Plain on that side.  Then he turned about and went back by the way he had come, and up the country betwixt the mountains and the plain northward, until he had been into every house of folk in those parts and asked his question.

Then he went up into that fair country of the dales, and even anigh to where dwelt the King's Daughter, and otherwhere in the land and everywhere, quartering the realm of the Glittering Plain as the heron quarters the flooded meadow when the waters draw aback into the river.  So that now all people knew him when he came, and they wondered at him; but when he came to any house for the third or fourth time, they wearied of him, and were glad when he departed.

Ever it was one of two answers that he had:  either folk said to him, "There is no such woman; this land is happy, and nought but happy people dwell herein;" or else they told him of the woman who lived in sorrow, and was ever looking on a book, that she might bring to her the man whom she desired.

Whiles he wearied and longed for death, but would not die until there was no corner of the land unsearched.  Whiles he shook off weariness, and went about his quest as a craftsman sets about his work in the morning.  Whiles it irked him to see the soft and merry folk of the land, who had no skill to help him, and he longed for the house of his fathers and the men of the spear and the plough; and thought, "Oh, if I might but get me back, if it were but for an hour and to die there, to the meadows of the Raven, and the acres beneath the mountains of Cleveland by the Sea.  Then at least should I learn some tale of what is or what hath been, howsoever evil the tidings were, and not be bandied about by lies for ever."

The Story of the Glittering Plain, by William Morris, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[f15]

CHAPTER XV: YET HALLBLITHE SPEAKETH WITH THE KING

So wore the days and the moons; and now were some six moons worn since first he came to the Glittering Plain; and he was come to Wood-end again, and heard and knew that the King was sitting once more in the door of his pavilion to hearken to the words of his people, and he said to himself:  "I will speak yet again to this man, if indeed he be a man; yea, though he turn me into stone."

And he went up toward the pavilion; and on the way it came into his mind what the men of the kindred were doing that morning; and he had a vision of them as it were, and saw them yoking the oxen to the plough, and slowly going down the acres, as the shining iron drew the long furrow down the stubble-land, and the light haze hung about the elm-trees in the calm morning, and the smoke rose straight into the air from the roof of the kindred.  And he said:  "What is this? am I death-doomed this morning that this sight cometh so clearly upon me amidst the falseness of this unchanging land?"

Thus he came to the pavilion, and folk fell back before him to the right and the left, and he stood before the King, and said to him: "I cannot find her; she is not in thy land."

Then spake the King, smiling upon him, as erst:  "What wilt thou then?  Is it not time to rest?"

He said:  "Yea, O King; but not in this land."

Said the King:  "Where else than in this land wilt thou find rest? Without is battle and famine, longing unsatisfied, and heart-burning and fear; within it is plenty and peace and good will and pleasure without cease.  Thy word hath no meaning to me."

Said Hallblithe:  "Give me leave to depart, and I will bless thee."

"Is there nought else to do?" said the King.

"Nought else," said Hallblithe.

Therewith he felt that the King's face changed though he still smiled on him, and again he felt his heart grow cold before the King.

But the King spake and said:  "I hinder not thy departure, nor will any of my folk.  No hand will be raised against thee; there is no weapon in all the land, save the deedless sword by my side and the weapons which thou bearest."

Said Hallblithe:  "Dost thou not owe me a joy in return for my beguiling?"

"Yea," said the King, "reach out thine hand to take it."

"One thing only may I take of thee," said Hallblithe; "my troth-plight maiden or else the speeding of my departure."

Then said the King, and his voice was terrible though yet he smiled: "I will not hinder; I will not help.  Depart in peace!"

Then Hallblithe turned away dizzy and half fainting, and strayed down the field, scarce knowing where he was; and as he went he felt his sleeve plucked at, and turned about, and lo! he was face to face with the Sea-eagle, no less joyous than aforetime.  He took Hallblithe in his arms and embraced him and kissed him, and said:  "Well met, faring-fellow!  Whither away?"

"Away out of this land of lies," said Hallblithe.

The Sea-eagle shook his head, and quoth he:  "Art thou still seeking a dream?  And thou so fair that thou puttest all other men to shame."

"I seek no dream," said Hallblithe, "but rather the end of dreams."

"Well," said the Sea-eagle, "we will not wrangle about it.  But hearken.  Hard by in a pleasant nook of the meadows have I set up my tent; and although it be not as big as the King's pavilion, yet is it fair enough.  Wilt thou not come thither with me and rest thee to-night; and to-morrow we will talk of this matter?"

Now Hallblithe was weary and confused, and downhearted beyond his wont, and the friendly words of the Sea-eagle softened his heart, and he smiled on him and said:  "I give thee thanks; I will come with thee:  thou art kind, and hast done nought to me save good from the time when I first saw thee lying in thy bed in the Hall of the Ravagers.  Dost thou remember the day?"

The Sea-eagle knitted his brow as one striving with a troublous memory, and said:  "But dimly, friend, as if it had passed in an ugly dream:  meseemeth my friendship with thee began when I came to thee from out of the wood, and saw thee standing with those three damsels; that I remember full well ye were fair to look on."

Hallblithe wondered at his words, but said no more about it, and they went together to a flowery nook nigh a stream of clear water where stood a silken tent, green like the grass which it stood on, and flecked with gold and goodly colours.  Nigh it on the grass lay the Sea-eagle's damsel, ruddy-cheeked and sweet-lipped, as fair as aforetime.  She turned about when she heard men coming, and when she saw Hallblithe a smile came into her face like the sun breaking out on a fair but clouded morning, and she went up to him and took him by the hands and kissed his cheek, and said:  "Welcome, Spearman! welcome back!  We have heard of thee in many places, and have been sorry that thou wert not glad, and now are we fain of thy returning. Shall not sweet life begin for thee from henceforward?"

Again was Hallblithe moved by her kind welcome; but he shook his head and spake:  "Thou art kind, sister; yet if thou wouldst be kinder thou wilt show me a way whereby I may escape from this land.  For abiding here has become irksome to me, and meseemeth that hope is yet alive without the Glittering Plain."

Her face fell as she answered:  "Yea, and fear also, and worse, if aught be worse.  But come, let us eat and drink in this fair place, and gather for thee a little joyance before thou departest, if thou needs must depart."

He smiled on her as one not ill-content, and laid himself down on the grass, while the twain busied themselves, and brought forth fair cushions and a gilded table, and laid dainty victual thereon and good wine.

So they ate and drank together, and the Sea-eagle and his mate became very joyous again, and Hallblithe bestirred himself not to be a mar-feast; for he said within himself:  "I am departing, and after this time I shall see them no more; and they are kind and blithe with me, and have been aforetime; I will not make their merry hearts sore. For when I am gone I shall be remembered of them but a little while."

The Story of the Glittering Plain, by William Morris, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[f16]

CHAPTER XVI: THOSE THREE GO THEIR WAYS TO THE EDGE OF THE GLITTERING PLAIN

So the evening wore merrily; and they made Hallblithe lie in an ingle of the tent on a fair bed, and he was weary, and slept thereon like a child.  But in the morning early they waked him; and while they were breaking their fast they began to speak to him of his departure, and asked him if he had an inkling of the way whereby he should get him gone, and he said:  "If I escape it must needs be by way of the mountains that wall the land about till they come down to the sea. For on the sea is no ship and no haven; and well I wot that no man of the land durst or can ferry me over to the land of my kindred, or otherwhere without the Glittering Plain.  Tell me therefore (and I ask no more of you), is there any rumour or memory of a way that cleaveth yonder mighty wall of rock to other lands?"

Said the damsel:  "There is more than a memory or a rumour:  there is a road through the mountains known to all men.  For at whiles the earthly pilgrims come into the Glittering Plain thereby; and yet but seldom, so many are the griefs and perils which beset the wayfarers on that road.  Whereof thou hadst far better bethink thee in time, and abide here and be happy with us and others who long sore to make thee happy."

"Nay," said Hallblithe, "there is nought to do but tell me of the way, and I will depart at once, blessing you."

Said the Sea-eagle:  "More than that at least will we do.  May I lose the bliss whereto I have attained, if I go not with thee to the very edge of the land of the Glittering Plain.  Shall it not be so, sweetheart?"

"Yea, at least we may do that," said the damsel; and she hung her head as if she were ashamed, and said:  "And that is all that thou wilt get from us at most."

Said Hallblithe:  "It is enough, and I asked not so much."

Then the damsel busied herself, and set meat and drink in two wallets, and took one herself and gave the other to the Sea-eagle, and said:  "We will be thy porters, O Spearman, and will give thee a full wallet from the last house by the Desert of Dread, for when thou hast entered therein, thou mayst well find victual hard to come by: and now let us linger no more since the road is dear to thee."

So they set forth on foot, for in that land men were slow to feel weariness; and turning about the hill of Wood-end, they passed by some broken country, and came at even to a house at the entrance of a long valley, with high and steeply-sloping sides, which seemed, as it were, to cleave the dale country wherein they had fared aforetime. At that house they slept well-guested by its folk, and the next morning took their way down the valley, and the folk of the house stood at the door to watch their departure; for they had told the wayfarers that they had fared but a little way thitherward and knew of no folk who had used that road.

So those three fared down the valley southward all day, ever mounting higher as they went.  The way was pleasant and easy, for they went over fair, smooth, grassy lawns betwixt the hill-sides, beside a clear rattling stream that ran northward; at whiles were clumps of tall trees, oak for the most part, and at whiles thickets of thorn and eglantine and other such trees:  so that they could rest well shaded when they would.

They passed by no house of men, nor came to any such in the even, but lay down to sleep in a thicket of thorn and eglantine, and rested well, and on the morrow they rose up betimes and went on their ways.

This second day as they went, the hill-sides on either hand grew lower, till at last they died out into a wide plain, beyond which in the southern offing the mountains rose huge and bare.  This plain also was grassy and beset with trees and thickets here and there. Hereon they saw wild deer enough, as hart and buck, and roebuck and swine:  withal a lion came out of a brake hard by them as they went, and stood gazing on them, so that Hallblithe looked to his weapons, and the Sea-eagle took up a big stone to fight with, being weaponless; but the damsel laughed, and tripped on her way lightly with girt-up gown, and the beast gave no more heed to them.

Easy and smooth was their way over this pleasant wilderness, and clear to see, though but little used, and before nightfall, after they had gone a long way, they came to a house.  It was not large nor high, but was built very strongly and fairly of good ashlar:  its door was shut, and on the jamb thereof hung a slug-horn.  The damsel, who seemed to know what to do, set her mouth to the horn, and blew a blast; and in a little while the door was opened, and a big man clad in red scarlet stood therein:  he had no weapons, but was somewhat surly of aspect:  he spake not, but stood abiding the word:  so the damsel took it up and said:  "Art thou not the Warden of the Uttermost House?"

He said:  "I am."

Said the damsel:  "May we guest here to-night?"

He said:  "The house lieth open to you with all that it hath of victual and plenishing:  take what ye will, and use what ye will."

They thanked him; but he heeded not their thanks, and withdrew him from them.  So they entered and found the table laid in a fair hall of stone carven and painted very goodly; so they ate and drank therein, and Hallblithe was of good heart, and the Sea-eagle and his mate were merry, though they looked softly and shyly on Hallblithe because of the sundering anigh; and they saw no man in the house save the man in scarlet, who went and came about his business, paying no heed to them.  So when the night was deep they lay down in the shut-bed off the hall, and slept, and the hours were tidingless to them until they woke in the morning.

On the morrow they arose and broke their fast, and thereafter the damsel spake to the man in scarlet and said:  "May we fill our wallets with victual for the way?"

Said the Warden:  "There lieth the meat."

So they filled their wallets, while the man looked on; and they came to the door when they were ready, and he unlocked it to them, saying no word.  But when they turned their faces towards the mountains he spake at last, and stayed them at the first step.  Quoth he: "Whither away?  Ye take the wrong road!"

Said Hallblithe:  "Nay, for we go toward the mountains and the edge of the Glittering Plain."

"Ye shall do ill to go thither," said the Warden, "and I bid you forbear."

"O Warden of the Uttermost House, wherefore should we forbear?" said the Sea-eagle.

Said the scarlet man:  "Because my charge is to further those who would go inward to the King, and to stay those who would go outward from the King."

"How then if we go outward despite thy bidding?" said the Sea-eagle, "wilt thou then hinder us perforce?"

"How may I," said the man, "since thy fellow hath weapons?"

"Go we forth, then," said the Sea-eagle.

"Yea," said the damsel, "we will go forth.  And know, O Warden, that this weaponed man only is of mind to fare over the edge of the Glittering Plain; but we twain shall come back hither again, and fare inwards."

Said the Warden:  "Nought is it to me what ye will do when you are past this house.  Nor shall any man who goeth out of this garth toward the mountains ever come back inwards save he cometh in the company of new-corners to the Glittering Plain."

"Who shall hinder him?" said the Sea-eagle.

"The KING," said the Warden.

Then there was silence awhile, and the man said:

"Now do as ye will."  And therewith he turned back into the house and shut the door.

But the Sea-eagle and the damsel stood gazing on one another, and at Hallblithe; and the damsel was downcast and pale; but the Sea-eagle cried out:

"Forward now, O Hallblithe, since thou willest it, and we will go with thee and share whatever may befall thee; yea, right up to the very edge of the Glittering Plain.  And thou, O beloved, why dost thou delay?  Why dost thou stand as if thy fair feet were grown to the grass?"

But the damsel gave a lamentable cry, and cast herself down on the ground, and knelt before the Sea-eagle, and took him by the knees, and said betwixt sobbing and weeping:  "O my lord and love, I pray thee to forbear, and the Spearman, our friend, shall pardon us.  For if thou goest, I shall never see thee more, since my heart will not serve me to go with thee.  O forbear!  I pray thee!"

And she grovelled on the earth before him; and the Sea-eagle waxed red, and would have spoken but Hallblithe cut his speech across, and said "Friends, be at peace!  For this is the minute that sunders us. Get ye back at once to the heart of the Glittering Plain, and live there and be happy; and take my blessing and thanks for the love and help that ye have given me.  For your going forward with me should destroy you and profit me nothing.  It would be but as the host bringing his guests one field beyond his garth, when their goal is the ends of the earth; and if there were a lion in the path, why should he perish for courtesy's sake?"

Therewith he stooped down to the damsel, and lifted her up and kissed her face; and he cast his arms about the Sea-eagle and said to him: "Farewell, shipmate!"

Then the damsel gave him the wallet of victual, and bade him farewell, weeping sorely; and he looked kindly on them for a moment of time, and then turned away from them and fared on toward the mountains, striding with great strides, holding his head aloft.  But they looked no more on him, having no will to eke their sorrow, but went their ways back again without delay.

The Story of the Glittering Plain, by William Morris, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[f17]

CHAPTER XVII: HALLBLITHE AMONGST THE MOUNTAINS

So strode on Hallblithe; but when he had gone but a little way his head turned, and the earth and heavens wavered before him, so that he must needs sit down on a stone by the wayside, wondering what ailed him.  Then he looked up at the mountains, which now seemed quite near to him at the plain's ending, and his weakness increased on him; and lo! as he looked, it was to him as if the crags rose up in the sky to meet him and overhang him, and as if the earth heaved up beneath him, and therewith he fell aback and lost all sense, so that he knew not what was become of the earth and the heavens and the passing of the minutes of his life.

When he came to himself he knew not whether he had lain so a great while or a little; he felt feeble, and for a while he lay scarce moving, and beholding nought, not even the sky above him.  Presently he turned about and saw hard stone on either side, so he rose wearily and stood upon his feet, and knew that he was faint with hunger and thirst.  Then he looked around him, and saw that he was in a narrow valley or cleft of the mountains amidst wan rocks, bare and waterless, where grew no blade of green; but he could see no further than the sides of that cleft, and he longed to be out of it that he might see whitherward to turn.  Then he bethought him of his wallet, and set his hand to it and opened it, thinking to get victual thence; but lo! it was all spoilt and wasted.  None the less, for all his feebleness, he turned and went toiling slowly along what seemed to be a path little trodden leading upward out of the cleft; and at last he reached the crest thereof, and sat him down on a rock on the other side; yet durst not raise his eyes awhile and look on the land, lest he should see death manifest therein.  At last he looked, and saw that he was high up amongst the mountain-peaks:  before him and on either hand was but a world of fallow stone rising ridge upon ridge like the waves of the wildest of the winter sea.  The sun not far from its midmost shone down bright and hot on that wilderness; yet was there no sign that any man had ever been there since the beginning of the world, save that the path aforesaid seemed to lead onward down the stony slope.

This way and that way and all about he gazed, straining his eyes if perchance he might see any diversity in the stony waste; and at last betwixt two peaks of the rock-wall on his left hand he descried a streak of green mingling with the cold blue of the distance; and he thought in his heart that this was the last he should see of the Glittering Plain.  Then he spake aloud in that desert, and said, though there was none to hear:  "Now is my last hour come; and here is Hallblithe of the Raven perishing, with his deeds undone and his longing unfulfilled, and his bridal-bed acold for ever.  Long may the House of the Raven abide and flourish, with many a man and maiden, valiant and fair and fruitful!  O kindred, cast thy blessing on this man about to die here, doing none otherwise than ye would have him!"

He sat there a little while longer, and then he said to himself: "Death tarries; were it not well that I go to meet him, even as the cot-carle preventeth the mighty chieftain?"

Then he arose, and went painfully down the slope, steadying himself with the shaft of his gleaming spear; but all at once he stopped; for it seemed to him that he heard voices borne on the wind that blew up the mountain-side.  But he shook his head and said:  "Now forsooth beginneth the dream which shall last for ever; nowise am I beguiled by it."  None the less he strove the more eagerly with the wind and the way and his feebleness; yet did the weakness wax on him, so that it was but a little while ere he faltered and reeled and fell down once more in a swoon.

When he came to himself again he was no longer alone:  a man was kneeling down by him and holding up his head, while another before him, as he opened his eyes, put a cup of wine to his lips.  So Hallblithe drank and was refreshed; and presently they gave him bread, and he ate, and his heart was strengthened, and the happiness of life returned to it, and he lay back, and slept sweetly for a season.

When he awoke from that slumber he found that he had gotten back much of his strength again, and he sat up and looked around him, and saw three men sitting anigh, armed and girt with swords, yet in evil array, and sore travel-worn.  One of these was very old, with long white hair hanging down; and another, though he was not so much stricken in years, still looked an old man of over sixty winters. The third was a man some forty years old, but sad and sorry and drooping of aspect.

So when they saw him stirring, they all fixed their eyes upon him, and the oldest man said:  "Welcome to him who erst had no tidings for us!"  And the second said:  "Tell us now thy tidings."  But the third, the sorry man, cried out aloud, saying:  "Where is the Land? Where is the Land?"

Said Hallblithe:  "Meseemeth the land which ye seek is the land which I seek to flee from.  And now I will not hide that meseemeth I have seen you before, and that was at Cleveland by the Sea when the days were happier."

Then they all three bowed their heads in yea-say, and spake:  "'Where is the Land?  Where is the Land?"

Then Hallblithe arose to his feet, and said:  "Ye have healed me of the sickness of death, and I will do what I may to heal you of your sickness of sorrow.  Come up the pass with me, and I will show you the land afar off."

Then they arose like young and brisk men, and he led them over the brow of the ridge into the little valley wherein he had first come to himself:  there he showed them that glimpse of a green land betwixt the two peaks, which he had beheld e'en now; and they stood a while looking at it and weeping for joy.

Then spake the oldest of the seekers:  "Show us the way to the land."

"Nay," said Hallblithe, "I may not; for when I would depart thence, I might not go by mine own will, but was borne out hither, I wot not how.  For when I came to the edge of the land against the will of the King, he smote me, and then cast me out.  Therefore since I may not help you, find ye the land for yourselves, and let me go blessing you, and come out of this desert by the way whereby ye entered it. For I have an errand in the world."

Spake the youngest of the seekers:  "Now art thou become the yoke-fellow of Sorrow, and thou must wend, not whither thou wouldst, but whither she will:  and she would have thee go forward toward life, not backward toward death."

Said the midmost seeker:  "If we let thee go further into the wilderness thou shalt surely die:  for hence to the peopled parts, and the City of Merchants, whence we come, is a month's journey:  and there is neither meat nor drink, nor beast nor bird, nor any green thing all that way; and since we have found thee famishing, we may well deem that thou hast no victual.  As to us we have but little; so that if it be much more than three days' journey to the Glittering Plain, we may well starve and die within sight of the Acre of the Undying.  Nevertheless that little will we share with thee if thou wilt help us to find that good land; so that thou mayst yet put away Sorrow, and take Joy again to thy board and bed."

Hallblithe hung his head and answered nought; for he was confused by the meshes of ill-hap, and his soul grew sick with the bitterness of death.  But the sad man spake again and said:  "Thou hast an errand sayest thou? is it such as a dead man may do?"

Hallblithe pondered, and amidst the anguish of his despair was borne in on him a vision of the sea-waves lapping the side of a black ship, and a man therein:  who but himself, set free to do his errand, and his heart was quickened within him, and he said:  "I thank you, and I will wend back with you, since there is no road for me save back again into the trap."

The three seekers seemed glad thereat, and the second one said: "Though death is pursuing, and life lieth ahead, yet will we not hasten thee unduly.  Time was when I was Captain of the Host, and learned how battles were lost by lack of rest.  Therefore have thy sleep now, that thou mayst wax in strength for our helping."

Said Hallblithe:  "I need not rest; I may not rest; I will not rest."

Said the sad man:  "It is lawful for thee to rest.  So say I, who was once a master of law."

Said the long-hoary elder:  "And I command thee to rest; I who was once the king of a mighty folk."

In sooth Hallblithe was now exceeding weary; so he laid him down and slept sweetly in the stony wilderness amidst those three seekers, the old, the sad, and the very old.

When he awoke he felt well and strong again, and he leapt to his feet and looked about him, and saw the three seekers stirring, and he deemed by the sun that it was early morning.  The sad man brought forth bread and water and wine, and they broke their fast; and when they had done he spake and said:  "Abideth now in wallet and bottle but one more full meal for us, and then no more save a few crumbs and a drop or two of wine if we husband it well."

Said the second elder:  "Get we to the road, then, and make haste.  I have been seeking, and meseemeth, though the way be long, it is not utterly blind for us.  Or look thou, Raven-son, is there not a path yonder that leadeth onward up to the brow of the ghyll again? and as I have seen, it leadeth on again down from the said brow."

Forsooth there was a track that led through the stony tangle of the wilderness; so they took to the road with a good heart, and went all day, and saw no living thing, and not a blade of grass or a trickle of water:  nought save the wan rocks under the sun; and though they trusted in their road that it led them aright, they saw no other glimpse of the Glittering Plain, because there rose a great ridge like a wall on the north side, and they went as it were down along a trench of the rocks, albeit it was whiles broken across by ghylls, and knolls, and reefs.

So at sunset they rested and ate their victual, for they were very weary; and thereafter they lay down, and slept as soundly as if they were in the best of the halls of men.  On the morrow betimes they arose soberly and went their ways with few words, and, as they deemed, the path still led them onward.  And now the great ridge on the north rose steeper and steeper, and their crossing it seemed not to be thought of; but their half-blind track failed them not.  They rested at even, and ate and drank what little they had left, save a mouthful or two of wine, and then went on again by the light of the moon, which was so bright that they still saw their way.  And it happened to Hallblithe, as mostly it does with men very travel-worn, that he went on and on scarce remembering where he was, or who his fellows were, or that he had any fellows.

So at midnight they lay down in the wilderness again, hungry and weary.  They rose at dawn and went forward with waning hope:  for now the mountain ridge on the north was close to their path, rising up along a sheer wall of pale stone over which nothing might go save the fowl flying; so that at first on that morning they looked for nothing save to lay their bones in that grievous desert where no man should find them.

But, as beset with famine, they fared on heavily down the narrow track, there came a hoarse cry from Hallblithe's dry throat and it was as if his cry had been answered by another like to his; and the seekers turned and beheld him pointing to the cliff-side, and lo! half-way up the pale sun-litten crag stood two ravens in a cranny of the stone, flapping their wings and croaking, with thrusting forth and twisting of their heads; and presently they came floating on the thin pure air high up over the heads of the wayfarers, croaking for the pleasure of the meeting, as though they laughed thereat.

Then rose the heart of Hallblithe, and he smote his palms together, and fell to singing an old song of his people, amidst the rocks whereas few men had sung aforetime.

Whence are ye and whither, O fowl of our fathers?
 What field have ye looked on, what acres unshorn?
 What land have ye left where the battle-folk gathers,
 And the war-helms are white o'er the paths of the corn?

What tale do ye bear of the people uncraven,
 Where amidst the long hall-shadow sparkle the spears;
 Where aloft on the hall-ridge now flappeth the raven,
 And singeth the song of the nourishing years?

There gather the lads in the first of the morning,
 While white lies the battle-day's dew on the grass,
 And the kind steeds trot up to the horn's voice of warning,
 And the winds wake and whine in the dusk of the pass.

O fowl of our fathers, why now are ye resting?
 Come over the mountains and look on the foe.
 Full fair after fight won shall yet be your nesting;
 And your fledglings the sons of the kindred shall know.

Therewith he strode with his head upraised, and above him flew the ravens, croaking as if they answered his song in friendly fashion.

It was but a little after this that the path turned aside sharp toward the cliffs, and the seekers were abashed thereof, till Hallblithe running forward beheld a great cavern in the face of the cliff at the path's ending:  so he turned and cried on his fellows, and they hastened up, and presently stood before that cavern's mouth with doubt and joy mingled in their minds; for now, mayhappen, they had reached the gate of the Glittering Plain, or mayhappen the gate of death.

The sad man hung his head and spake:  "Doth not some new trap abide us?  What do we here? is this aught save death?"

Spake the Elder of Elders:  "Was not death on either hand e'en now, even as treason besetteth the king upon his throne?"

And the second said:  "Yea, we were as the host which hath no road save through the multitude of foe-men."

But Hallblithe laughed and said:  "Why do ye hang back, then?  As for me, if death be here, soon is mine errand sped."  Therewith he led the way into the dark of the cave, and the ravens hung about the crag overhead croaking, as the men left the light.

So was their way swallowed up in the cavern, and day and its time became nought to them; they went on and on, and became exceeding faint and weary, but rested not, for death was behind them.  Whiles they deemed they heard waters running, and whiles the singing of fowl; and to Hallblithe it seemed that he heard his name called, so that he shouted back in answer; but all was still when the sound of his voice had died out.

At last, when they were pressing on again after a short while of resting, Hallblithe cried out that the cave was lightening:  so they hastened onward, and the light grew till they could dimly see each other, and dimly they beheld the cave that it was both wide and high. Yet a little further, and their faces showed white to one another, and they could see the crannies of the rocks, and the bats hanging garlanded from the roof.  So then they came to where the day streamed down bright on them from a break overhead, and lo! the sky and green leaves waving against it.

To those way-worn men it seemed hard to clamber out that way, and especially to the elders:  so they went on a little further to see if there were aught better abiding them, but when they found the daylight failing them again, they turned back to the place of the break in the roof, lest they should waste their strength and perish in the bowels of the mountain.  So with much ado they hove up Hallblithe till he got him first on to a ledge of the rocky wall, and so, what by strength, what by cunning, into the daylight through the rent in the roof.  So when he was without he made a rope of his girdle and strips from his raiment, for he was ever a deft craftsman, and made a shift to heave up therewith the sad man, who was light and lithe of body; and then the two together dealt with the elders one after another, till they were all four on the face of the earth again.

The place whereto they had gotten was the side of a huge mountain, stony and steep, but set about with bushes, which seemed full fair to those wanderers amongst the rocks.  This mountain-slope went down towards a fair green plain, which Hallblithe made no doubt was the outlying waste of the Glittering Plain:  nay, he deemed that he could see afar off thereon the white walls of the Uttermost House.  So much he told the seekers in few words; and then while they grovelled on the earth and wept for pure joy, whereas the sun was down and it was beginning to grow dusk, he went and looked around soberly to see if he might find water and any kind of victual; and presently a little down the hillside he came upon a place where a spring came gushing up out of the earth and ran down toward the plain; and about it was green grass growing plentifully, and a little thicket of bramble and wilding fruit-trees.  So he drank of the water, and plucked him a few wilding apples somewhat better than crabs, and then went up the hill again and fetched the seekers to that mountain hostelry; and while they drank of the stream he plucked them apples and bramble-berries. For indeed they were as men out of their wits, and were dazed by the extremity of their jog, and as men long shut up in prison, to whom the world of men-folk hath become strange.  Simple as the victual was, they were somewhat strengthened by it and by the plentiful water, and as night was now upon them, it was of no avail for them to go further:  so they slept beneath the boughs of the thorn-bushes.

The Story of the Glittering Plain, by William Morris, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[f18]

CHAPTER XVIII: HALLBLITHE DWELLETH IN THE WOOD ALONE

But on the morrow they arose betimes, and broke their fast on that woodland victual, and then went speedily down the mountain-side; and Hallblithe saw by the clear morning light that it was indeed the Uttermost House which he had seen across the green waste.  So he told the seekers; but they were silent and heeded nought, because of a fear that had come upon them, lest they should die before they came into that good land.  At the foot of the mountain they came upon a river, deep but not wide, with low grassy banks, and Hallblithe, who was an exceeding strong swimmer, helped the seekers over without much ado; and there they stood upon the grass of that goodly waste.

Hallblithe looked on them to note if any change should come over them, and he deemed that already they were become stronger and of more avail.  But he spake nought thereof, and strode on toward the Uttermost House, even as that other day he had stridden away from it.

Such diligence they made, that it was but little after noon when they came to the door thereof.  Then Hallblithe took the horn and blew upon it, while his fellows stood by murmuring, "It is the Land!  It is the Land!"

So came the Warden to the door, clad in red scarlet, and the elder went up to him and said:  "Is this the Land?"

"What land?" said the Warden.

"Is it the Glittering Plain?" said the second of the seekers.

"Yea, forsooth," said the Warden.  Said the sad man:  "Will ye lead us to the King?"

"Ye shall come to the King," said the Warden.

"When, oh when?" cried they out all three.

"The morrow of to-morrow, maybe," said the Warden.

"Oh! if to-morrow were but come!" they cried.

"It will come," said the red man; "enter ye the house, and eat and drink and rest you."

So they entered, and the Warden heeded Hallblithe nothing.  They ate and drank and then went to their rest, and Hallblithe lay in a shut-bed off from the hall, but the Warden brought the seekers otherwhere, so that Hallblithe saw them not after he had gone to bed; but as for him he slept and forgot that aught was.

In the morning when he awoke he felt very strong and well-liking; and he beheld his limbs that they were clear of skin and sleek and fair; and he heard one hard by in the hall carolling and singing joyously. So he sprang from his bed with the wonder of sleep yet in him, and drew the curtains of the shut-bed and looked forth into the hall; and lo on the high-seat a man of thirty winters by seeming, tall, fair of fashion, with golden hair and eyes as grey as glass, proud and noble of aspect; and anigh him sat another man of like age to look on, a man strong and burly, with short curling brown hair and a red beard, and ruddy countenance, and the mien of a warrior.  Also, up and down the hall, paced a man younger of aspect than these two, tall and slender, black-haired and dark-eyed, amorous of countenance; he it was who was singing a snatch of song as he went lightly on the hall pavement:  a snatch like to this:

Fair is the world, now autumn's wearing,
 And the sluggard sun lies long abed;
 Sweet are the days, now winter's nearing,
 And all winds feign that the wind is dead.

Dumb is the hedge where the crabs hang yellow,
 Bright as the blossoms of the spring;
 Dumb is the close where the pears grow mellow,
 And none but the dauntless redbreasts sing.

Fair was the spring, but amidst his greening
 Grey were the days of the hidden sun;
 Fair was the summer, but overweening,
 So soon his o'er-sweet days were done.

Come then, love, for peace is upon us,
 Far off is failing, and far is fear,
 Here where the rest in the end hath won us,
 In the garnering tide of the happy year.

Come from the grey old house by the water,
 Where, far from the lips of the hungry sea,
 Green groweth the grass o'er the field of the slaughter,
 And all is a tale for thee and me.

So Hallblithe did on his raiment and went into the hall; and when those three saw him they smiled upon him kindly and greeted him; and the noble man at the board said:  "Thanks have thou, O Warrior of the Raven, for thy help in our need:  thy reward from us shall not be lacking."

Then the brown-haired man came up to him, and clapped him on the back and said to him:  "Brisk man of the Raven, good is thy help at need; even so shall be mine to thee henceforward."

But the young man stepped up to him lightly, and cast his arms about him, and kissed him, and said:  "O friend and fellow, who knoweth but I may one day help thee as thou hast holpen me? though thou art one who by seeming mayst well help thyself.  And now mayst thou be as merry as I am to-day!"

Then they all three cried out joyously:  "It is the Land!  It is the Land!"

So Hallblithe knew that these men were the two elders and the sad man of yesterday, and that they had renewed their youth.

Joyously now did those men break their fast:  nor did Hallblithe make any grim countenance, for he thought:  "That which these dotards and drivellers have been mighty enough to find, shall I not be mighty enough to flee from?"  Breakfast done, the seekers made little delay, so eager as they were to behold the King, and to have handsel of their new sweet life.  So they got them ready to depart, and the once-captain said:  "Art thou able to lead us to the King, O Raven-son, or must we seek another man to do so much for us?"

Said Hallblithe:  "I am able to lead you so nigh unto Wood-end (where, as I deem, the King abideth) that ye shall not miss him."

Therewith they went to the door, and the Warden unlocked to them, and spake no word to them when they departed, though they thanked him kindly for the guesting.

When they were without the garth, the young man fell to running about the meadow plucking great handfuls of the rich flowers that grew about, singing and carolling the while.  But he who had been king looked up and down and round about, and said at last:  "Where be the horses and the men?"

But his fellow with the red beard said:  "Raven-son, in this land when they journey, what do they as to riding or going afoot?"

Said Hallblithe:  "Fair fellows, ye shall wot that in this land folk go afoot for the most part, both men and women; whereas they weary but little, and are in no haste."

Then the once-captain clapped the once-king on the shoulder, and said:  "Hearken, lord, and delay no longer, but gird up thy gown, since here is no mare's son to help thee:  for fair is to-day that lies before us, with many a new fair day beyond it."

So Hallblithe led the way inward, thinking of many things, yet but little of his fellows.  Albeit they, and the younger man especially, were of many words; for this black-haired man had many questions to ask, chiefly concerning the women, what they were like to look on, and of what mood they were.  Hallblithe answered thereto as long as he might, but at last he laughed and said:  "Friend, forbear thy questions now; for meseemeth in a few hours thou shalt be as wise hereon as is the God of Love himself."

So they made diligence along the road, and all was tidingless till on the second day at even they came to the first house off the waste. There had they good welcome, and slept.  But on the morrow when they arose, Hallblithe spake to the Seekers, and said:  "Now are things much changed betwixt us since the time when we first met:  for then I had all my desire, as I thought, and ye had but one desire, and well nigh lacked hope of its fulfilment.  Whereas now the lack hath left you and come to me.  Wherefore even as time agone ye might not abide even one night at the House of the Raven, so hard as your desire lay on you; even so it fareth with me to-day, that I am consumed with my desire, and I may not abide with you; lest that befall which befalleth betwixt the full man and the fasting.  Wherefore now I bless you and depart."

They abounded in words of good-will to him, and the once-king said: "Abide with us, and we shall see to it that thou have all the dignities that a man may think of."

And the once-captain said:  "Lo, here is mine hand that hath been mighty; never shalt thou lack it for the accomplishment of thine uttermost desire.  Abide with us."

Lastly said the young man:  "Abide with us, Son of the Raven!  Set thine heart on a fair woman, yea even were it the fairest; and I will get her for thee, even were my desire set on her."

But he smiled on them, and shook his head, and said:  "All hail to you! but mine errand is yet undone."  And therewith he departed.

He skirted Wood-end and came not to it, but got him down to the side of the sea, not far from where he first came aland, but somewhat south of it.  A fair oak-wood came down close to the beach of the sea; it was some four miles end-long and over-thwart.  Thither Hallblithe betook him, and in a day or two got him wood-wright's tools from a house of men a little outside the wood, three miles from the sea-shore.  Then he set to work and built him a little frame-house on a lawn of the wood beside a clear stream; for he was a very deft wood-wright.  Withal he made him a bow and arrows, and shot what he would of the fowl and the deer for his livelihood; and folk from that house and otherwhence came to see him, and brought him bread and wine and spicery and other matters which he needed.  And the days wore, and men got used to him, and loved him as if he had been a rare image which had been brought to that land for its adornment; and now they no longer called him the Spearman, but the Wood-lover.  And as for him, he took all in patience, abiding what the lapse of days should bring forth.

The Story of the Glittering Plain, by William Morris, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[f19]

CHAPTER XIX: HALLBLITHE BUILDS HIM A SKIFF

After Hallblithe had been housed a little while, and the time was again drawing nigh to the twelfth moon since he had come to the Glittering Plain, he went in the wood one day; and, pondering many things without fixing on any one, he stood before a very great oak-tree and looked at the tall straight bole thereof, and there came into his head the words of an old song which was written round a scroll of the carving over the shut-bed, wherein he was wont to lie when he was at home in the House of the Raven:  and thus it said:

I am the oak-tree, and forsooth
 Men deal by me with little ruth;
 My boughs they shred, my life they slay,
 And speed me o'er the watery way.

He looked up into that leafy world for a little and then turned back toward his house; but all day long, whether he were at work or at rest, that posy ran in his head, and he kept on saying it over, aloud or not aloud, till the day was done and he went to sleep.

Then in his sleep he dreamed that an exceeding fair woman stood by his bedside, and at first she seemed to him to be an image of the Hostage.  But presently her face changed, and her body and her raiment; and, lo! it was the lovely woman, the King's daughter whom he had seen wasting her heart for the love of him.  Then even in his dream shame thereof overtook him, and because of that shame he awoke, and lay awake a little, hearkening the wind going through the woodland boughs, and the singing of the owl who had her dwelling in the hollow oak nigh to his house.  Slumber overcame him in a little while, and again the image of the King's daughter came to him in his dream, and again when he looked upon her, shame and pity rose so hotly in his heart that he awoke weeping, and lay a while hearkening to the noises of the night.  The third time he slept and dreamed; and once more that image came to him.  And now he looked, and saw that she had in her hand a book covered outside with gold and gems, even as he saw it in the orchard-close aforetime:  and he beheld her face that it was no longer the face of one sick with sorrow; but glad and clear, and most beauteous.

Now she opened the book and held it before Hallblithe and turned the leaves so that he might see them clearly; and therein were woods and castles painted, and burning mountains, and the wall of the world, and kings upon their thrones, and fair women and warriors, all most lovely to behold, even as he had seen it aforetime in the orchard when he lay lurking amidst the leaves of the bay-tree.

So at last she came to the place in the book wherein was painted Hallblithe's own image over against the image of the Hostage; and he looked thereon and longed.  But she turned the leaf, and, lo! on one side the Hostage again, standing in a fair garden of the spring with the lilies all about her feet, and behind her the walls of a house, grey, ancient, and lovely:  and on the other leaf over against her was painted a sea rippled by a little wind and a boat thereon sailing swiftly, and one man alone in the boat sitting and steering with a cheerful countenance; and he, who but Hallblithe himself.  Hallblithe looked thereon for a while and then the King's daughter shut the book, and the dream flowed into other imaginings of no import.

In the grey dawn Hallblithe awoke, and called to mind his dream, and he leapt from his bed and washed the night from off him in the stream, and clad himself and went the shortest way through the wood to that House of folk aforesaid:  and as he went his face was bright and he sang the second part of the carven posy; to wit:

Along the grass I lie forlorn
 That when a while of time is worn,
 I may be filled with war and peace
 And bridge the sundering of the seas.

 He came out of the wood and hastened over the flowery meads of the Glittering Plain, and came to that same house when it was yet very early.  At the door he came across a damsel bearing water from the well, and she spake to him and said:  "Welcome, Wood-lover!  Seldom art thou seen in our garth; and that is a pity of thee.  And now I look on thy face I see that gladness hath come into thine heart, and that thou art most fair and lovely.  Here then is a token for thee of the increase of gladness."  Therewith she set her buckets on the earth, and stood before him, and took him by the ears, and drew down his face to hers and kissed him sweetly.  He smiled on her and said: "I thank thee, sister, for the kiss and the greeting; but I come here having a lack."

"Tell us," she said, "that we may do thee a pleasure."

He said:  "I would ask the folk to give me timber, both beams and battens and boards; for if I hew in the wood it will take long to season."

"All this is free for thee to take from our wood-store when thou hast broken thy fast with us," said the damsel.  "Come thou in and rest thee."

She took him by the hand and they went in together, and she gave him to eat and drink, and went up and down the house, saying to every one:  "Here is come the Wood-lover, and he is glad again; come and see him."

So the folk gathered about him, and made much of him.  And when they had made an end of breakfast, the head man of the House said to him: "The beasts are in the wain, and the timber abideth thy choosing; come and see."

So he brought Hallblithe to the timber-bower, where he chose for himself all that he needed of oak-timber of the best; and they loaded the wain therewith, and gave him what he would moreover of nails and treenails and other matters; and he thanked them; and they said to him:  "Whither now shall we lead thy timber?"

"Down to the sea-side," quoth he, "nighest to my dwelling."

So did they, and more than a score, men and women, went with him, some in the wain, and some afoot.  Thus they came down to the sea-shore, and laid the timber on the strand just above high-water mark; and straightway Hallblithe fell to work shaping him a boat, for well he knew the whole craft thereof; and the folk looked on wondering, till the tide had ebbed the little it was wont to ebb, and left the moist sand firm and smooth; then the women left watching Hallblithe's work, and fell to paddling barefoot in the clear water, for there was scarce a ripple on the sea; and the carles came and played with them so that Hallblithe was left alone a while; for this kind of play was new to that folk, since they seldom came down to the sea-side. Thereafter they needs must dance together, and would have had Hallblithe dance with them; and when he naysaid them because he was fain of his work, in all playfulness they fell to taking the adze out of his hand, whereat he became somewhat wroth, and they were afraid and went and had their dance out without him.

By this time the sun was grown very hot, and they came to him again, and lay down about him and watched his work, for they were weary. And one of the women, still panting with the dance, spake as she looked on the loveliness of her limbs, which one of the swains was caressing:  "Brother," said she, "great strokes thou smitest; when wilt thou have smitten the last of them, and come to our house again?"

"Not for many days, fair sister," said he, without looking up.

"Alas that thou shouldst talk so," said a carle, rising up from the warm sand; "what shall all thy toil win thee?"

Spake Hallblithe:  "Maybe a merry heart, or maybe death."

At that word they all rose up together, and stood huddled together like sheep that have been driven to the croft-gate, and the shepherd hath left them for a little and they know not whither to go.  Little by little they got them to the wain and harnessed their beasts thereto, and departed silently by the way that they had come; but in a little time Hallblithe heard their laughter and merry speech across the flowery meadows.  He heeded their departure little, but went on working, and worked the sun down, and on till the stars began to twinkle.  Then he went home to his house in the wood, and slept and dreamed not, and began again on the morrow with a good heart.

To be short, no day passed that he wrought not his full tale of work, and the days wore, and his ship-wright's work throve.  Often the folk of that house, and from otherwhere round about, came down to the strand to watch him working.  Nowise did they wilfully hinder him, but whiles when they could get no talk from him, they would speak of him to each other, wondering that he should so toil to sail upon the sea; for they loved the sea but little, and it soon became clear to them that he was looking to nought else:  though it may not be said that they deemed he would leave the land for ever.  On the other hand, if they hindered him not, neither did they help, saving when he prayed them for somewhat which he needed, which they would then give him blithely.

Of the Sea-eagle and his damsel, Hallblithe saw nought; whereat he was well content, for he deemed it of no avail to make a second sundering of it.

So he worked and kept his heart up, and at last all was ready; he had made him a mast and a sail, and oars, and whatso-other gear there was need of.  So then he thrust his skiff into the sea on an evening whenas there were but two carles standing by; for there would often be a score or two of folk.  These two smiled on him and bespake him kindly, but would not help him when he bade them set shoulder to her bows and shove.  Albeit he got the skiff into the water without much ado, and got into her, and brought her to where a stream running from out of his wood made a little haven for her up from the sea.  There he tied her to a tree-hole, and busied himself that even with getting the gear into her, and victual and water withal, as much as he deemed he should need:  and so, being weary, he went to his house to sleep, thinking that he should awake in the grey of the morning and thrust out into the deep sea.  And he was the more content to abide, because on that eve, as oftenest betid, the wind blew landward from the sea, whereas in the morning it oftenest blew seaward from the land.  In any case he thought to be astir so timely that he should come alone to his keel, and depart with no leave-takings.  But, as it fell out, he overslept himself, so that when he came out into the wood clad in all his armour, with his sword girt to his side, and his spear over his shoulder, he heard the voices of folk, and presently found so many gathered about his boat that he had some ado to get aboard.

The folk had brought many gifts for him of such things as they deemed he might need for a short voyage, as fruit and wine, and woollen cloths to keep the cold night from him; he thanked them kindly as he stepped over the gunwale, and some of the women kissed him:  and one said (she it was, who had met him at the stead that morning when he went to fetch timber):  "Thou wilt be back this even, wilt thou not, brother?  It is yet but early, and thou shalt have time enough to take all thy pleasure on the sea, and then come back to us to eat thy meat in our house at nightfall."

She spake, knitting her brows in longing for his return; but he knew that all those deemed he would come back again soon; else had they deemed him a rebel of the King, and might, as he thought, have stayed him.  So he changed not countenance in any wise, but said only: "farewell, sister, for this day, and farewell to all you till I come back."

Therewith he unmoored his boat, and sat down and took the oars, and rowed till he was out of the little haven, and on the green sea, and the keel rose and fell on the waves.  Then he stepped the mast and hoisted sail, and sheeted home, for the morning wind was blowing gently from the mountains over the meadows of the Glittering Plain, so the sail filled, and the keel leapt forward and sped over the face of the cold sea.  And it is to be said that whether he wotted or not, it was the very day twelve months since he had come to that shore along with the Sea-eagle.  So that folk stood and watched the skiff growing less and less upon the deep till they could scarce see her. Then they turned about and went into the wood to disport them, for the sun was growing hot.  Nevertheless, there were some of them (and that damsel was one), who came back to the sea-shore from time to time all day long; and even when the sun was down they looked seaward under the rising moon, expecting to see Hallblithe's bark come into the shining path which she drew across the waters round about the Glittering Land.

The Story of the Glittering Plain, by William Morris, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[f20]

CHAPTER XX: SO NOW SAILETH HALLBLITHE AWAY FROM THE GLITTERING PLAIN

But as to Hallblithe, he soon lost sight of the Glittering Plain and the mountains thereof, and there was nought but sea all round about him, and his heart swelled with joy as he sniffed the brine and watched the gleaming hills and valleys of the restless deep; and he said to himself that he was going home to his Kindred and the Roof of his Fathers of old time.

He stood as near due north as he might; but as the day wore, the wind headed him, and he deemed it not well to beat, lest he should make his voyage overlong; so he ran on with the wind abeam, and his little craft leapt merrily over the sea-hills under the freshening breeze. The sun set and the moon and stars shone out, and he still sailed on, and durst not sleep, save as a dog does, with one eye.  At last came dawn, and as the light grew it was a fair day with a falling wind, and a bright sky, but it clouded over before sunset, and the wind freshened from the north by east, and, would he, would he not, Hallblithe must run before it night-long, till at sunrise it fell again, and all day was too light for him to make much way beating to northward; nor did it freshen till after the moon was risen some while after sunset.  And now he was so weary that he must needs sleep; so he lashed the helm, and took a reef in the sail, and ran before the wind, he sleeping in the stern.

But past the middle of the night, towards the dawning, he awoke with the sound of a great shout in his ears.  So he looked over the dark waters, and saw nought, for the night was cloudy again.  Then he trimmed his craft, and went to sleep again, for he was over-burdened with slumber.

When he awoke it was broad daylight; so he looked to the tiller and got the boat's head a little up to the wind, and then gazed about him with the sleep still in his eyes.  And as his eyes took in the picture before him he could not refrain a cry; for lo! there arose up great and grim right ahead the black cliffs of the Isle of Ransom. Straightway he got to the sheet, and strove to wear the boat; but for all that he could do she drifted toward the land, for she was gotten into a strong current of the sea that set shoreward.  So he struck sail, and took the oars and rowed mightily so that he might bear her off shore; but it availed nothing, and still he drifted landward.  So he stood up from the oars, and turned about and looked, and saw that he was but some three furlongs from the shore, and that he was come to the very haven-mouth whence he had set sail with the Sea-eagle a twelvemonth ago:  and he knew that into that haven he needs must get him, or be dashed to pieces against the high cliffs of the land:  and he saw how the waves ran on to the cliffs, and whiles one higher than the others smote the rock-wall and ran up it, as if it could climb over on to the grassy lip beyond, and then fell back again, leaving a river of brine running down the steep.

Then he said that he would take what might befall him inside the haven.  So he hoisted sail again, and took the tiller, and steered right for the midmost of the gate between the rocks, wondering what should await him there.  Then it was but a few minutes ere his bark shot into the smoothness of the haven, and presently began to lose way; for all the wind was dead within that land-locked water. Hallblithe looked steadily round about seeking his foe; but the haven was empty of ship or boat; so he ran his eye along the shore to see where he should best lay his keel and as aforesaid there was no beach there, and the water was deep right up to the grassy lip of the land; though the tides ran somewhat high, and at low water would a little steep undercliff go up from the face of the sea.  But now it was near the top of the tide, and there was scarce two feet betwixt the grass and the dark-green sea.

Now Hallblithe steered toward an ingle of the haven; and beyond it, a little way off, rose a reef of rocks out of the green grass, and thereby was a flock of sheep feeding, and a big man lying down amongst them, who seemed to be unarmed, as Hallblithe could not see any glint of steel about him.  Hallblithe drew nigh the shore, and the big man stirred not; nor did he any the more when the keel ran along the shore, and Hallblithe leapt out and moored his craft to his spear stuck deep in the earth.  And now Hallblithe deems that the man must be either dead or asleep:  so he drew his sword and had it in his right hand, and in his left a sharp knife, and went straight up to the man betwixt the sheep, and found him so lying on his side that he could not see his face; so he stirred him with his foot, and cried out:  "Awake, O Shepherd! for dawn is long past and day is come, and therewithal a guest for thee!"

The man turned over and slowly sat up, and, lo! who should it be but the Puny Fox?  Hallblithe started back at the sight of him, and cried out at him, and said:  "Have I found thee, O mine enemy?"

The Puny Fox sat up a little straighter, and rubbed his eyes and said:  "Yea, thou hast found me sure enough.  But as to my being thine enemy, a word or two may be said about that presently."

"What!" said Hallblithe, "dost thou deem that aught save my sword will speak to thee?"

"I wot not," said the Puny Fox, slowly rising to his feet, "but I suppose thou wilt not slay me unarmed, and thou seest that I have no weapons."

"Get thee weapons, then," quoth Hallblithe, "and delay not; for the sight of thee alive sickens me."

"Ill is that," said the Puny Fox, "but come thou with me at once, where I shall find both the weapons and a good fighting-stead. Hasten! time presseth, now thou art come at last."

"And my boat?" said Hallblithe.

"Wilt thou carry her in thy pouch?" said the Puny Fox; "thou wilt not need her again, whether thou slay me, or I thee."

Hallblithe knit his brows on him in his wrath; for he deemed that Fox's meaning was to threaten him with the vengeance of the kindred. Howbeit, he said nought; for he deemed it ill to wrangle in words with one whom he was presently to meet in battle; so he followed as the Puny Fox led.  Fox brought him past the reef of rock aforesaid, and up a narrow cleft of the cliffs overlooking the sea, whereby they came into a little grass-grown meadow well nigh round in shape, as smooth and level as a hall-floor, and fenced about by a wall of rock: a place which had once been the mouth of an earth-fire, and a cauldron of molten stone.

When they stood on the smooth grass Fox said:  "Hold thee there a little, while I go to my weapon-chest, and then shall we see what is to be done."

Therewith he turned aside to a cranny of the rock, and going down on his hands and knees, fell to creeping like a worm up a hole therein, which belike led to a cavern; for after his voice had come forth from the earth, grunting and groaning, and cursing this thing, and that, out he comes again feet first, and casts down an old rusty sword without a sheath; a helm no less rusty, and battered withal, and a round target, curled up and outworn as if it would fall to pieces of itself.  Then he stands up and stretches himself, and smiles pleasantly on Hallblithe and says:  "Now, mine enemy, when I have donned helm and shield and got my sword in hand, we may begin the play:  as to a hauberk I must needs go lack; for I could not come by it; I think the old man must have chaffered it away:  he was ever too money-fain."

But Hallblithe looked on him angrily and said:  "Hast thou brought me hither to mock me?  Hast thou no better weapons wherewith to meet a warrior of the Raven than these rusty shards, which look as if thou hadst robbed a grave of the dead?  I will not fight thee so armed."

"Well," said the Puny Fox, "and from out of a grave come they verily: for in that little hole lieth my father's grandsire, the great Sea-mew of the Ravagers, the father of that Sea-eagle whom thou knowest. But since thou thinkest scorn of these weapons of a dead warrior, in go the old carle's treasures again!  It is as well maybe; since he might be wrath beyond his wont if he were to wake and miss them; and already this cold cup of the once-boiling rock is not wholly safe because of him."

So he crept into the hole once more, and out of it presently, and stood smiting his palms one against the other to dust them, like a man who has been handling parchments long laid by; and Hallblithe stood looking at him, still wrathful, but silent.

Then said the Puny Fox:  "This at least was a wise word of thine, that thou wouldst not fight me.  For the end of fighting is slaying; and it is stark folly to fight without slaying; and now I see that thou desirest not to slay me:  for if thou didst, why didst thou refuse to fall on me armed with the ghosts of weapons that I borrowed from a ghost?  Nay, why didst thou not slay me as I crept out of yonder hole?  Thou wouldst have had a cheap bargain of me either way. It would be rank folly to fight me."

Said Hallblithe hoarsely:  "Why didst thou bewray me, and lie to me, and lure me away from the quest of my beloved, and waste a whole year of my life?"

"It is a long story," said the Puny Fox, "which I may tell thee some day.  Meantime I may tell thee this, that I was compelled thereto by one far mightier than I, to wit the Undying King."

At that word the smouldering wrath blazed up in Hallblithe, and he drew his sword hastily and hewed at the Puny Fox:  but he leapt aside nimbly and ran in on Hallblithe, and caught his sword-arm by the wrist, and tore the weapon out of his hand, and overbore him by sheer weight and stature, and drave him to the earth.  Then he rose up, and let Hallblithe rise also, and took his sword and gave it into his hand again and said:  "Crag-nester, thou art wrathful, but little. Now thou hast thy sword again and mayst slay me if thou wilt.  Yet not until I have spoken a word to thee:  so hearken! or else by the Treasure of the Sea I will slay thee with my bare hands.  For I am strong indeed in this place with my old kinsman beside me.  Wilt thou hearken?"

"Speak," said Hallblithe, "I hearken."

Said the Puny Fox:  "True it is that I lured thee away from thy quest, and wore away a year of thy life.  Yet true it is also that I repent me thereof, and ask thy pardon.  What sayest thou?"

Hallblithe spake not, but the heat died out of his face and he was become somewhat pale.  Said the Puny Fox:  "Dost thou not remember, O Raven, how thou badest me battle last year on the sea-shore by the side of the Rollers of the Raven? and how this was to be the prize of battle, that the vanquished should serve the vanquisher year-long, and do all his will?  And now this prize and more thou hast won without battle; for I swear by the Treasure of the Sea, and by the bones of the great Sea-mew yonder, that I will serve thee not year-long but life-long, and that I will help thee in thy quest for thy beloved.  What sayest thou?"

Hallblithe stood speechless a moment, looking past the Puny Fox, rather than at him.  Then the sword tumbled out of his hand on to the grass, and great tears rolled down his cheeks and fell on to his raiment, and he reached out his hand to the Puny Fox and said:  "O friend, wilt thou not bring me to her? for the days wear, and the trees are growing old round about the Acres of the Raven."

Then the Puny Fox took his hand; and laughed merrily in his face, and said:  "Great is thine heart, O Carrion-biter!  But now that thou art my friend I will tell thee that I have a deeming of the whereabouts of thy beloved.  Or where deemest thou was the garden wherein thou sawest her standing on the page of the book in that dream of the night?  So it is, O Raven-son, that it is not for nothing that my grandsire's father lieth in yonder hole of the rocks; for of late he hath made me wise in mighty lore.  Thanks have thou, O kinsman!"  And he turned him toward the rock wherein was the grave.

But Hallblithe said:  "What is to do now?  Am I not in a land of foemen?"

"Yea, forsooth," said the Puny Fox, "and even if thou knewest where thy love is, thou shouldst hardly escape from this isle unslain, save for me."

Said Hallblithe:  "Is there not my bark, that I might depart at once? for I deem not that the Hostage is on the Isle of Ransom."

The Puny Fox laughed boisterously and said:  "Nay, she is not.  But as to thy boat, there is so strong a set of the flood-tide toward this end of the isle, that with the wind blowing as now, from the north-north-east, thou mayst not get off the shore for four hours at least, and I misdoubt me that within that time we shall have tidings of a ship of ours coming into the haven.  Thy bark they shall take, and thee also if thou art therein; and then soon were the story told, for they know thee for a rebel of the Undying King.  Hearken!  Dost thou not hear the horn's voice?  Come up hither and we shall see what is towards."

So saying, he led hastily up a kind of stair in the rock-wall, until they reached a cranny, whence through a hole in the cliff, they could see all over the haven.  And lo! as they looked, in the very gate and entry of it came a great ship heaving up her bows on the last swell of the outer sea (where the wind had risen somewhat), and rolling into the smooth, land-locked water.  Black was her sail, and the image of the Sea-eagle enwrought thereon spread wide over it; and the banner of the Flaming Sword streamed out from the stern.  Many men all-weaponed were on the decks, and the minstrels high up on the poop were blowing a merry song of return on their battle-horns.

"Lo, you," said the Puny Fox, "thy luck or mine hath served thee this time, in that the Flaming Sword did not overhaul thee ere thou madest the haven.  We are well here at least."

Said Hallblithe:  "But may not some of them come up hither perchance?"

"Nay, nay," said the Puny Fox; "they fear the old man in the cleft yonder; for he is not over guest-fain.  This mead is mine own, as for other living men; it is my unroofed house, and I have here a house with a roof also, which I will show thee presently.  For now since the Flaming Sword hath come, there is no need for haste; nay, we cannot depart till they have gone up-country.  So I will show thee presently what we shall do to-night."

So there they sat and watched those men bring their ship to the shore and moor her hard by Hallblithe's boat.  They cried out when they saw her, and when they were aland they gathered about her to note her build, and the fashion of the spear whereto she was tied.  Then in a while the more part of them, some fourscore in number, departed up the valley toward the great house and left none but a half dozen ship-warders behind.

"Seest thou, friend of the Ravens," said the Fox, "hadst thou been there, they might have done with thee what they would.  Did I not well to bring thee into my unroofed house?"

"Yea, verily," said Hallblithe; "but will not some of the ship-wards, or some of the others returning, come up hither and find us?  I shall yet lay my bones in this evil island."

The Puny Fox laughed, and said:  "It is not so bad as thy sour looks would have it; anyhow it is good enough for a grave, and at this present I may call it a casket of precious things."

"What meanest thou?" said Hallblithe eagerly.

"Nay, nay," said the other, "nought but what thou knowest.  Art thou not therein, and I myself? without reckoning the old carle in the hole yonder.  But I promise thee thou shalt not die here this time, unless thou wilt.  And as to folk coming up hither, I tell thee again they durst not; because they fear my great-grandsire over much.  Not that they are far wrong therein; for now he is dead, the worst of him seemeth to come out of him, and he is not easily dealt with, save by one who hath some share of his wisdom.  Thou thyself couldst see by my kinsman, the Sea-eagle, how much of ill blood and churlish malice there may be in our kindred when they wax old, and loneliness and dreariness taketh hold of them.  For I must tell thee that I have oft heard my father say that his father the Sea-eagle was in his youth and his prime blithe and buxom, a great lover of women, and a very friendly fellow.  But ever, as I say, as the men of our kind wax in years, they worsen; and thereby mayst thou deem how bad the old man in yonder must be, since he hath lain so long in the grave.  But now we will go to that house of mine on the other side of the mead, over against my kinsman's."

Therewith he led Hallblithe down from the rock while Hallblithe said to him:  "What! art thou also dead that thou hast a grave here?"

"Nay, nay," said Fox, smiling, "am I so evil-conditioned then?  I am no older than thou art."

"But tell me," said Hallblithe, "wilt thou also wax evil as thou growest old?"

"Maybe not," said Fox, looking hard at him, "for in my mind it is that I may be taken into another house, and another kindred, and amongst them I shall be healed of much that might turn to ill."

Therewith were they come across the little meadow to a place where was a cave in the rock closed with a door, and a wicket window therein.  Fox led Hallblithe into it, and within it was no ill dwelling; for it was dry and clean, and there were stools therein and a table, and shelves and lockers in the wall.  When they had sat them down Fox said:  "Here mightest thou dwell safely as long as thou wouldst, if thou wouldst risk dealings with the old carle.  But, as I wot well that thou art in haste to be gone and get home to thy kindred, I must bring thee at dusk to-day close up to our feast-hall, so that thou mayst be at hand to do what hath to be done to-night, so that we may get us gone to-morrow.  Also thou must do off thy Raven gear lest we meet any in the twilight as we go up to the house; and here have I to hand home-spun raiment such as our war-taken thralls wear, which shall serve thy turn well enough; but this thou needst not do on till the time is at hand for our departure; and then I will bring thee away, and bestow thee in a bower hard by the hall; and when thou art within, I may so look to it that none shall go in there, or if they do, they shall see nought in thee save a carle known to them by name.  My kinsman hath learned me to do harder things than this.  But now it is time to eat and drink."

Therewith he drew victual from out a locker and they fell to.  But when they had eaten, Fox taught Hallblithe what he should do in the hall that night, as shall be told hereafter.  And then, with much talk about many things, they wore away the day in that ancient cup of the seething rock, and a little before dusk set out for the hall, bearing with them Hallblithe's gear bundled up together, as though it had been wares from over sea.  So they came to the house before the tables were set, and the Puny Fox bestowed Hallblithe in a bower which gave into the buttery, so that it was easy to go straight into the mid-most of the hall.  There was Hallblithe clad and armed in his Raven gear; but Fox gave him a vizard to go over his face, so that none might know him when he entered therein.

The Story of the Glittering Plain, by William Morris, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[f21]

CHAPTER XXI: OF THE FIGHT OF THE CHAMPIONS IN THE HALL OF THE RAVAGERS

Now it is to be told that the chieftains came into the hall that night and sat down at the board on the dais, even as Hallblithe had seen them do aforetime.  And the chieftain of all, who was called the Erne of the Sea-eagles, rose up according to custom and said: "Hearken, folk! this is a night of the champions, whereon we may not eat till the pale blades have clashed together, and one hath vanquished and another been overcome.  Now let them stand forth and give out the prize of victory which the vanquished shall pay to the vanquisher.  And let it be known, that, whosoever may be the champion that winneth the battle, whether he be a kinsman, or an alien, or a foeman declared; yea, though he have left the head of my brother at the hall-door, he shall pass this night with us safe from sword, safe from axe, safe from hand:  he shall eat as we eat, drink as we drink, sleep as we sleep, and depart safe from any hand or weapon, and shall sail the sea at his pleasure in his own keel or in ours, as to him and us may be meet.  Blow up horns for the champions!"

So the horns blew a cheerful strain, and when they were done, there came into the hall a tall man clad in black, and with black armour and weapons saving the white blade of his sword.  He had a vizard over his face, but his hair came down from under his helm like the tail of a red horse.

So he stood amidst the floor and cried out:  "I am the champion of the Ravagers.  But I swear by the Treasure of the Sea that I will cross no blade to-night save with an alien, a foeman of the kindred. Hearest thou, O chieftain, O Erne of the Sea-eagles?"

"Hear it I do," said the chieftain, "and I deem that thy meaning is that we should go supperless to bed; and this cometh of thy perversity:  for we know thee despite thy vizard.  Belike thou deemest that thou shalt not be met this even, and that there is no free alien in the island to draw sword against thee.  But beware! For when we came aland this morning we found a skiff of the aliens tied to a great spear stuck in the bank of the haven; so that there will be one foeman at least abroad in the island.  But we said if we should come on the man, we would set his head on the gable of the hall with the mouth open toward the North for a token of reproach to the dwellers in the land over sea.  But now give out the prize of victory, and I swear by the Treasure of the Sea that we will abide by thy word."

Said the champion:  "These are the terms and conditions of the battle; that whichso of us is vanquished, he shall either die, or serve the vanquisher for twelve moons, to fare with him at his will, to go his errands, and do according to his commandment in all wise. Hearest thou, chieftain?"

"Yea," said he, "and by the Undying King, both thou and we shall abide by this bargain.  So look to it that thou smite great strokes, lest our hall lack a gable-knop.  Horns, blow up for the alien champion!"

So again the horns were winded; and ere their voice had died, in from the buttery screens came a glittering image of war, and there stood the alien champion over against the warrior of the sea; and he too had a vizard over his face.

Now when the folk saw him, and how slim and light and small he looked beside their champion, and they beheld the Raven painted on his white shield, they hooted and laughed for scorn of him and his littleness. But he tossed his sword up lightly and caught it by the hilts as it fell, and drew nigher to the champion of the sea and stood facing him within reach of his sword.  Then the chieftain on the high-seat put his two hands to his mouth and roared out:  "Fall on, ye champions, fall on!"

But the folk in the hall were so eager that they stood on the benches and the boards, and craned over each other's shoulders, so that they might lose no whit of the hand-play.  Now flashed the blades in the candle-lit hall, and the red-haired champion hove up his sword and smote two great strokes to right and to left; but the alien gave way before him, and the folk cried out at him in scorn and in joy of their champion, who fell to raining down great strokes like the hail amidst the lightning.  But so deft was the alien, that he stood amidst it unhurt, and laid many strokes on his foeman, and did all so lightly and easily, that it seemed as if he were dancing rather than fighting; and the folk held their peace and began to doubt if their huge champion would prevail.  Now the red-haired fetched a mighty stroke at the alien, who leapt aside lightly and gat his sword in his left hand and dealt a great stroke on the other's head, and the red-haired staggered, for he had over-reached himself; and again the alien smote him a left-handed stroke so that he fell full length on the floor with a mighty clatter, and the sword flew out of his hand: and the folk were dumb-founded.

Then the alien threw himself on the sea-champion, and knelt upon him, and shortened his sword as if to slay him with a thrust.  But thereon the man overthrown cried out:  "Hold thine hand, for I am vanquished! Now give me peace according to the bargain struck between us, that I shall serve thee year-long, and follow thee wheresoever thou goest."

Therewith the alien champion arose and stood off from him, and the man of the sea gat to his feet, and did off his helm, so that all men could see that he was the Puny Fox.

Then the victorious champion unhelmed himself, and lo, it was Hallblithe!  And a shout arose in the hall, part of wonder, part of wrath.

Then cried out the Puny Fox:  "I call on all men here to bear witness that by reason of this battle, Hallblithe of the Ravens is free to come and go as he will in the Isle of Ransom, and to take help of any man that will help him, and to depart from the isle when he will and how he will, taking me with him if so he will."

Said the chieftain:  "Yea, this is right and due, and so shall it be. But now, since no freeman, who is not a foe of the passing hour, may abide in our hall without eating of our meat, come up here, Hallblithe, and sit by me, and eat and drink of the best we have, since the Norns would not give us thine head for a gable-knop.  But what wilt thou do with thy thrall the Puny Fox; and whereto in the hall wilt thou have him shown?  Or wilt thou that he sit fasting in the darkness to-night, laid in gyves and fetters?  Or shall he have the cheer of whipping and stripes, as befitteth a thrall to whom the master oweth a grudge?  What is thy will with him?"

Said Hallblithe:  "My will is that thou give him a seat next to me, whether that be high or low, or the bench of thy prison-house.  That he eat of my dish, and drink of my cup, whatsoever the meat and drink may be.  For to-morrow I mean that we twain shall go under the earth-collar together, and that our blood shall run together and that we shall be brothers in arms henceforward."  Then Hallblithe did on his helm again and drew his sword, and looked aside to the Puny Fox to bid him do the like, and he did so, and Hallblithe said:  "Chieftain, thou hast bidden me to table, and I thank thee; but I will not set my teeth in meat, out of our own house and land, which hath not been truly given to me by one who wotteth of me, unless I have conquered it as a prey of battle; neither will I cast a lie into the loving-cup which shall pass from thy lips to mine:  therefore I will tell thee, that though I laid a stroke or two on the Puny Fox, and those no light ones, yet was this battle nought true and real, but a mere beguiling, even as that which I saw foughten in this hall aforetime, when meseemeth the slain men rose up in time to drink the good-night cup.  Therefore, O men of the Ravagers, and thou, O Puny Fox, there is nought to bind your hands and refrain your hearts, and ye may slay me if ye will without murder or dishonour, and may make the head of Hallblithe a knop for your feast-hall.  Yet shall one or two fall to earth before I fall."

Therewith he shook his sword aloft, and a great roar arose, and weapons came down from the wall, and the candles shone on naked steel.  But the Puny Fox came and stood by Hallblithe, and spake in his ear amidst the uproar:  "Well now, brother-in-arms, I have been trying to learn thee the lore of lies, and surely thou art the worst scholar who was ever smitten by master.  And the outcome of it is that I, who have lied so long and well, must now pay for all, and die for a barren truth."

Said Hallblithe:  "Let all be as it will!  I love thee, lies and all; but as for me I cannot handle them.  Lo you! great and grim shall be the slaying, and we shall not fall unavenged."

Said the Puny Fox:  "Hearken! for still they hang back.  Belike it is I that have drawn this death on thee and me.  My last lie was a fool's lie and we die for it:  for what wouldst thou have done hadst thou wotted that thy beloved, the Hostage of the Rose--"  He broke off perforce; for Hallblithe was looking to right and left and handling his sword, and heard not that last word of his; and from both sides of the hall the throng was drawing round about those twain, weapon in hand.  Then Hallblithe set his eyes on a big man in front who was heaving up a heavy short-sword and thought that he would at least slay this one.  But or ever he might smite, the great horn blared out over the tumult, and men forbore a while and fell somewhat silent.

Then came down to them the voice of the chieftain, a loud voice, but clear and with mirth mingled with anger in it, and he said:  "What do these fools of the Ravagers cumbering the floor of the feast-hall, and shaking weapons when there is no foeman anigh?  Are they dreaming-drunk before the wine is poured?  Why do they not sit down in their places, and abide the bringing in of the meat?  And ye women, where are ye, why do ye delay our meat, when ye may well wot that our hearts are drooping for hunger; and all hath been duly done, the battle of the champions fought and won, and the prize of war given forth and taken?  How long, O folk, shall your chieftains sit fasting?"

Then there arose great laughter in the hall, and men withdrew them from those twain and went and sat them down in their places.

Then the chieftain said:  "Come up hither, I say, O Hallblithe, and bring thy war-thrall with thee if thou wilt.  But delay not, unless it be so that thou art neither hungry nor thirsty; and good sooth thou shouldst be both; for men say that the ravens are hard to satisfy.  Come then and make good cheer with us!"

So Hallblithe thrust his sword into the sheath, and the Puny Fox did the like, and they went both together up the hall to the high-seat. And Hallblithe sat down on the chieftain's right hand, and the Puny Fox next to him; and the chieftain, the Erne, said:  "O Hallblithe, dost thou need thine armour at table; or dost thou find it handy to take thy meat clad in thy byrny and girt with a sword?"

Then laughed Hallblithe and said:  "Nay, meseemeth to-night I shall need war-gear no more."  And he stood up and did off all his armour and gave it, sword and all, into the hands of a woman, who bore it off, he knew not whither.  And the Erne looked on him and said: "Well is that! and now I see that thou art a fair young man, and it is no marvel though maidens desire thee."

As he spake came in the damsels with the victual and the cheer was exceeding good, and Hallblithe grew light-hearted.

But when the healths had been drunk as aforetime, and men had drunk a cup or two thereafter, there rose a warrior from one of the endlong benches, a big young man, black-haired and black-bearded, ruddy of visage, and he said in a voice that was rough and fat:  "O Erne, and ye other chieftains, we have been talking here at our table concerning this guest of thine who hath beguiled us, and we are not wholly at one with thee as to thy dealings with him.  True it is, now that the man hath our meat in his belly, that he must depart from amongst us with a whole skin, unless of his own will he stand up to fight some man of us here.  Yet some of us think that he is not so much our friend that we should help him to a keel whereon to fare home to those that hate us:  and we say that it would not be unlawful to let the man abide in the isle, and proclaim him a wolf's-head within a half-moon of today.  Or what sayest thou?"

Said the Erne:  "Wait for my word a while, and hearken to another! Is the Grey-goose of the Ravagers in the hall?  Let him give out his word on this matter."

Then arose a white-headed carle from a table nigh to the dais, whose black raiment was well adorned with gold.  Despite his years his face was fair and little wrinkled; a man with a straight nose and a well-fashioned mouth, and with eyes still bright and grey.  He spake:  "O folk, I find that the Erne hath done well in cherishing this guest. For first, if he hath beguiled us, he did it not save by the furtherance and sleight of our own kinsman; therefore if any one is to die for beguiling us, let it be the Puny Fox.  Secondly, we may well wot that heavy need hath driven the man to this beguilement; and I say that it was no unmanly deed for him to enter our hall and beguile us with his sleight; and that he hath played out the play right well and cunningly with the wisdom of a warrior.  Thirdly, the manliness of him is well proven, in that having overcome us in sleight, he hath spoken out the sooth concerning our beguilement and hath made himself our foeman and captive, when he might have sat down by us as our guest, freely and in all honour.  And this he did, not as contemning the Puny Fox and his lies and crafty wiles (for he hath told us that he loveth him); but so that he might show himself a man in that which trieth manhood.  Moreover, ye shall not forget that he is the rebel of the Undying King, who is our lord and master; therefore in cherishing him we show ourselves great-hearted, in that we fear not the wrath of our master.  Therefore I naysay the word of the War-brand that we should make this man a wolf's-head; for in so doing we shall show ourselves lesser-hearted than he is, and of no account beside of him; and his head on our hall-gable should be to us a nithing-stake, and a tree of reproach.  So I bid thee, O Erne, to make much of this man; and thou shalt do well to give him worthy gifts, such as warriors may take, so that he may show them at home in the House of the Raven, that it may be the beginning of peace betwixt us and his noble kindred.  This is my say, and later on I shall wax no wiser."

Therewith he sat down, and there arose a murmur and stir in the hall; but the more part said that the Grey-goose had spoken well, and that it was good to be at peace with such manly fellows as the new guest was.

But the Erne said:  "One word will I lay hereto, to wit, that he who desireth mine enmity let him do scathe to Hallblithe of the Ravens and hinder him."

Then he bade fill round the cups, and called a health to Hallblithe, and all men drank to him, and there was much joyance and merriment.

But when the night was well worn, the Erne turned to Hallblithe and said:  "That was a good word of the Grey-goose which he spake concerning the giving of gifts:  Raven-son, wilt thou take a gift of me and be my friend?"

"Thy friend will I be," said Hallblithe, "but no gift will I take of thee or any other till I have the gift of gifts, and that is my troth-plight maiden.  I will not be glad till I can be glad with her."

Then laughed the Erne, and the Puny Fox grinned all across his wide face, and Hallblithe looked from one to the other of them and wondered at their mirth, and when they saw his wondering eyes, they did but laugh the more; and the Erne said:  "Nevertheless, thou shalt see the gift which I would give thee; and then mayst thou take it or leave it as thou wilt.  Ho ye! bring in the throne of the Eastland with them that minister to it!"

Certain men left the hall as he spake, and came back bearing with them a throne fashioned most goodly of ivory, parcel-gilt and begemmed, and adorned with marvellous craftsmanship:  and they set it down amidst of the hall-floor and went aback to their places, while the Erne sat and smiled kindly on the folk and on Hallblithe.  Then arose the sound of fiddles and the lesser harp, and the doors of the screen were opened, and there flowed into the hall a company of fair damsels not less than a score, each one with a rose on her bosom, and they came and stood in order behind the throne of the Eastlands, and they strewed roses on the ground before them:  and when they were duly ranged they fell to singing:

Now waneth spring,
 While all birds sing,
 And the south wind blows
 The earliest rose
 To and fro
 By the doors we know,
 And the scented gale
 Fills every dale.
 Slow now are brooks running because of the weed,
 And the thrush hath no cunning to hide her at need,
 So swift as she flieth from hedge-row to tree
 As one that toil trieth, and deedful must be.

And O! that at last,
 All sorrows past,
 This night I lay
 'Neath the oak-beams grey!
 O, to wake from sleep,
 To see dawn creep
 Through the fruitful grove
 Of the house that I love!
 O! my feet to be treading the threshold once more,
 O'er which once went the leading of swords to the war!
 O! my feet in the garden's edge under the sun,
 Where the seeding grass hardens for haysel begun!

Lo, lo! the wind blows
 To the heart of the Rose,
 And the ship lies tied
 To the haven side!
 But O for the keel
 The sails to feel!
 And the alien ness
 Growing less and less;
 As down the wind driveth and thrusts through the sea
 The sail-burg that striveth to turn and go free,
 But the lads at the tiller they hold her in hand,
 And the wind our well-willer drives fierce to the land.

We shall wend it yet,
 The highway wet;
 For what is this
 That our bosoms kiss?
 What lieth sweet
 Before our feet?
 What token hath come
 To lead us home?
 'Tis the Rose of the garden walled round from the croft
 Where the grey roof its warden steep riseth aloft,
 'Tis the Rose 'neath the oaken-beamed hall, where they bide,
 The pledges unbroken, the hand of the bride.

Hallblithe heard the song, and half thought it promised him somewhat; but then he had been so misled and mocked at, that he scarce knew how to rejoice at it.

Now the Erne spake:  "Wilt thou not take the chair and these dainty song-birds that stand about it?  Much wealth might come into thine hall if thou wert to carry them over sea to rich men who have no kindred, nor affinity wherein to wed, but who love women as well as other men."

Said Hallblithe:  "I have wealth enow were I once home again.  As to these maidens, I know by the fashion of them that they are no women of the Rose, as by their song they should be.  Yet will I take any of these maidens that have will to go with me and be made sisters of my sisters, and wed with the warriors of the Rose; or if they are of a kindred, and long to sit each in the house of her folk, then will we send them home over the sea with warriors to guard them from all trouble.  For this gift I thank thee.  As to thy throne, I bid thee keep it till a keel cometh thy way from our land, bringing fair gifts for thee and thine.  For we are not so unwealthy."

Those that sat nearby heard his words and praised them; but the Erne said:  "All this is free to thee, and thou mayst do what thou wilt with the gifts given to thee.  Yet shalt thou have the throne; and I have thought of a way to make thee take it.  Or what sayst thou, Puny Fox?"

Said the Puny Fox:  "Yea if thou wilt, thou mayst, but I thought it not of thee that thou wouldst.  Now is all well."

Again Hallblithe looked from one to the other and wondered what they meant.  But the Erne cried out:  "Bring in now the sitter, who shall fill the empty throne!"

Then again the screen-doors opened, and there came in two weaponed men, leading between them a woman clad in gold and garlanded with roses.  So fair was the fashion of her face and all her body, that her coming seemed to make a change in the hall, as though the sun had shone into it suddenly.  She trod the hall-floor with firm feet, and sat down on the ivory chair.  But even before she was seated therein Hallblithe knew that the Hostage was under that roof and coming toward him.  And the heart rose in his breast and fluttered therein, so sore he yearned toward the Daughter of the Rose, and his very speech-friend.  Then he heard the Erne saying, "How now, Raven-son, wilt thou have the throne and the sitter therein, or wilt thou gainsay me once more?"

Thereafter he himself spake, and the sound of his voice was strange to him and as if he knew it not:  "Chieftain, I will not gainsay thee, but will take thy gift, and thy friendship therewith, whatsoever hath betided.  Yet would I say a word or two unto the woman that sitteth yonder.  For I have been straying amongst wiles and images, and mayhappen I shall yet find this to be but a dream of the night, or a beguilement of the day."  Therewith he arose from the table, and walked slowly down the hall; but it was a near thing that he did not fall a-weeping before all those aliens, so full his heart was.

He came and stood before the Hostage, and their eyes were upon each other, and for a little while they had no words.  Then Hallblithe began, wondering at his voice as he spake:  "Art thou a woman and my speech-friend?  For many images have mocked me, and I have been encompassed with lies, and led astray by behests that have not been fulfilled.  And the world hath become strange to me, and empty of friends."

Then she said:  "Art thou verily Hallblithe?  For I also have been encompassed by lies, and beset by images of things unhelpful."

"Yea," said he, "I am Hallblithe of the Ravens, wearied with desire for my troth-plight maiden."

Then came the rosy colour into the fairness of her face, as the rising sun lighteth the garden of flowers in the June morning; and she said:  "If thou art Hallblithe, tell me what befell to the finger-gold-ring that my mother gave me when we were both but little."

Then his face grew happy, and he smiled, and he said:  "I put it for thee one autumntide in the snake's hole in the bank above the river, amidst the roots of the old thorn-tree, that the snake might brood it, and make the gold grow greater; but when winter was over and we came to look for it, lo! there was neither ring nor snake, nor thorn-tree:  for the flood had washed it all away."

Thereat she smiled most sweetly, and whereas she had been looking on him hitherto with strained and anxious eyes, she now beheld him simply and friendly; and she said:  "O Hallblithe, I am a woman indeed, and thy speech-friend.  This is the flesh that desireth thee, and the life that is thine, and the heart which thou rejoicest.  But now tell me, who are these huge images around us, amongst whom I have sat thus, once in every moon this year past, and afterwards I was taken back to the women's bower?  Are they men or mountain-giants? Will they slay us, or shut us up from the light and air?  Or hast thou made peace with them?  Wilt thou then dwell with me here, or shall we go back again to Cleveland by the Sea?  And when, oh when, shall we depart?"

He smiled and said:  "Quick come thy questions, beloved.  These are the folks of the Ravagers and the Sea-eagles:  they be men, though fierce and wild they be.  Our foes they have been, and have sundered us; but now are they our friends, and have brought us together.  And to-morrow, O friend, shall we depart across the waters to Cleveland by the Sea."

She leaned forward, and was about to speak softly to him, but suddenly started back, and said:  "There is a big, red-haired man, as big as any here, behind thy shoulder.  Is he also a friend?  What would he with us?"

So Hallblithe turned about, and beheld the Puny Fox beside him, who took up the word and spoke, smiling as a man in great glee:  "O maiden of the Rose, I am Hallblithe's thrall, and his scholar, to unlearn the craft of lying, whereby I have done amiss towards both him and thee.  Whereof I will tell thee all the tale soon.  But now I will say that it is true that we depart to-morrow for Cleveland by the Sea, thou and he, and I in company.  Now I would ask thee, Hallblithe, if thou wouldst have me bestow this gift of thine in safe-keeping to-night, since there is an end of her sitting in the hall like a graven image:  and to-morrow the way will be long and wearisome, What sayest thou?"

Said the Hostage:  "Shall I trust this man and go with him?"

"Yea, thou shalt trust him," said Hallblithe, "for he is trusty.  And even were he not, it is meet for us of the Raven and the Rose to do as our worth biddeth us, and not to fear this folk.  And it behoveth us to do after their customs since we are in their house."

"That is sooth," she said; "big man, lead me out of the hall to my place.  Farewell, Hallblithe, for a little while, and then shall there be no more sundering for us."

Therewith she departed with the Puny Fox, and Hallblithe went back to the high-seat and sat down by the Erne, who laughed on him and said: "Thou hast taken my gift, and that is well:  yet shall I tell thee that I would not have given it to thee if I could have kept it for myself in such plight as thou wilt have it.  But all I could do, and the Puny Fox to help withal, availed me nought.  So good luck go with thine hands.  Now will we to bed, and to-morrow I will lead thee out on thy way; for to say sooth, there be some here who are not well pleased with either thee or me; and thou knowest that words are wasted on wilful men, but that deeds may avail somewhat."

Therewith he cried out for the cup of good-night, and when it was drunken, Hallblithe was shown to a fair shut-bed; even that wherein he had lain aforetime; and there he went to sleep in joy, and in good liking with all men.

The Story of the Glittering Plain, by William Morris, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[f22]

CHAPTER XXII: THEY GO FROM THE ISLE OF RANSOM AND COME TO CLEVELAND BY THE SEA

In the morning early Hallblithe arose from his bed, and when he came into the mid-hall, there was the Puny Fox and the Hostage with him; Hallblithe kissed her and embraced her, and she him; yet not like lovers long sundered, but as a man and maid betrothed are wont to do, for there were folk coming and going about the hall.  Then spake the Puny Fox:  "The Erne is abiding us out in the meadow yonder; for now nought will serve him but he must needs go under the earth-collar with us.  How sayest thou, is he enough thy friend?"

Said Hallblithe, smiling on the Hostage:  "What hast thou to say to it, beloved?"

"Nought at all," she said, "if thou art friend to any of these men. I may deem that I have somewhat against the chieftain, whereof belike this big man may tell thee hereafter; but even so much meseemeth I have against this man himself, who is now become thy friend and scholar; for he also strove for my beguilement, and that not for himself, but for another."

"True it is," said the Fox, "that I did it for another; even as yesterday I took thy mate Hallblithe out of the trap whereinto he had strayed, and compassed his deliverance by means of the unfaithful battle; and even as I would have stolen thee for him, O Rose-maiden, if need had been; yea, even if I must have smitten into ruin the roof-tree of the Ravagers.  And how could I tell that the Erne would give thee up unstolen?  Yea, thou sayeth sooth, O noble and spotless maiden; all my deeds, both good and ill, have I done for others; and so I deem it shall be while my life lasteth."

Then Hallblithe laughed and said:  "Art thou nettled, fellow-in-arms, at the word of a woman who knoweth thee not?  She shall yet be thy friend, O Fox.  But tell me, beloved, I deemed that thou hadst not seen Fox before; how then can he have helped the Erne against thee?"

"Yet she sayeth sooth," said Fox, "this was of my sleight:  for when I had to come before her, I changed my skin, as I well know how; there are others in this land who can do so much as that.  But what sayest thou concerning the brotherhood with the Erne?"

"Let it be so," said Hallblithe, "he is manly and true, though masterful, and is meet for this land of his.  I shall not fall out with him; for seldom meseemeth shall I see the Isle of Ransom."

"And I never again," said the Puny Fox.

"Dost thou loathe it, then," said the Hostage, "because of the evil thou hast done therein?"

"Nay," said he, "what is the evil, when henceforth I shall do but good?  Nay, I love the land.  Belike thou deemest it but dreary with its black rocks and black sand, and treeless wind-swept dales; but I know it in summer and winter, and sun and shade, in storm and calm. And I know where the fathers dwelt and the sons of their sons' sons have long lain in the earth.  I have sailed its windiest firths, and climbed its steepest crags; and ye may well wot that it hath a friendly face to me; and the land-wights of the mountains will be sorry for my departure."

So he spake, and Hallblithe would have answered him, but by now were they come to a grassy hollow amidst the dale, where the Erne had already made the earth-yoke ready.  To wit, he had loosened a strip of turf all save the two ends, and had propped it up with two ancient dwarf-wrought spears, so that amidmost there was a lintel to go under.

So when he saw those others coming, he gave them the sele of the day, and said to Hallblithe:  "What is it to be? shall I be less than thy brother-in-arms henceforward?"

Said Hallblithe:  "Not a whit less.  It is good to have brothers in other lands than one."

So they made no delay, but clad in all their war-gear, they went under the earth-yoke one after the other; thereafter they stood together, and each let blood in his arm, so that the blood of all three mingled together fell down on the grass of the ancient earth; and they swore friendship and brotherhood each to each.

But when all was done the Erne spake:  "Brother Hallblithe, as I lay awake in bed this morning I deemed that I would take ship with thee to Cleveland by the Sea, that I might dwell there a while.  But when I came out of the hall, and saw the dale lying green betwixt hill-side and hill-side, and the glittering river running down amidmost, and the sheep and kine and horses feeding up and down on either side the water:  and I looked up at the fells and saw how deep blue they stood up against the snowy peaks, and I thought of all our deeds on the deep sea, and the merry nights, in yonder abode of men:  then I thought that I would not leave the kindred, were it but for a while, unless war and lifting called me.  So now I will ride with thee to the ship, and then farewell to thee."

"It is good," said Hallblithe, "though not as good as it might be. Glad had we been with thee in the hall of the Ravens."

As he spoke drew anigh the carles leading the horses, and with them came six of those damsels whom the Erne had given to Hallblithe the night before; two of whom asked to be brought to their kindred over sea; but the other four were fain to go with Hallblithe and the Hostage, and become their sisters at Cleveland by the Sea.

So then they got to horse and rode down the dale toward the haven, and the carles rode with them, so that of weaponed men they were a score in company.  But when they were half-way to the haven they saw where hard by three knolls on the way-side were men standing with their weapons and war-gear glittering in the sun.  So the Erne laughed and said:  "Shall we have a word with War-brand then?"

But they rode steadily on their way, and when they came up to the knolls they saw that it was War-brand indeed with a score of men at his back; but they stirred not when they saw Erne's company that it was great.  Then Erne laughed aloud and cried out in a big voice, "What, lads! ye ride early this morning; are there foemen abroad in the Isle?"

They shrank back before him, but a carle of those who was hindermost cried out:  "Art thou coming back to us, Erne, or have thy new friends bought thee to lead them in battle?"

"Fear it nought," quoth Erne, "I shall be back before the shepherd's noon."

So they went their ways and came to the haven, and there lay the Flaming Sword, and beside her a trim bark, not right great, all ready for sea:  and Hallblithe's skiff was made fast to her for an after-boat.

Then the Hostage and Hallblithe and the six damsels went aboard her, and when the Erne had bidden them farewell, they cast off the hawsers and thrust her out through the haven-mouth; but ere they had got midmost of the haven, they saw the Erne, that he had turned about, and was riding up the dale with his house-carles, and each man's weapon was shining in his hand:  and they wondered if he were riding to battle with War-brand; and Fox said:  "Meseemeth our brother-in-arms hath in his mind to give those waylayers an evil minute, and verily he is the man to do the same."

So they gat them out of the haven, and the ebb-tide drave out seaward strongly, and the wind was fair for Cleveland by the Sea; and they ran speedily past the black cliffs of the Isle of Ransom, and soon were they hull down behind them.  But on the afternoon of the next day they hove up the land of the kindreds, and by sunset they beached their ship on the sand by the Rollers of the Raven, and went ashore without more ado.  And the strand was empty of all men, even as on the day when Hallblithe first met the Puny Fox.  So then in the cool of the evening they went up toward the House of the Raven.  Those damsels went together hand in hand two by two, and Hallblithe held the Hostage by the hand; but the Puny Fox went along beside them, gleeful and of many words; telling them tales of his wiles and his craft, and his skin-changing.

"But now," quoth he, "I have left all that behind me in the Isle of Ransom, and have but one shape, and I would for your behoof that it were a goodlier one:  and but one wisdom have I, even that which dwelleth in mine own head-bone.  Yet it may be that this may avail you one time or other.  But lo you! though I am thy thrall, have I not the look of a thrall-huckster from over sea leading up my wares to the cheaping-stead?"  They laughed at his words and were merry, and much love there was amongst them as they went up to the House of the Raven.

But when they came thither they went into the garth, and there was no man therein, for it was now dusk, and the windows of the long hall were yellow with candle-light.  Then said Fox:  "Abide ye here a little; for I would go into the hall alone and see the conditions of thy people, O Hallblithe."

"Go thou, then," said Hallblithe, "but be not rash.  I counsel thee; for our folk are not over-patient when they deem they have a foe before them."

The Puny Fox laughed, and said:  "So it is then the world over, that happy men are wilful and masterful."

Then he drew his sword and smote on the door with the pommel, and the door opened to him and in he went:  and he found that fair hall full of folk and bright with candles; and he stood amidst the floor; all men looked on him, and many knew him at once to be a man of the Ravagers, and silence fell upon the hall, but no man stirred hand against him.  Then he said:  "Will ye hearken to the word of an evil man, a robber of the folks?"

Spake the chieftain from the dais:  "Words will not hurt us, sea-warrior; and thou art but one among many; wherefore thy might this eve is but as the might of a new-born baby.  Speak, and afterwards eat and drink, and depart safe from amongst us!"

Spake the Puny Fox:  "What is gone with Hallblithe, a fair young man of your kindred, and with the Hostage of the Rose, his troth-plight maiden?"

Then was the hush yet greater in the hall, so that you might have heard a pin drop; and the chieftain said:  "It is a grief of ours that they are gone, and that none hath brought us back their dead bodies that we might lay them in the Acre of the Fathers."

Then leapt up a man from the end-long table nigh to Fox, and cried out:  "Yea, folk! they are gone, and we deem that runagates of thy kindred, O new-come man, have stolen them from us; wherefor they shall one day pay us."

Then laughed the Puny Fox and said:  "Some would say that stealing Hallblithe was like stealing a lion, and that he might take care of himself; though he was not as big as I am."

Said the last speaker:  "Did thy kin or didst thou steal him, O evil man?"

"Yea, I stole him," quoth Fox, "but by sleight, and not by might."

Then uprose great uproar in the hall, but the chieftain on the high-seat cried out:  "Peace, peace!" and the noise abated, and the chieftain said:  "Dost thou mean that thou comest hither to give us thine head for making away with Hallblithe and the Hostage?"

"I mean to ask rather," said the Fox, "what thou wilt give me for the bodies of these twain?"

Said the chieftain:  "A boat-load of gold were not too much if thou shouldst live a little longer."

Quoth the Puny Fox:  "Well, in anywise I will go and bring in the bodies aforesaid, and leave my reward to the goodwill of the Ravens."

Therewith he turned about to go, but lo! there already in the door stood Hallblithe holding the Hostage by the hand; and many in the hall saw them, for the door was wide.  Then they came in and stood by the side of the Puny Fox, and all men in the hall arose and shouted for joy.  But when the tumult was a little abated, the Puny Fox cried out:  "O chieftain, and all ye folk! if a boat-load of gold were not too much reward for the bringing back the dead bodies of your friends, what reward shall he have who hath brought back their bodies and the souls therein?"

Said the chieftain:  "The man shall choose his own reward."  And the men in the hall shouted their yeasay.

Then said the Puny Fox:  "Well, then, this I choose, that ye make me one of your kindred before the fathers of old time."

They all cried out that he had chosen wisely and manfully; but Hallblithe said:  "I bid you do for him no less than this; and ye shall wot that he is already my sworn brother-in-arms."

Now the chieftain cried out:  "O Wanderers from over the sea, come up hither and sit with us and be merry at last!"

So they went up to the dais, Hallblithe and the Hostage, and the Puny Fox and the six maidens withal.  And since the night was yet young, the supper of the men of the Ravens was turned into the wedding-feast of Hallblithe and the Hostage, and that very night she became a wife of the Ravens, that she might bear to the House the best of men and the fairest of women.

But on the morrow they brought the Puny Fox to the mote-stead of the kindreds that he might stand before the fathers and be made a son of the kindred; and this they did because of the word of Hallblithe, and because they believed in the tale which he told them of the Glittering Plain and the Acre of the Undying.  The four maidens also were made sisters of the House; and the other twain were sent home to their own kindred in all honour.

Of the Puny Fox it is said that he soon lost and forgot all the lore which he had learned of the ancient men, living and dead; and became as other men and was no wizard.  Yet he was exceeding valiant and doughty; and he ceased not to go with Hallblithe wheresoever he went; and many deeds they did together, whereof the memory of men hath failed:  but neither they nor any man of the Ravens came any more to the Glittering Plain, or heard any tidings of the folk that dwell there.

HEREWITH ENDETH THE TALE.

 

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: sgr.txt =====


The Science of Getting Rich, by Wallace Delois Wattles, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Science of Getting Rich

  

by Wallace Delois Wattles

  

Holyoke, Mass., E. Towne

  

[1910]

Formatted and proofed at sacred-texts.com, June 2007. This book is in the public domain in the United States because it was published prior to 1923.

The Science of Getting Rich, by Wallace Delois Wattles, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

Preface

THIS book is pragmatical, not philosophical; a practical manual, not a treatise upon theories. It is intended for the men and women whose most pressing need is for money; who wish to get rich first, and philosophize afterward. It is for those who have, so far, found neither the time, the means, nor the opportunity to go deeply into the study of metaphysics, but who want results and who are willing to take the conclusions of science as a basis for action, without going into all the processes by which those conclusions were reached.

It is expected that the reader will take the fundamental statements upon faith, just as he would take statements concerning a law of electrical action if they were promulgated by a Marconi or an Edison; and, taking the statements upon faith, that he will prove their truth by acting upon them without fear or hesitation. Every man or woman who does this will certainly get rich; for the science herein applied is an exact science, and failure is impossible. For the benefit, however, of those who wish to investigate philosophical theories and so secure a logical basis for faith, I will here cite certain authorities.

The monistic theory of the universe the theory that One is All, and that All is One; That one Substance manifests itself as the seeming many elements of the material world -is of Hindu origin, and has been gradually winning its way into the thought of the western world for two hundred years. It is the foundation of all the Oriental philosophies, and of those of Descartes, Spinoza, Leibnitz, Schopenhauer, Hegel, and Emerson.

The reader who would dig to the philosophical foundations of this is advised to read Hegel and Emerson for himself.

In writing this book I have sacrificed all other considerations to plainness and simplicity of style, so that all might understand. The plan of action laid down herein was deduced from the conclusions of philosophy; it has been thoroughly tested, and bears the supreme test of practical experiment; it works. If you wish to know how the conclusions were arrived at, read the writings of the authors mentioned above; and if you wish to reap the fruits of their philosophies in actual practice, read this book and do exactly as it tells you to do.

--The Author

The Science of Getting Rich, by Wallace Delois Wattles, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER 1

  

The Right To Be Rich.

WHATEVER may be said in praise of poverty, the fact remains that it is not possible to live a really complete or successful life unless one is rich. No man can rise to his greatest possible height in talent or soul development unless he has plenty of money; for to unfold the soul and to develop talent he must have many things to use, and he cannot have these things unless he has money to buy them with.

A man develops in mind, soul, and body by making use of things, and society is so organized that man must have money in order to become the possessor of things; therefore, the basis of all advancement for man must be the science of getting rich.

The object of all life is development; and everything that lives has an inalienable right to all the development it is capable of attaining.

Man's right to life means his right to have the free and unrestricted use of all the things which may be necessary to his fullest mental, spiritual, and physical unfoldment; or, in other words, his right to be rich.

In this book, I shall not speak of riches in a figurative way; to be really rich does not mean to be satisfied or contented with a little. No man ought to be satisfied with a little if he is capable of using and enjoying more. The purpose of Nature is the advancement and unfoldment of life; and every man should have all that can contribute to the power; elegance, beauty, and richness of life; to be content with less is sinful.

The man who owns all he wants for the living of all the life he is capable of living is rich; and no man who has not plenty of money can have all he wants. Life has advanced so far, and become so complex, that even the most ordinary man or woman requires a great amount of wealth in order to live in a manner that even approaches completeness. Every person naturally wants to become all that they are capable of becoming; this desire to realize innate possibilities is inherent in human nature; we cannot help wanting to be all that we can be. Success in life is becoming what you want to be; you can become what you want to be only by making use of things, and you can have the free use of things only as you become rich enough to buy them. To understand the science of getting rich is therefore the most essential of all knowledge.

There is nothing wrong in wanting to get rich. The desire for riches is really the desire for a richer, fuller, and more abundant life; and that desire is praise worthy. The man who does not desire to live more abundantly is abnormal, and so the man who does not desire to have money enough to buy all he wants is abnormal.

There are three motives for which we live; we live for the body, we live for the mind, we live for the soul. No one of these is better or holier than the other; all are alike desirable, and no one of the three--body, mind, or soul--can live fully if either of the others is cut short of full life and expression. It is not right or noble to live only for the soul and deny mind or body; and it is wrong to live for the intellect and deny body or soul.

We are all acquainted with the loathsome consequences of living for the body and denying both mind and soul; and we see that real life means the complete expression of all that man can give forth through body, mind, and soul. Whatever he can say, no man can be really happy or satisfied unless his body is living fully in every function, and unless the same is true of his mind and his soul. Wherever there is unexpressed possibility, or function not performed, there is unsatisfied desire. Desire is possibility seeking expression, or function seeking performance.

Man cannot live fully in body without good food, comfortable clothing, and warm shelter; and without freedom from excessive toil. Rest and recreation are also necessary to his physical life .

He cannot live fully in mind without books and time to study them, without opportunity for travel and observation, or without intellectual companionship.

To live fully in mind he must have intellectual recreations, and must surround himself with all the objects of art and beauty he is capable of using and appreciating.

To live fully in soul, man must have love; and love is denied expression by poverty.

A man's highest happiness is found in the bestowal of benefits on those he loves; love finds its most natural and spontaneous expression in giving. The man who has nothing to give cannot fill his place as a husband or father, as a citizen, or as a man. It is in the use of material things that a man finds full life for his body, develops his mind, and unfolds his soul. It is therefore of supreme importance to him that he should be rich.

It is perfectly right that you should desire to be rich; if you are a normal man or woman you cannot help doing so. It is perfectly right that you should give your best attention to the Science of Getting Rich, for it is the noblest and most necessary of all studies. If you neglect this study, you are derelict in your duty to yourself, to God and humanity; for you can render to God and humanity no greater service than to make the most of yourself.

The Science of Getting Rich, by Wallace Delois Wattles, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER 2

  

There is A Science of Getting Rich

THERE is a Science of getting rich, and it is an exact science, like algebra or arithmetic. There are certain laws which govern the process of acquiring riches; once these laws are learned and obeyed by any man, he will get rich with mathematical certainty.

The ownership of money and property comes as a result of doing things in a certain way; those who do things in this Certain Way, whether on purpose or accidentally, get rich; while those who do not do things in this Certain Way, no matter how hard they work or how able they are, remain poor.

It is a natural law that like causes always produce like effects; and, therefore, any man or woman who learns to do things in this certain way will infallibly get rich.

That the above statement is true is shown by the following facts:

Getting rich is not a matter of environment, for, if it were, all the people in certain neighborhoods would become wealthy; the people of one city would all be rich, while those of other towns would all be poor; or the inhabitants of one state would roll in wealth, while those of an adjoining state would be in poverty.

But everywhere we see rich and poor living side by side, in the same environment, and often engaged in the same vocations. When two men are in the same locality, and in the same business, and one gets rich while the other remains poor, it shows that getting rich is not, primarily, a matter of environment. Some environments may be more favorable than others, but when two men in the same business are in the same neighborhood, and one gets rich while the other fails, it indicates that getting rich is the result of doing things in a Certain Way.

And further, the ability to do things in this certain way is not due solely to the possession of talent, for many people who have great talent remain poor, while other who have very little talent get rich.

Studying the people who have got rich, we find that they are an average lot in all respects, having no greater talents and abilities than other men. It is evident that they do not get rich because they possess talents and abilities that other men have not, but because they happen to do things in a Certain Way.

Getting rich is not the result of saving, or "thrift"; many very penurious people are poor, while free spenders often get rich.

Nor is getting rich due to doing things which others fail to do; for two men in the same business often do almost exactly the same things, and one gets rich while the other remains poor or becomes bankrupt.

From all these things, we must come to the conclusion that getting rich is the result of doing things in a Certain Way.

If getting rich is the result of doing things in a Certain Way, and if like causes always produce like effects, then any man or woman who can do things in that way can become rich, and the whole matter is brought within the domain of exact science.

The question arises here, whether this Certain Way may not be so difficult that only a few may follow it. This cannot be true, as we have seen, so far as natural ability is concerned. Talented people get rich, and blockheads get rich; intellectually brilliant people get rich, and very stupid people get rich; physically strong people get rich, and weak and sickly people get rich.

Some degree of ability to think and understand is, of course, essential; but in so far natural ability is concerned, any man or woman who has sense enough to read and understand these words can certainly get rich.

Also, we have seen that it is not a matter of environment. Location counts for something; one would not go to the heart of the Sahara and expect to do successful business.

Getting rich involves the necessity of dealing with men, and of being where there are people to deal with; and if these people are inclined to deal in the way you want to deal, so much the better. But that is about as far as environment goes.

If anybody else in your town can get rich, so can you; and if anybody else in your state can get rich, so can you.

Again, it is not a matter of choosing some particular business or profession. People get rich in every business, and in every profession; while their next door neighbors in the same vocation remain in poverty.

It is true that you will do best in a business which you like, and which is congenial to you; and if you have certain talents which are well developed, you will do best in a business which calls for the exercise of those talents.

Also, you will do best in a business which is suited to your locality; an ice-cream parlor would do better in a warm climate than in Greenland, and a salmon fishery will succeed better in the Northwest than in Florida, where there are no salmon.

But, aside from these general limitations, getting rich is not dependent upon your engaging in some particular business, but upon your learning to do things in a Certain Way. If you are now in business, and anybody else in your locality is getting rich in the same business, while you are not getting rich, it is because you are not doing things in the same Way that the other person is doing them.

No one is prevented from getting rich by lack of capital. True, as you get capital the increase becomes more easy and rapid; but one who has capital is already rich, and does not need to consider how to become so. No matter how poor you may be, if you begin to do things in the Certain Way you will begin to get rich; and you will begin to have capital. The getting of capital is a part of the process of getting rich; and it is a part of the result which invariably follows the doing of things in the Certain Way. You may be the poorest man on the continent, and be deeply in debt; you may have neither friends, influence, nor resources; but if you begin to do things in this way, you must infallibly begin to get rich, for like causes must produce like effects. If you have no capital, you can get capital; if you are in the wrong business, you can get into the right business; if you are in the wrong location, you can go to the right location; and you can do so by beginning in your present business and in your present location to do things in the Certain Way which causes success.

The Science of Getting Rich, by Wallace Delois Wattles, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER 3

  

Is Opportunity Monopolized?

NO man is kept poor because opportunity has been taken away from him; because other people have monopolized the wealth, and have put a fence around it. You may be shut off from engaging in business in certain lines, but there are other channels open to you. Probably it would be hard for you to get control of any of the great railroad systems; that field is pretty well monopolized. But the electric railway business is still in its infancy, and offers plenty of scope for enterprise; and it will be but a very few years until traffic and transportation through the air will become a great industry, and in all its branches will give employment to hundreds of thousands, and perhaps to millions, of people. Why not turn your attention to the development of aerial transportation, instead of competing with J.J. Hill and others for a chance in the steam railway world?

It is quite true that if you are a workman in the employ of the steel trust you have very little chance of becoming the owner of the plant in which you work; but it is also true that if you will commence to act in a Certain Way, you can soon leave the employ of the steel trust; you can buy a farm of from ten to forty acres, and engage in business as a producer of foodstuffs. There is great opportunity at this time for men who will live upon small tracts of land and cultivate the same intensively; such men will certainly get rich. You may say that it is impossible for you to get the land, but I am going to prove to you that it is not impossible, and that you can certainly get a farm if you will go to work in a Certain Way.

At different periods the tide of opportunity sets in different directions, according to the needs of the whole, and the particular stage of social evolution which has been reached. At present, in America, it is setting toward agriculture and the allied industries and professions. To-day, opportunity is open before the factory worker in his line. It is open before the business man who supplies the farmer more than before the one who supplies the factory worker; and before the professional man who waits upon the farmer more than before the one who serves the working class.

There is abundance of opportunity for the man who will go with the tide, instead of trying to swim against it.

So the factory workers, either as individuals or as a class, are not deprived of opportunity. The workers are not being "kept down" by their masters; they are not being "ground" by the trusts and combinations of capital. As a class, they are where they are because they do not do things in a Certain Way. If the workers of America chose to do so, they could follow the example of their brothers in Belgium and other countries, and establish great department stores and co-operative industries; they could elect men of their own class to office, and pass laws favoring the development of such co-operative industries; and in a few years they could take peaceable possession of the industrial field.

The working class may become the master class whenever they will begin to do things in a Certain Way; the law of wealth is the same for them as it is for all others. This they must learn; and they will remain where they are as long as they continue to do as they do. The individual worker, however, is not held down by the ignorance or the mental slothfulness of his class; he can follow the tide of opportunity to riches, and this book will tell him how.

No one is kept in poverty by a shortness in the supply of riches; there is more than enough for all. A palace as large as the capitol at Washington might be built for every family on earth from the building material in the United States alone; and under intensive cultivation, this country would produce wool, cotton, linen, and silk enough to cloth each person in the world finer than Solomon was arrayed in all his glory; together with food enough to feed them all luxuriously.

The visible supply is practically inexhaustible; and the invisible supply really IS inexhaustible.

Everything you see on earth is made from one original substance, out of which all things proceed.

New Forms are constantly being made, and older ones are dissolving; but all are shapes assumed by One Thing.

There is no limit to the supply of Formless Stuff, or Original Substance. The universe is made out of it; but it was not all used in making the universe. The spaces in, through, and between the forms of the visible universe are permeated and filled with the Original Substance; with the formless Stuff; with the raw material of all things. Ten thousand times as much as has been made might still be made, and even then we should not have exhausted the supply of universal raw material.

No man, therefore, is poor because nature is poor, or because there is not enough to go around.

Nature is an inexhaustible storehouse of riches; the supply will never run short. Original Substance is alive with creative energy, and is constantly producing more forms. When the supply of building material is exhausted, more will be produced; when the soil is exhausted so that food stuffs and materials for clothing will no longer grow upon it, it will be renewed or more soil will be made. When all the gold and silver has been dug from the earth, if man is still in such a stage of social development that he needs gold and silver, more will produced from the Formless. The Formless Stuff responds to the needs of man; it will not let him be without any good thing.

This is true of man collectively; the race as a whole is always abundantly rich, and if individuals are poor, it is because they do not follow the Certain Way of doing things which makes the individual man rich.

The Formless Stuff is intelligent; it is stuff which thinks. It is alive, and is always impelled toward more life.

It is the natural and inherent impulse of life to seek to live more; it is the nature of intelligence to enlarge itself, and of consciousness to seek to extend its boundaries and find fuller expression. The universe of forms has been made by Formless Living Substance, throwing itself into form in order to express itself more fully.

The universe is a great Living Presence, always moving inherently toward more life and fuller functioning.

Nature is formed for the advancement of life; its impelling motive is the increase of life. For this cause, everything which can possibly minister to life is bountifully provided; there can be no lack unless God is to contradict himself and nullify his own works.

You are not kept poor by lack in the supply of riches; it is a fact which I shall demonstrate a little farther on that even the resources of the Formless Supply are at the command of the man or woman will act and think in a Certain Way.

The Science of Getting Rich, by Wallace Delois Wattles, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER 4

  

The First Principle in The Science of Getting Rich.

THOUGHT is the only power which can produce tangible riches from the Formless Substance. The stuff from which all things are made is a substance which thinks, and a thought of form in this substance produces the form.

Original Substance moves according to its thoughts; every form and process you see in nature is the visible expression of a thought in Original Substance. As the Formless Stuff thinks of a form, it takes that form; as it thinks of a motion, it makes that motion. That is the way all things were created. We live in a thought world, which is part of a thought universe. The thought of a moving universe extended throughout Formless Substance, and the Thinking Stuff moving according to that thought, took the form of systems of planets, and maintains that form. Thinking Substance takes the form of its thought, and moves according to the thought. Holding the idea of a circling system of suns and worlds, it takes the form of these bodies, and moves them as it thinks. Thinking the form of a slow-growing oak tree, it moves accordingly, and produces the tree, though centuries may be required to do the work. In creating, the Formless seems to move according to the lines of motion it has established; the thought of an oak tree does not cause the instant formation of a full-grown tree, but it does start in motion the forces which will produce the tree, along established lines of growth.

Every thought of form, held in thinking Substance, causes the creation of the form, but always, or at least generally, along lines of growth and action already established.

The thought of a house of a certain construction, if it were impressed upon Formless Substance, might not cause the instant formation, of the house; but it would cause the turning of creative energies already working in trade and commerce into such channels as to result in the speedy building of the house. And if there were no existing channels through which the creative energy could work, then the house would be formed directly from primal substance, without waiting for the slow processes of the organic and inorganic world.

No thought of form can be impressed upon Original Substance without causing the creation of the form.

Man is a thinking center, and can originate thought. All the forms that man fashions with his hands must first exist in his thought; he cannot shape a thing until he has thought that thing.

And so far man has confined his efforts wholly to the work of his hands; he has applied manual labor to the world of forms, seeking to change or modify those already existing. He has never thought of trying to cause the creation of new forms by impressing his thoughts upon Formless Substance.

When man has a thought-form, he takes material from the forms of nature, and makes an image of the form which is in his mind. He has, so far, made little or no effort to co-operate with Formless Intelligence; to work "with the Father." He has not dreamed that he can "do what he seeth the Father doing." Man reshapes and modifies existing forms by manual labor; he has given no attention to the question whether he may not produce things from Formless Substance by communicating his thoughts to it. We propose to prove that he may do so; to prove that any man or woman may do so, and to show how. As our first step, we must lay down three fundamental propositions.

First, we assert that there is one original formless stuff, or substance, from which all things are made. All the seemingly many elements are but different presentations of one element; all the many forms found in organic and inorganic nature are but different shapes, made from the same stuff. And this stuff is thinking stuff; a thought held in it produces the form of the thought. Thought, in thinking substance, produces shapes. Man is a thinking center, capable of original thought; if man can communicate his thought to original thinking substance, he can cause the creation, or formation, of the thing he thinks about. To summarize this:-

There is a thinking stuff from which all things are made, and which, in its original state, permeates, penetrates, and fills the interspaces of the universe.

A thought, in this substance, Produces the thing that is imaged by the thought.

Man can form things in his thought, and, by impressing his thought upon formless substance, can cause the thing he thinks about to be created.

It may be asked if I can prove these statements; and without going into details, I answer that I can do so, both by logic and experience.

Reasoning back from the phenomena of form and thought, I come to one original thinking substance; and reasoning forward from this thinking substance, I come to man's power to cause the formation of the thing he thinks about.

And by experiment, I find the reasoning true; and this is my strongest proof.

If one man who reads this book gets rich by doing what it tells him to do, that is evidence in support of my claim; but if every man who does what it tells him to do gets rich, that is positive proof until some one goes through the process and fails. The theory is true until the process fails; and this process will not fail, for every man who does exactly what this book tells him to do will get rich.

I have said that men get rich by doing things in a Certain Way; and in order to do so, men must become able to think in a certain way.

A man's way of doing things is the direct result of the way he thinks about things.

To do things in a way you want to do them, you will have to acquire the ability to think the way you want to think; this is the first step toward getting rich.

To think what you want to think is to think TRUTH, regardless of appearances.

Every man has the natural and inherent power to think what he wants to think, but it requires far more effort to do so than it does to think the thoughts which are suggested by appearances. To think according to appearance is easy; to think truth regardless of appearances is laborious, and requires the expenditure of more power than any other work man is called upon to perform.

There is no labor from which most people shrink as they do from that of sustained and consecutive thought; it is the hardest work in the world. This is especially true when truth is contrary to appearances. Every appearance in the visible world tends to produce a corresponding form in the mind which observes it; and this can only be prevented by holding the thought of the TRUTH.

To look upon the appearance of disease will produce the form of disease in your own mind, and ultimately in your body, unless you hold the thought of the truth, which is that there is no disease; it is only an appearance, and the reality is health.

To look upon the appearances of poverty will produce corresponding forms in your own mind, unless you hold to the truth that there is no poverty; there is only abundance.

To think health when surrounded by the appearances of disease, or to think riches when in the midst of appearances of poverty, requires power; but he who acquires this power becomes a MASTER MIND. He can conquer fate; he can have what he wants.

This power can only be acquired by getting hold of the basic fact which is behind all appearances; and that fact is that there is one Thinking Substance, from which and by which all things are made.

Then we must grasp the truth that every thought held in this substance becomes a form, and that man can so impress his thoughts upon it as to cause them to take form and become visible things.

When we realize this, we lose all doubt and fear, for we know that we can create what we want to create; we can get what we want to have, and can become what we want to be. As a first step toward getting rich, you must believe the three fundamental statements given previously in this chapter; and in order to emphasize them. I repeat them here:-

There is a thinking stuff from which all things are made, and which, in its original state, permeates, penetrates, and fills the interspaces of the universe.

A thought, in this substance, Produces the thing that is imaged by the thought.

Man can form things in his thought, and, by impressing his thought upon formless substance, can cause the thing he thinks about to be created.

You must lay aside all other concepts of the universe than this monistic one; and you must dwell upon this until it is fixed in your mind, and has become your habitual thought. Read these creed statements over and over again; fix every word upon your memory, and meditate upon them until you firmly believe what they say. If a doubt comes to you, cast it aside as a sin. Do not listen to arguments against this idea; do not go to churches or lectures where a contrary concept of things is taught or preached. Do not read magazines or books which teach a different idea; if you get mixed up in your faith, all your efforts will be in vain.

Do not ask why these things are true, nor speculate as to how they can be true; simply take them on trust.

The science of getting rich begins with the absolute acceptance of this faith.

The Science of Getting Rich, by Wallace Delois Wattles, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER 5

  

Increasing Life.

YOU must get rid of the last vestige of the old idea that there is a Deity whose will it is that you should be poor, or whose purposes may be served by keeping you in poverty.

The Intelligent Substance which is All, and in All, and which lives in All and lives in you, is a consciously Living Substance. Being a consciously living substance, It must have the nature and inherent desire of every living intelligence for increase of life. Every living thing must continually seek for the enlargement of its life, because life, in the mere act of living, must increase itself.

A seed, dropped into the ground, springs into activity, and in the act of living produces a hundred more seeds; life, by living, multiplies itself. It is forever Becoming More; it must do so, if it continues to be at all.

Intelligence is under this same necessity for continuous increase. Every thought we think makes it necessary for us to think another thought; consciousness is continually expanding. Every fact we learn leads us to the learning of another fact; knowledge is continually increasing. Every talent we cultivate brings to the mind the desire to cultivate another talent; we are subject to the urge of life, seeking expression, which ever drives us on to know more, to do more, and to be more.

In order to know more, do more, and be more we must have more; we must have things to use, for we learn, and do, and become, only by using things. We must get rich, so that we can live more.

The desire for riches is simply the capacity for larger life seeking fulfillment; every desire is the effort of an unexpressed possibility to come into action. It is power seeking to manifest which causes desire. That which makes you want more money is the same as that which makes the plant grow; it is Life, seeking fuller expression.

The One Living Substance must be subject to this inherent law of all life; it is permeated with the desire to live more; that is why it is under the necessity of creating things.

The One Substance desires to live more in you; hence it wants you to have all the things you can use.

It is the desire of God that you should get rich. He wants you to get rich because he can express himself better through you if you have plenty of things to use in giving him expression. He can live more in you if you have unlimited command of the means of life.

The universe desires you to have everything you want to have.

Nature is friendly to your plans.

Everything is naturally for you.

Make up your mind that this is true.

It is essential, however that your purpose should harmonize with the purpose that is in All.

You must want real life, not mere pleasure of sensual gratification. Life is the performance of function; and the individual really lives only when he performs every function, physical, mental, and spiritual, of which he is capable, without excess in any.

You do not want to get rich in order to live swinishly, for the gratification of animal desires; that is not life. But the performance of every physical function is a part of life, and no one lives completely who denies the impulses of the body a normal and healthful expression.

You do not want to get rich solely to enjoy mental pleasures, to get knowledge, to gratify ambition, to outshine others, to be famous. All these are a legitimate part of life, but the man who lives for the pleasures of the intellect alone will only have a partial life, and he will never be satisfied with his lot.

You do not want to get rich solely for the good of others, to lose yourself for the salvation of mankind, to experience the joys of philanthropy and sacrifice. The joys of the soul are only a part of life; and they are no better or nobler than any other part.

You want to get rich in order that you may eat, drink, and be merry when it is time to do these things; in order that you may surround yourself with beautiful things, see distant lands, feed your mind, and develop your intellect; in order that you may love men and do kind things, and be able to play a good part in helping the world to find truth.

But remember that extreme altruism is no better and no nobler than extreme selfishness; both are mistakes.

Get rid of the idea that God wants you to sacrifice yourself for others, and that you can secure his favor by doing so; God requires nothing of the kind.

What he wants is that you should make the most of yourself, for yourself, and for others; and you can help others more by making the most of yourself than in any other way.

You can make the most of yourself only by getting rich; so it is right and praiseworthy that you should give your first and best thought to the work of acquiring wealth.

Remember, however, that the desire of Substance is for all, and its movements must be for more life to all; it cannot be made to work for less life to any, because it is equally in all, seeking riches and life.

Intelligent Substance will make things for you, but it will not take things away from some one else and give them to you.

You must get rid of the thought of competition. You are to create, not to compete for what is already created.

You do not have to take anything away from any one.

You do not have to drive sharp bargains.

You do not have to cheat, or to take advantage. You do not need to let any man work for you for less than he earns.

You do not have to covet the property of others, or to look at it with wishful eyes; no man has anything of which you cannot have the like, and that without taking what he has away from him.

You are to become a creator, not a competitor; you are going to get what you want, but in such a way that when you get it every other man will have more than he has now.

I am aware that there are men who get a vast amount of money by proceeding in direct opposition to the statements in the paragraph above, and may add a word of explanation here. Men of the plutocratic type, who become very rich, do so sometimes purely by their extraordinary ability on the plane of competition; and sometimes they unconsciously relate themselves to Substance in its great purposes and movements for the general racial upbuilding through industrial evolution. Rockefeller, Carnegie, Morgan, et al., have been the unconscious agents of the Supreme in the necessary work of systematizing and organizing productive industry; and in the end, their work will contribute immensely toward increased life for all. Their day is nearly over; they have organized production, and will soon be succeeded by the agents of the multitude, who will organize the machinery of distribution.

The multi-millionaires are like the monster reptiles of the prehistoric eras; they play a necessary part in the evolutionary process, but the same Power which produced them will dispose of them. And it is well to bear in mind that they have never been really rich; a record of the private lives of most of this class will show that they have really been the most abject and wretched of the poor.

Riches secured on the competitive plane are never satisfactory and permanent; they are yours to-day, and another's tomorrow. Remember, if you are to become rich in a scientific and certain way, you must rise entirely out of the competitive thought. You must never think for a moment that the supply is limited. Just as soon as you begin to think that all the money is being "cornered" and controlled by bankers and others, and that you must exert yourself to get laws passed to stop this process, and so on; in that moment you drop into the competitive mind, and your power to cause creation is gone for the time being; and what is worse, you will probably arrest the creative movements you have already instituted.

KNOW that there are countless millions of dollars' worth of gold in the mountains of the earth, not yet brought to light; and know that if there were not, more would be created from Thinking Substance to supply your needs.

KNOW that the money you need will come, even if it is necessary for a thousand men to be led to the discovery of new gold mines to-morrow.

Never look at the visible supply; look always at the limitless riches in Formless Substance, and KNOW that they are coming to you as fast as you can receive and use them. Nobody, by cornering the visible supply, can prevent you from getting what is yours.

So never allow yourself to think for an instant that all the best building spots will be taken before you get ready to build your house, unless you hurry. Never worry about the trusts and combines, and get anxious for fear they will soon come to own the whole earth. Never get afraid that you will lose what you want because some other person "beats you to it." That cannot possibly happen; you are not seeking any thing that is possessed by anybody else; you are causing what you want to be created from formless Substance, and the supply is without limits. Stick to the formulated statement:--

There is a thinking stuff from which all things are made, and which, in its original state, permeates, penetrates, and fills the interspaces of the universe.

A thought, in this substance, produces the thing that is imaged by the thought.

Man can form things in his thought, and, by impressing his thought upon formless substance, can cause the thing he thinks about to be created.

The Science of Getting Rich, by Wallace Delois Wattles, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER 6

  

How Riches Come to You

WHEN I say that you do not have to drive sharp bargains, I do not mean that you do not have to drive any bargains at all, or that you are above the necessity for having any dealings with your fellow men. I mean that you will not need to deal with them unfairly; you do not have to get something for nothing, but can give to every man more than you take from him.

You cannot give every man more in cash market value than you take from him, but you can give him more in use value than the cash value of the thing you take from him. The paper, ink, and other material in this book may not be worth the money you pay for it; but if the ideas suggested by it bring you thousands of dollars, you have not been wronged by those who sold it to you; they have given you a great use value for a small cash value.

Let us suppose that I own a picture by one of the great artists, which, in any civilized community, is worth thousands of dollars. I take it to Baffin Ray, and by "salesmanship" induce an Eskimo to give a bundle of furs worth $500 for it. I have really wronged him, for he has no use for the picture; it has no use value to him; it will not add to his life.

But suppose I give him a gun worth $50 for his furs; then he has made a good bargain. He has use for the gun; it will get him many more furs and much food; it will add to his life in every way; it will make him rich.

When you rise from the competitive to the creative plane, you can scan your business transactions very strictly, and if you are selling any man anything which does not add more to his life than the thing he give you in exchange, you can afford to stop it. You do not have to beat anybody in business. And if you are in a business which does beat people, get out of it at once.

Give every man more in use value than you take from him in cash value; then you are adding to the life of the world by every business transaction.

If you have people working for you, you must take from them more in cash value than you pay them in wages; but you can so organize your business that it will be filled with the principle of advancement, and so that each employee who wishes to do so may advance a little every day.

You can make your business do for your employees what this book is doing for you. You can so conduct your business that it will be a sort of ladder, by which every employee who will take the trouble may climb to riches himself; and given the opportunity, if he will not do so it is not your fault.

And finally, because you are to cause the creation of your riches from Formless Substance which permeates all your environment, it does not follow that they are to take shape from the atmosphere and come into being before your eyes.

If you want a sewing machine, for instance, I do not mean to tell you that you are to impress the thought of a sewing machine on Thinking Substance until the machine is formed without hands, in the room where you sit, or elsewhere. But if you want a sewing machine, hold the mental image of it with the most positive certainty that it is being made, or is on its way to you. After once forming the thought, have the most absolute and unquestioning faith that the sewing machine is coming; never think of it, or speak, of it, in any other way than as being sure to arrive. Claim it as already yours.

It will be brought to you by the power of the Supreme Intelligence, acting upon the minds of men. If you live in Maine, it may be that a man will be brought from Texas or Japan to engage in some transaction which will result in your getting what you want.

If so, the whole matter will be as much to that man's advantage as it is to yours.

Do not forget for a moment that the Thinking Substance is through all, in all, communicating with all, and can influence all. The desire of Thinking Substance for fuller life and better living has caused the creation of all the sewing machines already made; and it can cause the creation of millions more, and will, whenever men set it in motion by desire and faith, and by acting in a Certain Way.

You can certainly have a sewing machine in your house; and it is just as certain that you can have any other thing or things which you want, and which you will use for the advancement of your own life and the lives of others.

You need not hesitate about asking largely; "it is your Father's pleasure to give you the kingdom, " said Jesus.

Original Substance wants to live all that is possible in you, and wants you to have all that you can or will use for the living of the most abundant life.

If you fix upon your consciousness the fact that the desire you feel for the possession of riches is one with the desire of Omnipotence for more complete expression, your faith becomes invincible.

Once I saw a little boy sitting at a piano, and vainly trying to bring harmony out of the keys; and I saw that he was grieved and provoked by his inability to play real music. I asked him the cause of his vexation, and he answered, "I can feel the music in me, but I can't make my hands go right." The music in him was the URGE of Original Substance, containing all the possibilities of all life; all that there is of music was seeking expression through the child.

God, the One Substance, is trying to live and do and enjoy things through humanity. He is saying "I want hands to build wonderful structures, to play divine harmonies, to paint glorious pictures; I want feet to run my errands, eyes to see my beauties, tongues to tell mighty truths and to sing marvelous songs," and so on.

All that there is of possibility is seeking expression through men. God wants those who can play music to have pianos and every other instrument, and to have the means to cultivate their talents to the fullest extent; He wants those who can appreciate beauty to be able to surround themselves with beautiful things; He wants those who can discern truth to have every opportunity to travel and observe; He wants those who can appreciate dress to be beautifully clothed, and those who can appreciate good food to be luxuriously fed.

He wants all these things because it is Himself that enjoys and appreciates them; it is God who wants to play, and sing, and enjoy beauty, and proclaim truth and wear fine clothes, and eat good foods. "it is God that worketh in you to will and to do," said Paul.

The desire you feel for riches is the infinite, seeking to express Himself in you as He sought to find expression in the little boy at the piano.

So you need not hesitate to ask largely.

Your part is to focalize and express the desire to God.

This is a difficult point with most people; they retain something of the old idea that poverty and self-sacrifice are pleasing to God. They look upon poverty as a part of the plan, a necessity of nature. They have the idea that God has finished His work, and made all that He can make, and that the majority of men must stay poor because there is not enough to go around. They hold to so much of this erroneous thought that they feel ashamed to ask for wealth; they try not to want more than a very modest competence, just enough to make them fairly comfortable.

I recall now the case of one student who was told that he must get in mind a clear picture of the things he desired, so that the creative thought of them might be impressed on Formless Substance. He was a very poor man, living in a rented house, and having only what he earned from day to day; and he could not grasp the fact that all wealth was his. So, after thinking the matter over, he decided that he might reasonably ask for a new rug for the floor of his best room, and an anthracite coal stove to heat the house during the cold weather. Following the instructions given in this book, he obtained these things in a few months; and then it dawned upon him that he had not asked enough. He went through the house in which he lived, and planned all the improvements he would like to make in it; he mentally added a bay window here and a room there, until it was complete in his mind as his ideal home; and then he planned its furnishings.

Holding the whole picture in his mind, he began living in the Certain Way, and moving toward what he wanted; and he owns the house now, and is rebuilding it after the form of his mental image. And now, with still larger faith, he is going on to get greater things. It has been unto him according to his faith, and it is so with you and with all of us.

The Science of Getting Rich, by Wallace Delois Wattles, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER 7

  

Gratitude.

THE illustrations given in the last chapter will have conveyed to the reader the fact that the first step toward getting rich is to convey the idea of your wants to the Formless Substance.

This is true, and you will see that in order to do so it becomes necessary to relate yourself to the Formless Intelligence in a harmonious way.

To secure this harmonious relation is a matter of such primary and vital importance that I shall give some space to its discussion here, and give you instructions which, if you will follow them, will be certain to bring you into perfect unity of mind with God.

The whole process of mental adjustment and atonement can be summed up in one word, gratitude.

First, you believe that there is one Intelligent Substance, from which all things proceed; second, you believe that this Substance gives you everything you desire; and third, you relate yourself to it by a feeling of deep and profound gratitude.

Many people who order their lives rightly in all other ways are kept in poverty by their lack of gratitude. Having received one gift from God, they cut the wires which connect them with Him by failing to make acknowledgment.

It is easy to understand that the nearer we live to the source of wealth, the more wealth we shall receive; and it is easy also to understand that the soul that is always grateful lives in closer touch with God than the one which never looks to Him in thankful acknowledgment.

The more gratefully we fix our minds on the Supreme when good things come to us, the more good things we will receive, and the more rapidly they will come; and the reason simply is that the mental attitude of gratitude draws the mind into closer touch with the source from which the blessings come.

If it is a new thought to you that gratitude brings your whole mind into closer harmony with the creative energies of the universe, consider it well, and you will see that it is true. The good things you already have have come to you along the line of obedience to certain laws. Gratitude will lead your mind out along the ways by which things come; and it will keep you in close harmony with creative thought and prevent you from falling into competitive thought.

Gratitude alone can keep you looking toward the All, and prevent you from falling into the error of thinking of the supply as limited; and to do that would be fatal to your hopes.

There is a Law of Gratitude, and it is absolutely necessary that you should observe the law, if you are to get the results you seek.

The law of gratitude is the natural principle that action and reaction are always equal, and in opposite directions.

The grateful outreaching of your mind in thankful praise to the Supreme is a liberation or expenditure of force; it cannot fail to reach that to which it addressed, and the reaction is an instantaneous movement towards you.

"Draw nigh unto God, and He will draw nigh unto you." That is a statement of psychological truth.

And if your gratitude is strong and constant, the reaction in Formless Substance will be strong and continuous; the movement of the things you want will be always toward you. Notice the grateful attitude that Jesus took; how He always seems to be saying, "I thank Thee, Father, that Thou hearest me." You cannot exercise much power without gratitude; for it is gratitude that keeps you connected with Power.

But the value of gratitude does not consist solely in getting you more blessings in the future. Without gratitude you cannot long keep from dissatisfied thought regarding things as they are.

The moment you permit your mind to dwell with dissatisfaction upon things as they are, you begin to lose ground. You fix attention upon the common, the ordinary, the poor, and the squalid and mean; and your mind takes the form of these things. Then you will transmit these forms or mental images to the Formless, and the common, the poor, the squalid, and mean will come to you.

To permit your mind to dwell upon the inferior is to become inferior and to surround yourself with inferior things.

On the other hand, to fix your attention on the best is to surround yourself with the best, and to become the best.

The Creative Power within us makes us into the image of that to which we give our attention.

We are Thinking Substance, and thinking substance always takes the form of that which it thinks about.

The grateful mind is constantly fixed upon the best; therefore it tends to become the best; it takes the form or character of the best, and will receive the best.

Also, faith is born of gratitude. The grateful mind continually expects good things, and expectation becomes faith. The reaction of gratitude upon one's own mind produces faith; and every outgoing wave of grateful thanksgiving increases faith. He who has no feeling of gratitude cannot long retain a living faith; and without a living faith you cannot get rich by the creative method, as we shall see in the following chapters.

It is necessary, then, to cultivate the habit of being grateful for every good thing that comes to you; and to give thanks continuously.

And because all things have contributed to your advancement, you should include all things in your gratitude.

Do not waste time thinking or talking about the shortcomings or wrong actions of plutocrats or trust magnates. Their organization of the world has made your opportunity; all you get really comes to you because of them.

Do not rage against, corrupt politicians; if it were not for politicians we should fall into anarchy, and your opportunity would be greatly lessened.

God has worked a long time and very patiently to bring us up to where we are in industry and government, and He is going right on with His work. There is not the least doubt that He will do away with plutocrats, trust magnates, captains of industry, and politicians as soon as they can be spared; but in the meantime, behold they are all very good. Remember that they are all helping to arrange the lines of transmission along which your riches will come to you, and be grateful to them all. This will bring you into harmonious relations with the good in everything, and the good in everything will move toward you.

The Science of Getting Rich, by Wallace Delois Wattles, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER 8

  

Thinking in the Certain Way.

TURN back to chapter 6 and read again the story of the man who formed a mental image of his house, and you will get a fair idea of the initial step toward getting rich. You must form a clear and definite mental picture of what you want; you cannot transmit an idea unless you have it yourself.

You must have it before you can give it; and many people fail to impress Thinking Substance because they have themselves only a vague and misty concept of the things they want to do, to have, or to become.

It is not enough that you should have a general desire for wealth "to do good with"; everybody has that desire.

It is not enough that you should have a wish to travel, see things, live more, etc. Everybody has those desires also. If you were going to send a wireless message to a friend, you would not send the letters of the alphabet in their order, and let him construct the message for himself; nor would you take words at random from the dictionary. You would send a coherent sentence; one which meant something. When you try to impress your wants upon Substance, remember that it must be done by a coherent statement; you must know what you want, and be definite. You can never get rich, or start the creative power into action, by sending out unformed longings and vague desires.

Go over your desires just as the man I have described went over his house; see just what you want, and get a clear mental picture of it as you wish it to look when you get it.

That clear mental picture you must have continually in mind, as the sailor has in mind the port toward which he is sailing the ship; you must keep your face toward it all the time. You must no more lose sight of it than the steersman loses sight of the compass.

It is not necessary to take exercises in concentration, nor to set apart special times for prayer and affirmation, nor to "go into the silence," nor to do occult stunts of any kind. There things are well enough, but all you need is to know what you want, and to want it badly enough so that it will stay in your thoughts.

Spend as much of your leisure time as you can in contemplating your picture, but no one needs to take exercises to concentrate his mind on a thing which he really wants; it is the things you do not really care about which require effort to fix your attention upon them.

And unless you really want to get rich, so that the desire is strong enough to hold your thoughts directed to the purpose as the magnetic pole holds the needle of the compass, it will hardly be worth while for you to try to carry out the instructions given in this book.

The methods herein set forth are for people whose desire for riches is strong enough to overcome mental laziness and the love of ease, and make them work.

The more clear and definite you make your picture then, and the more you dwell upon it, bringing out all its delightful details, the stronger your desire will be; and the stronger your desire, the easier it will be to hold your mind fixed upon the picture of what you want.

Something more is necessary, however, than merely to see the picture clearly. If that is all you do, you are only a dreamer, and will have little or no power for accomplishment.

Behind your clear vision must be the purpose to realize it; to bring it out in tangible expression.

And behind this purpose must be an invincible and unwavering FAITH that the thing is already yours; that it is "at hand" and you have only to take possession of it.

Live in the new house, mentally, until it takes form around you physically. In the mental realm, enter at once into full enjoyment of the things you want.

"Whatsoever things ye ask for when ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have them," said Jesus.

See the things you want as if they were actually around you all the time; see yourself as owning and using them. Make use of them in imagination just as you will use them when they are your tangible possessions. Dwell upon your mental picture until it is clear and distinct, and then take the Mental Attitude of Ownership toward everything in that picture. Take possession of it, in mind, in the full faith that it is actually yours. Hold to this mental ownership; do not waiver for an instant in the faith that it is real.

And remember what was said in a proceeding chapter about gratitude; be as thankful for it all the time as you expect to be when it has taken form. The man who can sincerely thank God for the things which as yet he owns only in imagination, has real faith. He will get rich; he will cause the creation of whatsoever he wants.

You do not need to pray repeatedly for things you want; it is not necessary to tell God about it every day.

"Use not vain repetitions as the heathen do," said Jesus said to his pupils, "for your Father knoweth the ye have need of these things before ye ask Him."

Your part is to intelligently formulate your desire for the things which make for a larger life, and to get these desire arranged into a coherent whole; and then to impress this Whole Desire upon the Formless Substance, which has the power and the will to bring you what you want.

You do not make this impression by repeating strings of words; you make it by holding the vision with unshakable PURPOSE to attain it, and with steadfast FAITH that you do attain it.

The answer to prayer is not according to your faith while you are talking, but according to your faith while you are working.

You cannot impress the mind of God by having a special Sabbath day set apart to tell Him what you want, and the forgetting Him during the rest of the week. You cannot impress Him by having special hours to go into your closet and pray, if you then dismiss the matter from your mind until the hour of prayer comes again.

Oral prayer is well enough, and has its effect, especially upon yourself, in clarifying your vision and strengthening your faith; but it is not your oral petitions which get you what you want. In order to get rich you do not need a "sweet hour of prayer"; you need to "pray without ceasing." And by prayer I mean holding steadily to your vision, with the purpose to cause its creation into solid form, and the faith that you are doing so.

"Believe that ye receive them."

The whole matter turns on receiving, once you have clearly formed your vision. When you have formed it, it is well to make an oral statement, addressing the Supreme in reverent prayer; and from that moment you must, in mind, receive what you ask for. Live in the new house; wear the fine clothes; ride in the automobile; go on the journey, and confidently plan for greater journeys. Think and speak of all the things you have asked for in terms of actual present ownership. Imagine an environment, and a financial condition exactly as you want them, and live all the time in that imaginary environment and financial condition. Mind, however, that you do not do this as a mere dreamer and castle builder; hold to the FAITH that the imaginary is being realized, and to the PURPOSE to realize it. Remember that it is faith and purpose in the use of the imagination which make the difference between the scientist and the dreamer. And having learned this fact, it is here that you must learn the proper use of the Will.

The Science of Getting Rich, by Wallace Delois Wattles, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER 9

  

How to Use the Will.

TO set about getting rich in a scientific way, you do not try to apply your will power to anything outside of yourself.

Your have no right to do so, anyway.

It is wrong to apply your will to other men and women, in order to get them to do what you wish done.

It is as flagrantly wrong to coerce people by mental power as it is to coerce them by physical power. If compelling people by physical force to do things for you reduces them to slavery, compelling them by mental means accomplishes exactly the same thing; the only difference is in methods. If taking things from people by physical force is robbery, then taking things by mental force is robbery also; there is no difference in principle.

You have no right to use your will power upon another person, even "for his own good"; for you do not know what is for his good. The science of getting rich does not require you to apply power or force to any other person, in any way whatsoever. There is not the slightest necessity for doing so; indeed, any attempt to use your will upon others will only tend to defeat your purpose.

You do not need to apply your will to things, in order to compel them to come to you.

That would simply be trying to coerce God, and would be foolish and useless, as well as irreverent.

You do not have to compel God to give you good things, any more than you have to use your will power to make the sun rise.

You do not have to use your will power to conquer an unfriendly deity, or to make stubborn and rebellious forces do your bidding.

Substance is friendly to you, and is more anxious to give you what you want than you are to get it.

To get rich, you need only to use your will power upon yourself.

When you know what to think and do, then you must use your will to compel yourself to think and do the right things. That is the legitimate use of the will in getting what you want--to use it in holding yourself to the right course. Use your will to keep yourself thinking and acting in the Certain Way.

Do not try to project your will, or your thoughts, or your mind out into space, to "act" on things or people.

Keep your mind at home; it can accomplish more there than elsewhere.

Use your mind to form a mental image of what you want, and to hold that vision with faith and purpose; and use your will to keep your mind working in the Right Way.

The more steady and continuous your faith and purpose, the more rapidly you will get rich, because you will make only POSITIVE impressions upon Substance; and you will not neutralize or offset them by negative impressions.

The picture of your desires, held with faith and purpose, is taken up by the Formless, and permeates it to great distances-throughout the universe, for all I know.

As this impression spreads, all things are set moving toward its realization; every living thing, every inanimate thing, and the things yet uncreated, are stirred toward bringing into being that which you want. All force begins to be exerted in that direction; all things begin to move toward you. The minds of people, everywhere, are influenced toward doing the things necessary to the fulfilling of your desires; and they work for you, unconsciously.

But you can check all this by starting a negative impression in the Formless Substance. Doubt or unbelief is as certain to start a movement away from you as faith and purpose are to start one toward you. It is by not understanding this that most people who try to make use of "mental science" in getting rich make their failure. Every hour and moment you spend in giving heed to doubts and fears, every hour you spend in worry, every hour in which your soul is possessed by unbelief, sets a current away from you in the whole domain of intelligent Substance. All the promises are unto them that believe, and unto them only. Notice how insistent Jesus was upon this point of belief; and now you know the reason why.

Since belief is all important, it behooves you to guard your thoughts; and as your beliefs will be shaped to a very great extent by the things you observe and think about, it is important that you should command your attention.

And here the will comes into use; for it is by your will that you determine upon what things your attention shall be fixed.

If you want to become rich, you must not make a study of poverty.

Things are not brought into being by thinking about their opposites. Health is never to be attained by studying disease and thinking about disease; righteousness is not to be promoted by studying sin and thinking about sin; and no one ever got rich by studying poverty and thinking about poverty.

Medicine as a science of disease has increased disease; religion as a science of sin has promoted sin, and economics as a study of poverty will fill the world with wretchedness and want.

Do not talk about poverty; do not investigate it, or concern yourself with it. Never mind what its causes are; you have nothing to do with them.

What concerns you is the cure.

Do not spend your time in charitable work, or charity movements; all charity only tends to perpetuate the wretchedness it aims to eradicate.

I do not say that you should be hard hearted or unkind, and refuse to hear the cry of need; but you must not try to eradicate poverty in any of the conventional ways. Put poverty behind you, and put all that pertains to it behind you, and "make good."

Get rich; that is the best way you can help the poor.

And you cannot hold the mental image which is to make you rich if you fill your mind with pictures of poverty. Do not read books or papers which give circumstantial accounts of the wretchedness of the tenement dwellers, of the horrors of child labor, and so on. Do not read anything which fills your mind with gloomy images of want and suffering.

You cannot help the poor in the least by knowing about these things; and the wide-spread knowledge of them does not tend at all to do away with poverty.

What tends to do away with poverty is not the getting of pictures of poverty into your mind, but getting pictures of wealth into the minds of the poor.

You are not deserting the poor in their misery when you refuse to allow your mind to be filled with pictures of that misery.

Poverty can be done away with, not by increasing the number of well to do people who think about poverty, but by increasing the number of poor people who purpose with faith to get rich.

The poor do not need charity; they need inspiration. Charity only sends them a loaf of bread to keep them alive in their wretchedness, or gives them an entertainment to make them forget for an hour or two; but inspiration will cause them to rise out of their misery. If you want to help the poor, demonstrate to them that they can become rich; prove it by getting rich yourself.

The only way in which poverty will ever be banished from this world is by getting a large and constantly increasing number of people to practice the teachings of this book.

People must be taught to become rich by creation, not by competition.

Every man who becomes rich by competition throws down behind him the ladder by which he rises, and keeps others down; but every man who gets rich by creation opens a way for thousands to follow him, and inspires them to do so.

You are not showing hardness of heart or an unfeeling disposition when you refuse to pity poverty, see poverty, read about poverty, or think or talk about it, or to listen to those who do talk about it. Use your will power to keep your mind OFF the subject of poverty, and to keep it fixed with faith and purpose ON the vision of what you want.

The Science of Getting Rich, by Wallace Delois Wattles, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER 10

  

Further Use of the Will.

YOU cannot retain a true and clear vision of wealth if you are constantly turning your attention to opposing pictures, whether they be external or imaginary.

Do not tell of your past troubles of a financial nature, if you have had them, do not think of them at all. Do no tell of the poverty of your parents, or the hardships of your early life; to do any of these things is to mentally class yourself with the poor for the time being, and it will certainly check the movement of things in your direction.

"Let the dead bury their dead," as Jesus said.

Put poverty and all things that pertain to poverty completely behind you.

You have accepted a certain theory of the universe as being correct, and are resting all your hopes of happiness on its being correct; and what can you gain by giving heed to conflicting theories?

Do not read religious books which tell you that the world is soon coming to an end; and do not read the writing of muck-rakers and pessimistic philosophers who tell you that it is going to the devil.

The world is not going to the devil; it is going to God.

It is wonderful Becoming.

True, there may be a good many things in existing conditions which are disagreeable; but what is the use of studying them when they are certainly passing away, and when the study of them only tends to check their passing and keep them with us? Why give time and attention to things which are being removed by evolutionary growth, when you can hasten their removal only by promoting the evolutionary growth as far as your part of it goes?

No matter how horrible in seeming may be the conditions in certain countries, sections, or places, you waste your time and destroy your own chances by considering them.

You should interest yourself in the world's becoming rich.

Think of the riches the world is coming into, instead of the poverty it is growing out of; and bear in mind that the only way in which you can assist the world in growing rich is by growing rich yourself through the creative method--not the competitive one.

Give your attention wholly to riches; ignore poverty.

Whenever you think or speak of those who are poor, think and speak of them as those who are becoming rich;--as those who are to be congratulated rather than pitied. Then they and others will catch the inspiration, and begin to search for the way out.

Because I say that you are to give your whole time and mind and thought to riches, it does not follow that you are to be sordid or mean.

To become really rich is the noblest aim you can have in life, for it includes everything else.

On the competitive plane, the struggle to get rich is a Godless scramble for power over other men; but when we come into the creative mind, all this is changed.

All that is possible in the way of greatness and soul unfoldment, of service and lofty endeavor, comes by way of getting rich; all is made possible by the use of things.

If you lack for physical health, you will find that the attainment of it is conditional on your getting rich.

Only those who are emancipated from financial worry, and who have the means to live a care-free existence and follow hygienic practices, can have and retain health.

Moral and spiritual greatness is possible only to those who are above the competitive battle for existence; and only those who are becoming rich on the plane of creative thought are free from the degrading influences of competition. If your heart is set on domestic happiness, remember that love flourishes best where there is refinement, a high level of thought, and freedom from corrupting influences; and these are to be found only where riches are attained by the exercise of creative thought, without strife or rivalry.

You can aim at nothing so great or noble, I repeat, as to become rich; and you must fix your attention upon your mental picture of riches, to the exclusion of all that may tend to dim or obscure the vision.

You must learn to see the underlying TRUTH in all things; you must see beneath all seemingly wrong conditions the Great One Life ever moving forward toward fuller expression and more complete happiness.

It is the truth that there is no such thing as poverty; that there is only wealth.

Some people remain in poverty because they are ignorant of the fact that there is wealth for them; and these can best be taught by showing them the way to affluence in your own person and practice.

Others are poor because, while they feel that there is a way out, they are too intellectually indolent to put forth the mental effort necessary to find that way and by travel it; and for these the very best thing you can do is to arouse their desire by showing them the happiness that comes from being rightly rich.

Others still are poor because, while they have some notion of science, they have become so swamped and lost in the maze of metaphysical and occult theories that they do not know which road to take. They try a mixture of many systems and fail in all. For these, again, the very best thing, to do is to show the right way in your own person and practice; an ounce of doing things is worth a pound of theorizing.

The very best thing you can do for the whole world is to make the most of yourself.

You can serve God and man in no more effective way than by getting rich; that is, if you get rich by the creative method and not by the competitive one.

Another thing. We assert that this book gives in detail the principles of the science of getting rich; and if that is true, you do not need to read any other book upon the subject. This may sound narrow and egotistical, but consider: there is no more scientific method of computation in mathematics than by addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division; no other method is possible. There can be but one shortest distance between two points. There is only one way to think scientifically, and that is to think in the way that leads by the most direct and simple route to the goal. No man has yet formulated a briefer or less complex "system" than the one set forth herein; it has been stripped of all non-essentials. When you commence on this, lay all others aside; put them out of your mind altogether.

Read this book every day; keep it with you; commit it to memory, and do not think about other "systems" and theories. If you do, you will begin to have doubts, and to be uncertain and wavering in your thought; and then you will begin to make failures.

After you have made good and become rich, you may study other systems as much as you please; but until you are quite sure that you have gained what you want, do not read anything on this line but this book, unless it be the authors mentioned in the Preface.

And read only the most optimistic comments on the world's news; those in harmony with your picture.

Also, postpone your investigations into the occult. Do not dabble in theosophy, Spiritualism, or kindred studies. It is very likely that the dead still live, and are near; but if they are, let them alone; mind your own business.

Wherever the spirits of the dead may be, they have their own work to do, and their own problems to solve; and we have no right to interfere with them. We cannot help them, and it is very doubtful whether they can help us, or whether we have any right to trespass upon their time if they can. Let the dead and the hereafter alone, and solve your own problem; get rich. If you begin to mix with the occult, you will start mental cross-currents which will surely bring your hopes to shipwreck. Now, this and the preceding chapters have brought us to the following statement of basic facts:--

There is a thinking stuff from which all things are made, and which, in its original state, permeates, penetrates, and fills the interspaces of the universe.

A thought, in this substance, Produces the thing that is imaged by the thought.

Man can form things in his thought, and, by impressing his thought upon formless substance, can cause the thing he thinks about to be created.

In order to do this, man must pass from the competitive to the creative mind; he must form a clear mental picture of the things he wants, and hold this picture in his thoughts with the fixed PURPOSE to get what he wants, and the unwavering FAITH that he does get what he wants, closing his mind against all that may tend to shake his purpose, dim his vision, or quench his faith.

And in addition to all this, we shall now see that he must live and act in a Certain Way.

The Science of Getting Rich, by Wallace Delois Wattles, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER 11

  

Acting in the Certain Way.

THOUGHT is the creative power, or the impelling force which causes the creative power to act; thinking in a Certain Way will bring riches to you, but you must not rely upon thought alone, paying no attention to personal action. That is the rock upon which many otherwise scientific metaphysical thinkers meet shipwreck--the failure to connect thought with personal action.

We have not yet reached the stage of development, even supposing such a stage to be possible, in which man can create directly from Formless Substance without nature's processes or the work of human hands; man must not only think, but his personal action must supplement his thought.

By thought you can cause the gold in the hearts of the mountains to be impelled toward you; but it will not mine itself, refine itself, coin itself into double eagles, and come rolling along the roads seeking its way into your pocket.

Under the impelling power of the Supreme Spirit, men's affairs will be so ordered that some one will be led to mine the gold for you; other men's business transactions will be so directed that the gold will be brought toward you, and you must so arrange your own business affairs that you may be able to receive it when it comes to you. Your thought makes all things, animate and inanimate, work to bring you what you want; but your personal activity must be such that you can rightly receive what you want when it reaches you. You are not to take it as charity, nor to steal it; you must give every man more in use value than he gives you in cash value.

The scientific use of thought consists in forming a clear and distinct mental image of what you want; in holding fast to the purpose to get what you want; and in realizing with grateful faith that you do get what you want.

Do not try to 'project' your thought in any mysterious or occult way, with the idea of having it go out and do things for you; that is wasted effort, and will weaken your power to think with sanity.

The action of thought in getting rich is fully explained in the preceding chapters; your faith and purpose positively impress your vision upon Formless Substance, which has THE SAME DESIRE FOR MORE LIFE THAT YOU HAVE; and this vision, received from you, sets all the creative forces at work IN AND THROUGH THEIR REGULAR CHANNELS OF ACTION, but directed toward you.

It is not your part to guide or supervise the creative process; all you have to do with that is to retain your vision, stick to your purpose, and maintain your faith and gratitude.

But you must act in a Certain Way, so that you can appropriate what is yours when it comes to you; so that you can meet the things you have in your picture, and put them in their proper places as they arrive.

You can really see the truth of this. When things reach you, they will be in the hands of other men, who will ask an equivalent for them.

And you can only get what is yours by giving the other man what is his.

Your pocketbook is not going to be transformed into a Fortunata's purse, which shall be always full of money without effort on your part.

This is the crucial point in the science of getting rich; right here, where thought and personal action must be combined. There are very many people who, consciously or unconsciously, set the creative forces in action by the strength and persistence of their desires, but who remain poor because they do not provide for the reception of the thing they want when it comes.

By thought, the thing you want is brought to you; by action you receive it.

Whatever your action is to be, it is evident that you must act NOW. You cannot act in the past, and it is essential to the clearness of your mental vision that you dismiss the past from your mind. You cannot act in the future, for the future is not here yet. And you cannot tell how you will want to act in any future contingency until that contingency has arrived.

Because you are not in the right business, or the right environment now, do not think that you must postpone action until you get into the right business or environment. And do not spend time in the present taking thought as to the best course in possible future emergencies; have faith in your ability to meet any emergency when it arrives.

If you act in the present with your mind on the future, your present action will be with a divided mind, and will not be effective.

Put your whole mind into present action.

Do not give your creative impulse to Original Substance, and then sit down and wait for results; if you do, you will never get them. Act now. There is never any time but now, and there never will be any time but now. If you are ever to begin to make ready for the reception of what you want, you must begin now.

And your action, whatever it is, must most likely be in your present business or employment, and must be upon the persons and things in your present environment.

You cannot act where you are not; you cannot act where you have been, and you cannot act where you are going to be; you can act only where you are.

Do not bother as to whether yesterday's work was well done or ill done; do to-day's work well.

Do not try to do tomorrow's work now; there will be plenty of time to do that when you get to it.

Do not try, by occult or mystical means, to act on people or things that are out of your reach.

Do not wait for a change of environment, before you act; get a change of environment by action.

You can so act upon the environment in which you are now, as to cause yourself to be transferred to a better environment.

Hold with faith and purpose the vision of yourself in the better environment, but act upon your present environment with all your heart, and with all your strength, and with all your mind.

Do not spend any time in day dreaming or castle building; hold to the one vision of what you want, and act NOW.

Do not cast about seeking some new thing to do, or some strange, unusual, or remarkable action to perform as a first step toward getting rich. It is probable that your actions, at least for some time to come, will be those you have been performing for some time past; but you are to begin now to perform these actions in the Certain Way, which will surely make you rich.

If you are engaged in some business, and feel that it is not the right one for you, do not wait until you get into the right business before you begin to act.

Do not feel discouraged, or sit down and lament because you are misplaced. No man was ever so misplaced but that he could not find the right place, and no man ever became so involved in the wrong business but that he could get into the right business.

Hold the vision of yourself in the right business, with the purpose to get into it, and the faith that you will get into it, and are getting into it; but ACT in your present business. Use your present business as the means of getting a better one, and use your present environment as the means of getting into a better one. Your vision of the right business, if held with faith and purpose, will cause the Supreme to move the right business toward you; and your action, if performed in the Certain Way, will cause you to move toward the business.

If you are an employee, or wage earner, and feel that you must change places in order to get what you want, do not 'project' your thought into space and rely upon it to get you another job. It will probably fail to do so.

Hold the vision of yourself in the job you want, while you ACT with faith and purpose on the job you have, and you will certainly get the job you want.

Your vision and faith will set the creative force in motion to bring it toward you, and your action will cause the forces in your own environment to move you toward the place you want. In closing this chapter, we will add another statement to our syllabus:--

There is a thinking stuff from which all things are made, and which, in its original state, permeates, penetrates, and fills the interspaces of the universe.

A thought, in this substance, Produces the thing that is imaged by the thought.

Man can form things in his thought, and, by impressing his thought upon formless substance, can cause the thing he thinks about to be created.

In order to do this, man must pass from the competitive to the creative mind; he must form a clear mental picture of the things he wants, and hold this picture in his thoughts with the fixed PURPOSE to get what he wants, and the unwavering FAITH that he does get what he wants, closing his mind to all that may tend to shake his purpose, dim his vision, or quench his faith.

That he may receive what he wants when it comes, man must act NOW upon the people and things in his present environment.

The Science of Getting Rich, by Wallace Delois Wattles, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER 12

  

Efficient Action.

YOU must use your thought as directed in previous chapters, and begin to do what you can do where you are; and you must do ALL that you can do where you are.

You can advance only be being larger than your present place; and no man is larger than his present place who leaves undone any of the work pertaining to that place.

The world is advanced only by those who more than fill their present places.

If no man quite filled his present place, you can see that there must be a going backward in everything. Those who do not quite fill their present places are dead weight upon society, government, commerce, and industry; they must be carried along by others at a great expense. The progress of the world is retarded only by those who do not fill the places they are holding; they belong to a former age and a lower stage or plane of life, and their tendency is toward degeneration. No society could advance if every man was smaller than his place; social evolution is guided by the law of physical and mental evolution. In the animal world, evolution is caused by excess of life.

When an organism has more life than can be expressed in the functions of its own plane, it develops the organs of a higher plane, and a new species is originated.

There never would have been new species had there not been organisms which more than filled their places. The law is exactly the same for you; your getting rich depends upon your applying this principle to your own affairs.

Every day is either a successful day or a day of failure; and it is the successful days which get you what you want. If everyday is a failure, you can never get rich; while if every day is a success, you cannot fail to get rich.

If there is something that may be done today, and you do not do it, you have failed in so far as that thing is concerned; and the consequences may be more disastrous than you imagine.

You cannot foresee the results of even the most trivial act; you do not know the workings of all the forces that have been set moving in your behalf. Much may be depending on your doing some simple act; it may be the very thing which is to open the door of opportunity to very great possibilities. You can never know all the combinations which Supreme Intelligence is making for you in the world of things and of things and of human affairs; your neglect or failure to do some small thing may cause a long delay in getting what you want.

Do, every day, ALL that can be done that day.

There is, however, a limitation or qualification of the above that you must take into account.

You are not to overwork, nor to rush blindly into your business in the effort to do the greatest possible number of things in the shortest possible time.

You are not to try to do tomorrow's work today, nor to do a week's work in a day.

It is really not the number of things you do, but the EFFICIENCY of each separate action that counts.

Every act is, in itself, either a success or a failure.

Every act is, in itself, either effective or inefficient.

Every inefficient act is a failure, and if you spend your life in doing inefficient acts, your whole life will be a failure.

The more things you do, the worse for you, if all your acts are inefficient ones.

On the other hand, every efficient act is a success in itself, and if every act of your life is an efficient one, your whole life MUST be a success.

The cause of failure is doing too many things in an inefficient manner, and not doing enough things in an efficient manner.

You will see that it is a self-evident proposition that if you do not do any inefficient acts, and if you do a sufficient number of efficient acts, you will become rich. If, now, it is possible for you to make each act an efficient one, you see again that the getting of riches is reduced to an exact science, like mathematics.

The matter turns, then, on the questions whether you can make each separate act a success in itself. And this you can certainly do.

You can make each act a success, because ALL Power is working with you; and ALL Power cannot fail.

Power is at your service; and to make each act efficient you have only to put power into it.

Every action is either strong or weak; and when every one is strong, you are acting in the Certain Way which will make you rich.

Every act can be made strong and efficient by holding your vision while you are doing it, and putting the whole power of your FAITH and PURPOSE into it.

It is at this point that the people fail who separate mental power from personal action. They use the power of mind in one place and at one time, and they act in another pace and at another time. So their acts are not successful in themselves; too many of them are inefficient. But if ALL Power goes into every act, no matter how commonplace, every act will be a success in itself; and as in the nature of things every success opens the way to other successes, your progress toward what you want, and the progress of what you want toward you, will become increasingly rapid.

Remember that successful action is cumulative in its results. Since the desire for more life is inherent in all things, when a man begins to move toward larger life more things attach themselves to him, and the influence of his desire is multiplied.

Do, every day, all that you can do that day, and do each act in an efficient manner.

In saying that you must hold your vision while you are doing each act, however trivial or commonplace, I do not mean to say that it is necessary at all times to see the vision distinctly to its smallest details. It should be the work of your leisure hours to use your imagination on the details of your vision, and to contemplate them until they are firmly fixed upon memory. If you wish speedy results, spend practically all your spare time in this practice.

By continuous contemplation you will get the picture of what you want, even to the smallest details, so firmly fixed upon your mind, and so completely transferred to the mind of Formless Substance, that in your working hours you need only to mentally refer to the picture to stimulate your faith and purpose, and cause your best effort to be put forth. Contemplate your picture in your leisure hours until your consciousness is so full of it that you can grasp it instantly. You will become so enthused with its bright promises that the mere thought of it will call forth the strongest energies of your whole being.

Let us again repeat our syllabus, and by slightly changing the closing statements bring it to the point we have now reached.

There is a thinking stuff from which all things are made, and which, in its original state, permeates, penetrates, and fills the interspaces of the universe.

A thought, in this substance, Produces the thing that is imaged by the thought.

Man can form things in his thought, and, by impressing his thought upon formless substance, can cause the thing he thinks about to be created.

In order to do this, man must pass from the competitive to the creative mind; he must form a clear mental picture of the things he wants, and do, with faith and purpose, all that can be done each day, doing each separate thing in an efficient manner.

The Science of Getting Rich, by Wallace Delois Wattles, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER 13

  

Getting into the Right Business.

SUCCESS, in any particular business, depends for one thing upon your possessing in a well-developed state the faculties required in that business.

Without good musical faculty no one can succeed as a teacher of music; without well-developed mechanical faculties no one can achieve great success in any of the mechanical trades; without tact and the commercial faculties no one can succeed in mercantile pursuits. But to possess in a well-developed state the faculties required in your particular vocation does not insure getting rich. There are musicians who have remarkable talent, and who yet remain poor; there are blacksmiths, carpenters, and so on who have excellent mechanical ability, but who do not get rich; and there are merchants with good faculties for dealing with men who nevertheless fail.

The different faculties are tools; it is essential to have good tools, but it is also essential that the tools should be used in the Right Way. One man can take a sharp saw, a square, a good plane, and so on, and build a handsome article of furniture; another man can take the same tools and set to work to duplicate the article, but his production will be a botch. He does not know how to use good tools in a successful way.

The various faculties of your mind are the tools with which you must do the work which is to make you rich; it will be easier for you to succeed if you get into a business for which you are well equipped with mental tools.

Generally speaking, you will do best in that business which will use your strongest faculties; the one for which you are naturally "best fitted." But there are limitations to this statement, also. No man should regard his vocation as being irrevocably fixed by the tendencies with which he was born.

You can get rich in ANY business, for if you have not the right talent for you can develop that talent; it merely means that you will have to make your tools as you go along, instead of confining yourself to the use of those with which you were born. It will be EASIER for you to succeed in a vocation for which you already have the talents in a well-developed state; but you CAN succeed in any vocation, for you can develop any rudimentary talent, and there is no talent of which you have not at least the rudiment.

You will get rich most easily in point of effort, if you do that for which you are best fitted; but you will get rich most satisfactorily if you do that which you WANT to do.

Doing what you want to do is life; and there is no real satisfaction in living if we are compelled to be forever doing something which we do not like to do, and can never do what we want to do. And it is certain that you can do what you want to do; the desire to do it is proof that you have within you the power which can do it.

Desire is a manifestation of power.

The desire to play music is the power which can play music seeking expression and development; the desire to invent mechanical devices is the mechanical talent seeking expression and development.

Where there is no power, either developed or undeveloped, to do a thing, there is never any desire to do that thing; and where there is strong desire to do a thing, it is certain proof that the power to do it is strong, and only requires to be developed and applied in the Right Way.

All things else being equal, it is best to select the business for which you have the best developed talent; but if you have a strong desire to engage in any particular line of work, you should select that work as the ultimate end at which you aim.

You can do what you want to do, and it is your right and privilege to follow the business or avocation which will be most congenial and pleasant.

You are not obliged to do what you do not like to do, and should not do it except as a means to bring you to the doing of the thing you want to do.

If there are past mistakes whose consequences have placed you in an undesirable business or environment, you may be obliged for some time to do what you do not like to do; but you can make the doing of it pleasant by knowing that it is making it possible for you to come to the doing of what you want to do.

If you feel that you are not in the right vocation, do not act too hastily in trying to get into another one. The best way, generally, to change business or environment is by growth.

Do not be afraid to make a sudden and radical change if the opportunity is presented, and you feel after careful consideration that it is the right opportunity; but never take sudden or radical action when you are in doubt as to the wisdom of doing so.

There is never any hurry on the creative plane; and there is no lack of opportunity.

When you get out of the competitive mind you will understand that you never need to act hastily. No one else is going to beat you to the thing you want to do; there is enough for all. If one space is taken, another and a better one will be opened for you a little farther on; there is plenty of time. When you are in doubt, wait. Fall back on the contemplation of your vision, and increase your faith and purpose; and by all means, in times of doubt and indecision, cultivate gratitude.

A day or two spent in contemplating the vision of what you want, and in earnest thanksgiving that you are getting it, will bring your mind into such close relationship with the Supreme that you will make no mistake when you do act.

There is a mind which knows all there is to know; and you can come into close unity with this mind by faith and the purpose to advance in life, if you have deep gratitude.

Mistakes come from acting hastily, or from acting in fear or doubt, or in forgetfulness of the Right Motive, which is more life to all, and less to none.

As you go on in the Certain Way, opportunities will come to you in increasing number; and you will need to be very steady in your faith and purpose, and to keep in close touch with the All Mind by reverent gratitude.

Do all that you can do in a perfect manner every day, but do it without haste, worry, or fear. Go as fast as you can, but never hurry.

Remember that in the moment you begin to hurry you cease to be a creator and become a competitor; you drop back upon the old plane again.

Whenever you find yourself hurrying, call a halt; fix your attention on the mental image of the thing you want, and begin to give thanks that you are getting it. The exercise of GRATITUDE will never fail to strengthen your faith and renew your purpose.

The Science of Getting Rich, by Wallace Delois Wattles, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER 14

  

The Impression of Increase.

WHETHER you change your vocation or not, your actions for the present must be those pertaining to the business in which you are now engaged.

You can get into the business you want by making constructive use of the business you are already established in; by doing your daily work in a Certain Way.

And in so far as your business consists in dealing with other men, whether personally or by letter, the key-thought of all your efforts must be to convey to their minds the impression of increase.

Increase is what all men and all women are seeking; it is the urge of the Formless Intelligence within them, seeking fuller expression.

The desire for increase is inherent in all nature; it is the fundamental impulse of the universe. All human activities are based on the desire for increase; people are seeking more food, more clothes, better shelter, more luxury, more beauty, more knowledge, more pleasure-- increase in something, more life.

Every living thing is under this necessity for continuous advancement; where increase of life ceases, dissolution and death set in at once.

Man instinctively knows this, and hence he is forever seeking more. This law of perpetual increase is set forth by Jesus in the parable of the talents; only those who gain more retain any; from him who hath not shall be taken away even that which he hath.

The normal desire for increased wealth is not an evil or a reprehensible thing; it is simply the desire for more abundant life; it is aspiration.

And because it is the deepest instinct of their natures, all men and women are attracted to him who can give them more of the means of life.

In following the Certain Way as described in the foregoing pages, you are getting continuous increase for yourself, and you are giving it to all with whom you deal.

You are a creative center, from which increase is given off to all.

Be sure of this, and convey assurance of the fact to every man, woman, and child with whom you come in contact. No matter how small the transaction, even if it be only the selling of a stick of candy to a little child, put into it the thought of increase, and make sure that the customer is impressed with the thought.

Convey the impression of advancement with everything you do, so that all people shall receive the impression that you are an Advancing Man, and that you advance all who deal with you. Even to the people whom you meet in a social way, without any thought of business, and to whom you do not try to sell anything, give the thought of increase.

You can convey this impression by holding the unshakable faith that you, yourself, are in the Way of Increase; and by letting this faith inspire, fill, and permeate every action.

Do everything that you do in the firm conviction that you are an advancing personality, and that you are giving advancement to everybody.

Feel that you are getting rich, and that in so doing you are making others rich, and conferring benefits on all.

Do not boast or brag of your success, or talk about it unnecessarily; true faith is never boastful.

Wherever you find a boastful person, you find one who is secretly doubtful and afraid. Simply feel the faith, and let it work out in every transaction; let every act and tone and look express the quiet assurance that you are getting rich; that you are already rich. Words will not be necessary to communicate this feeling to others; they will feel the sense of increase when in your presence, and will be attracted to you again.

You must so impress others that they will feel that in associating with you they will get increase for themselves. See that you give them a use value greater than the cash value you are taking from them.

Take an honest pride in doing this, and let everybody know it; and you will have no lack of customers. People will go where they are given increase; and the Supreme, which desires increase in all, and which knows all, will move toward you men and women who have never heard of you. Your business will increase rapidly, and you will be surprised at the unexpected benefits which will come to you. You will be able from day to day to make larger combinations, secure greater advantages, and to go on into a more congenial vocation if you desire to do so.

But doing thing all this, you must never lose sight of your vision of what you want, or your faith and purpose to get what you want.

Let me here give you another word of caution in regard to motives.

Beware of the insidious temptation to seek for power over other men.

Nothing is so pleasant to the unformed or partially developed mind as the exercise of power or dominion over others. The desire to rule for selfish gratification has been the curse of the world. For countless ages kings and lords have drenched the earth with blood in their battles to extend their dominions; this not to seek more life for all, but to get more power for themselves.

To-day, the main motive in the business and industrial world is the same; men Marshal their armies of dollars, and lay waste the lives and hearts of millions in the same mad scramble for power over others. Commercial kings, like political kings, are inspired by the lust for power.

Jesus saw in this desire for mastery the moving impulse of that evil world He sought to overthrow. Read the twenty-third chapter of Matthew, and see how He pictures the lust of the Pharisees to be called "Master," to sit in the high places, to domineer over others, and to lay burdens on the backs of the less fortunate; and note how He compares this lust for dominion with the brotherly seeking for the Common Good to which He calls His disciples.

Look out for the temptation to seek for authority, to become a "master," to be considered as one who is above the common herd, to impress others by lavish display, and so on.

The mind that seeks for mastery over others is the competitive mind; and the competitive mind is not the creative one. In order to master your environment and your destiny, it is not at all necessary that you should rule over your fellow men and indeed, when you fall into the world's struggle for the high places, you begin to be conquered by fate and environment, and your getting rich becomes a matter of chance and speculation.

Beware of the competitive mind!! No better statement of the principle of creative action can be formulated than the favorite declaration of the late "Golden Rule" Jones of Toledo: "What I want for myself, I want for everybody."

The Science of Getting Rich, by Wallace Delois Wattles, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER 15

  

The Advancing Man.

WHAT I have said in the last chapter applies as well to the professional man and the wage-earner as to the man who is engaged in mercantile business.

No matter whether you are a physician, a teacher, or a clergyman, if you can give increase of life to others and make them sensible of the fact, they will be attracted to you, and you will get rich. The physician who holds the vision of himself as a great and successful healer, and who works toward the complete realization of that vision with faith and purpose, as described in former chapters, will come into such close touch with the Source of Life that he will be phenomenally successful; patients will come to him in throngs.

No one has a greater opportunity to carry into effect the teaching of this book than the practitioner of medicine; it does not matter to which of the various schools he may belong, for the principle of healing is common to all of them, and may be reached by all alike. The Advancing Man in medicine, who holds to a clear mental image of himself as successful, and who obeys the laws of faith, purpose, and gratitude, will cure every curable case he undertakes, no matter what remedies he may use.

In the field of religion, the world cries out for the clergyman who can teach his hearers the true science of abundant life. He who masters the details of the science of getting rich, together with the allied sciences of being well, of being great, and of winning love, and who teaches these details from the pulpit, will never lack for a congregation. This is the gospel that the world needs; it will give increase of life, and men will hear it gladly, and will give liberal support to the man who brings it to them.

What is now needed is a demonstration of the science of life from the pulpit. We want preachers who can not only tell us how, but who in their own persons will show us how. We need the preacher who will himself be rich, healthy, great, and beloved, to teach us how to attain to these things; and when he comes he will find a numerous and loyal following.

The same is true of the teacher who can inspire the children with the faith and purpose of the advancing life. He will never be "out of a job." And any teacher who has this faith and purpose can give it to his pupils; he cannot help giving it to them if it is part of his own life and practice.

What is true of the teacher, preacher, and physician is true of the lawyer, dentist, real estate man, insurance agent--of everybody.

` The combined mental and personal action I have described is infallible; it cannot fail. Every man and woman who follows these instructions steadily, perseveringly, and to the letter, will get rich. The law of the Increase of Life is as mathematically certain in its operation as the law of gravitation; getting rich is an exact science.

The wage-earner will find this as true of his case as of any of the others mentioned. Do not feel that you have no chance to get rich because you are working where there is no visible opportunity for advancement, where wages are small and the cost of living high. Form your clear mental vision of what you want, and begin to act with faith and purpose.

Do all the work you can do, every day, and do each piece of work in a perfectly successful manner; put the power of success, and the purpose to get rich, into everything that you do.

But do not do this merely with the idea of currying favor with your employer, in the hope that he, or those above you, will see your good work and advance you; it is not likely that they will do so.

The man who is merely a "good" workman, filling his place to the very best of his ability, and satisfied with that, is valuable to his employer; and it is not to the employer's interest to promote him; he is worth more where he is.

To secure advancement, something more is necessary than to be too large for your place.

The man who is certain to advance is the one who is too big for his place, and who has a clear concept of what he wants to be; who knows that he can become what he wants to be and who is determined to BE what he wants to be.

Do not try to more than fill your present place with a view to pleasing your employer; do it with the idea of advancing yourself. Hold the faith and purpose of increase during work hours, after work hours, and before work hours. Hold it in such a way that every person who comes in contact with you, whether foreman, fellow workman, or social acquaintance, will feel the power of purpose radiating from you; so that every one will get the sense of advancement and increase from you. Men will be attracted to you, and if there is no possibility for advancement in your present job, you will very soon see an opportunity to take another job.

There is a Power which never fails to present opportunity to the Advancing Man who is moving in obedience to law.

God cannot help helping you, if you act in a Certain Way; He must do so in order to help Himself.

There is nothing in your circumstances or in the industrial situation that can keep you down. If you cannot get rich working for the steel trust, you can get rich on a ten-acre farm; and if you begin to move in the Certain Way, you will certainly escape from the "clutches" of the steel trust and get on to the farm or wherever else you wish to be.

If a few thousands of its employees would enter upon the Certain Way, the steel trust would soon be in a bad plight; it would have to give its workingmen more opportunity, or go out of business. Nobody has to work for a trust; the trusts can keep men in so called hopeless conditions only so long as there are men who are too ignorant to know of the science of getting rich, or too intellectually slothful to practice it.

Begin this way of thinking and acting, and your faith and purpose will make you quick to see any opportunity to better your condition.

Such opportunities will speedily come, for the Supreme, working in All, and working for you, will bring them before you.

Do not wait for an opportunity to be all that you want to be; when an opportunity to be more than you are now is presented and you feel impelled toward it, take it. It will be the first step toward a greater opportunity.

There is no such thing possible in this universe as a lack of opportunities for the man who is living the advancing life.

It is inherent in the constitution of the cosmos that all things shall be for him and work together for his good; and he must certainly get rich if he acts and thinks in the Certain Way. So let wage-earning men and women study this book with great care, and enter with confidence upon the course of action it prescribes; it will not fail.

The Science of Getting Rich, by Wallace Delois Wattles, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER 16

  

Some Cautions, and Concluding Observations.

MANY people will scoff at the idea that there is an exact science of getting rich; holding the impression that the supply of wealth is limited, they will insist that social and governmental institutions must be changed before even any considerable number of people can acquire a competence.

But this is not true.

It is true that existing governments keep the masses in poverty, but this is because the masses do not think and act in the Certain Way.

If the masses begin to move forward as suggested in this book, neither governments nor industrial systems can check them; all systems must be modified to accommodate the forward movement.

If the people have the Advancing Mind, have the Faith that they can become rich, and move forward with the fixed purpose to become rich, nothing can possibly keep them in poverty.

Individuals may enter upon the Certain Way at any time, and under any government, and make themselves rich; and when any considerable number of individuals do so under any government, they will cause the system to be so modified as to open the way for others.

The more men who get rich on the competitive plane, the worse for others; the more who get rich on the creative plane, the better for others.

The economic salvation of the masses can only be accomplished by getting a large number of people to practice the scientific method set down in this book, and become rich. These will show others the way, and inspire them with a desire for real life, with the faith that it can be attained, and with the purpose to attain it.

For the present, however, it is enough to know that neither the government under which you live nor the capitalistic or competitive system of industry can keep you from getting rich. When you enter upon the creative plane of thought you will rise above all these things and become a citizen of another kingdom.

But remember that your thought must be held upon the creative plane; you are never for an instant to be betrayed into regarding the supply as limited, or into acting on the moral level of competition.

Whenever you do fall into old ways of thought, correct yourself instantly; for when you are in the competitive mind, you have lost the cooperation of the Mind of the Whole.

Do not spend any time in planning as to how you will meet possible emergencies in the future, except as the necessary policies may affect your actions today. You are concerned with doing today's work in a perfectly successful manner, and not with emergencies which may arise tomorrow; you can attend to them as they come.

Do not concern yourself with questions as to how you shall surmount obstacles which may loom upon your business horizon, unless you can see plainly that your course must be altered today in order to avoid them.

No matter how tremendous an obstruction may appear at a distance, you will find that if you go on in the Certain Way it will disappear as you approach it, or that a way over, though, or around it will appear.

No possible combination of circumstances can defeat a man or woman who is proceeding to get rich along strictly scientific lines. No man or woman who obeys the law can fail to get rich, any more than one can multiply two by two and fail to get four.

Give no anxious thought to possible disasters, obstacles, panics, or unfavorable combinations of circumstances; it is time enough to meet such things when they present themselves before you in the immediate present, and you will find that every difficulty carries with it the wherewithal for its overcoming.

Guard your speech. Never speak of yourself, your affairs, or of anything else in a discouraged or discouraging way.

Never admit the possibility of failure, or speak in a way that infers failure as a possibility.

Never speak of the times as being hard, or of business conditions as being doubtful. Times may be hard and business doubtful for those who are on the competitive plane, but they can never be so for you; you can create what you want, and you are above fear.

When others are having hard times and poor business, you will find your greatest opportunities.

Train yourself to think of and to look upon the world as a something which is Becoming, which is growing; and to regard seeming evil as being only that which is undeveloped. Always speak in terms of advancement; to do otherwise is to deny your faith, and to deny your faith is to lose it.

Never allow yourself to feel disappointed. You may expect to have a certain thing at a certain time, and not get it at that time; and this will appear to you like failure.

But if you hold to your faith you will find that the failure is only apparent.

Go on in the certain way, and if you do not receive that thing, you will receive something so much better that you will see that the seeming failure was really a great success.

A student of this science had set his mind on making a certain business combination which seemed to him at the time to be very desirable, and he worked for some, weeks to bring it about. When the crucial time came, the thing failed in a perfectly inexplicable way; it was as if some unseen influence had been working secretly against him. He was not disappointed; on the contrary, he thanked God that his desire had been overruled, and went steadily on with a grateful mind. In a few weeks an opportunity so much better came his way that he would not have made the first deal on any account; and he saw that a Mind which knew more than he knew had prevented him from losing the greater good by entangling himself with the lesser.

That is the way every seeming failure will work out for you, if you keep your faith, hold to your purpose, have gratitude, and do, every day, all that can be done that day, doing each separate act in a successful manner.

When you make a failure, it is because you have not asked for enough; keep on, and a larger thing then you were seeking will certainly come to you. Remember this.

You will not fail because you lack the necessary talent to do what you wish to do. If you go on as I have directed, you will develop all the talent that is necessary to the doing of your work.

It is not within the scope of this book to deal with the science of cultivating talent; but it is as certain and simple as the process of getting rich.

However, do not hesitate or waver for fear that when you come to any certain place you will fail for lack of ability; keep right on, and when you come to that place, the ability will be furnished to you. The same source of Ability which enabled the untaught Lincoln to do the greatest work in government ever accomplished by a single man is open to you; you may draw upon all the mind there is for wisdom to use in meeting the responsibilities which are laid upon you. Go on in full faith.

Study this book. Make it your constant companion until you have mastered all the ideas contained in it. While you are getting firmly established in this faith, you will do well to give up most recreations and pleasure; and to stay away from places where ideas conflicting with these are advanced in lectures or sermons. Do not read pessimistic or conflicting literature, or get into arguments upon the matter. Do very little reading, outside of the writers mentioned in the Preface. Spend most of your leisure time in contemplating your vision, and in cultivating gratitude, and in reading this book. It contains all you need to know of the science of getting rich; and you will find all the essentials summed up in the following chapter.

The Science of Getting Rich, by Wallace Delois Wattles, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER 17

  

Summary of the Science of Getting Rich.

THERE is a thinking stuff from which all things are made, and which, in its original state, permeates, penetrates, and fills the interspaces of the universe.

A thought in this substance produces the thing that is imaged by the thought.

Man can form things in his thought, and by impressing his thought upon formless substance can cause the thing he thinks about to be created.

In order to do this, man must pass from the competitive to the creative mind; otherwise he cannot be in harmony with the Formless Intelligence, which is always creative and never competitive in spirit.

Man may come into full harmony with the Formless Substance by entertaining a lively and sincere gratitude for the blessings it bestows upon him. Gratitude unifies the mind of man with the intelligence of Substance, so that man's thoughts are received by the Formless. Man can remain upon the creative plane only by uniting himself with the Formless Intelligence through a deep and continuous feeling of gratitude .

Man must form a clear and definite mental image of the things he wishes to have, to do, or to become; and he must hold this mental image in his thoughts, while being deeply grateful to the Supreme that all his desires are granted to him. The man who wishes to get rich must spend his leisure hours in contemplating his Vision, and in earnest thanksgiving that the reality is being given to him. Too much stress cannot be laid on the importance of frequent contemplation of the mental image, coupled with unwavering faith and devout gratitude. This is the process by which the impression is given to the Formless, and the creative forces set in motion.

The creative energy works through the established channels of natural growth, and of the industrial and social order. All that is included in his mental image will surely be brought to the man who follows the instructions given above, and whose faith does not waver. What he wants will come to him through the ways of established trade and commerce.

In order to receive his own when it shall come to him, man must be active; and this activity can only consist in more than filling his present place. He must keep in mind the Purpose to get rich through the realization of his mental image. And he must do, every day, all that can be done that day, taking care to do each act in a successful manner. He must give to every man a use value in excess of the cash value he receives, so that each transaction makes for more life; and he must so hold the Advancing Thought that the impression of increase will be communicated to all with whom he comes in contact.

The men and women who practice the foregoing instructions will certainly get rich; and the riches they receive will be in exact proportion to the definiteness of their vision, the fixity of their purpose, the steadiness of their faith, and the depth of their gratitude.

 

 

 

The End

 

    


===== BOOK: shib.txt =====


    
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

  

SHIBBOLETH

  

A TEMPLAR MONITOR

  

by SIR GEORGE COOPER CONNOR

  

Fifth Edition

  

Nashville, Tennessee: Order of the Red Cross

  

[1894]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com by John Bruno Hare, June 2008. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

There was no title page, verso or table of contents in the original book. This title page has been added in standard bibliographic format for the convenience of catalogers from internal evidence in this book. I have also added the subtitle for this online edition--JBH.

Click to enlarge
Cover of Shibboleth

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1] [p. 2]

[p. 3]

Dedication.

TO

SIR JOHN P. S. GOBIN,

M. E. Past Grand Master of the Grand Encampment.

TO WHOM I AM INDEBTED
 FOR NUMEROUS PROOFS OF KINDNESS AND SYMPATHY
 DURING THE YEARS OF OUR ACQUAINTANCE,
 I DEDICATE THIS MONITOR.

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 4] [p. 5]

  

PREFACE TO FIFTH EDITION.

THE early demand for the Fifth Edition of SHIBBOLETH, a demand the publishers scarcely anticipated in times like these, affords the author an opportunity to add several important matters to the volume, thus rendering it still more valuable to the Order of the Temple. So far as now seen this edition is a complete Monitor.

This edition contains all that appeared in the Fourth Edition, with a few errors corrected, and the Banners of Judah and Persia. There is also added a "Third Appendix," which contains directions for the Reception of Grand Officers; Hints to Eminent Commanders, and Rules of Order; Rituals for Divine Worship; Ritual of a Conclave of Sorrow; Ritual for the Christmas Observance; a Form for Recorder's Minutes; an Arrangement of Asylum and Prelate's Hall; and some Hints on Templar Banquets.

This Monitor reaches farther in its helpfulness than any that has been prepared heretofore. But it has not attempted to describe the Robes, and other equipments not universally accepted by the Order. Many requests have been made for the insertion of such descriptive matter, and the requests have been declined in the interests of peace. Such an attempt would develop acrimonious controversies.

My thanks are due, and they are hereby returned to the Fratres all over the Union, from Maine to Mexico, and the Atlantic to the Pacific, for the kind reception given the former editions of this Monitor, and for the many valuable hints received from all sources. It is the author's sincere desire to make this volume complete in all respects, and he will still be grateful for all suggestions looking to such completeness.

Chattanooga, Tenn., Feb. 10, 1894.

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 6]

  

NOTE BY THE PUBLISHERS.

SO far as known, the foregoing Preface is the last word written by SIR GEORGE COOPER CONNOR, the author of this volume. Only a few days later he was forced by disease to the chamber of death, which he never again left until the end came.

The expression of his thanks in the last paragraph may therefore be taken as his loving farewell to his brethren; and it is believed that his earnest desire to provide a Monitor that should be complete and helpful to the members of the Order has been fully realized in this new edition of SHIBBOLETH, to the preparation of which were given the last of his labors on earth.

Nashville, Tenn., November 1, 1894.

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 7]

  

THE ILLUSTRIOUS

  

ORDER OF THE RED CROSS.

  

Monitorial Instructions, Notes, Comments, and Suggestions.

  

A FEW HINTS TO COMMANDERS.

IT is the earnest desire of the author of this Monitor to discover that all the Commanderies invest the beautiful, instructive and entertaining Order of the Red Cross with the interest its importance demands. The Ritual provides ample opportunity for the display of true dramatic taste, both in robing and in reading. It also presents the great central thought of the Order,--TRUTH,--as it has never been presented previous to the adoption at Denver.

The feeling had become almost universal that the Order of the Red Cross was of slight importance, and was at best little more than a social observance. Hence the ceremonials were hurried over, the candidate was practically told that it was mere matter of form, and he went away profoundly impressed that the Commandery was indeed a jovial institution. Never was a graver mistake, and the impression so made was more injurious than beneficial. The Ritual now adopted can not fail to correct that erroneous view of the value of the Order.

The Order of the Red Cross should, if possible, be conferred upon classes, and be made the occasion of social intercourse among the members; the healing of wounds, the forming of new bonds of fraternity. The lessons of the ceremonies tend to these noble ends, and by conferring them with the dignity and pathos they merit those ends will be assuredly attained. See with what fervor of gratitude the newly created Companions will hereafter refer to the name they assumed, and the character they represented. There can be no nobler, and if the work is done with the devotion to dramatic effects which the Ritual demands, that name and character will never be forgotten.

[p. 8]

[paragraph continues] Hence the propriety of the Refection at the close of the work of the Council.

Commanders will advance the interests of the bodies they govern by securing full paraphernalia and equipments. The robes need not be expensive, but should be appropriate. It is of the greatest importance that the Grand Council, Companion Conductor, Warder and Guards be in Jewish robes and turbans. It is equally important that the Persian Guards should wear a uniform different from that of the Order of the Red Cross, an Order not then founded, technically speaking.

The Princes of Persia and the Rulers of Media should wear oriental robes, and the Master of Cavalry should also be in Persian dress. The Sovereign Master, Prince Chancellor and Prince Master of the Palace wear the regulation robes.

The seating of the Princes and Rulers, fully robed, should be in such form as to produce the best effects upon the Jewish Prince. No fixed floor plan can be laid down, because of the variations in the different Audience Chambers. Here Commanders will use their discretion.

In reading the lines of the Addresses be natural above all things. Affect no so-called dramatic or oratorical tones. Invest each scene with earnestness and pathos, as demanded. Allow no frivolous allusions, or undignified liberties to be taken with Z. Play the KING according to your best conception of royalty. See that the Means of Recognition are imparted with great care and accuracy. Let the dignified Order of the Red Cross be indeed a preparation for the solemn Order of the Temple.

  

THE BANNER OF THE ORDER.

It is of green color. In its center is a star of seven points, painted on gold, within which is painted the blood-red Cross of the

[p. 9]

[paragraph continues] Order, surrounded by the Motto: "Magna est Veritas, et Praevalebit." The letters on the arms of the Cross are black.

  

THE RED CROSS OF THE ORDER.

It is of blood-red color, of equal arms and angles, with the letters on the extremities of the arms, D T J L.

The four arms, thus indicating Deity, Truth, Justice and Liberty, commemorate our faith in God, and in the grand characteristics of the Order.

This Cross is the Jewel of the Order, and may be properly worn by the members thereof, suspended by a green and red ribbon.

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 10]

  

ORDER OF THE RED CROSS.

THE learned Sir Alfred Creigh, whose name is a household word among American Knights Templar, used the following language in a report to the Grand Commandery of Pennsylvania, September, 1867:

"The Ritual of the Red Cross was manufactured by Webb and his associates from kindred degrees not of this Order. It requires no argument to demonstrate that this degree has no connection whatever with the orders of Christian knighthood, nor never should have been incorporated into an order whose sublime teachings are of Jesus as the Redeemer of the world--in his mediatorial character, as the way, the truth and the life."

The equally scholarly and thoughtful Sir George S. Blackie made a report to the Grand Commandery of Tennessee, May 9, 1871, in which he used the following strong language:

"The inconsistency is glaring--the ceremonies are foreign to Christian knighthood. How utterly out of place does the Christian candidate appear when, as a preliminary to the glorious truths of the New Testament, he is introduced to a Jewish Sanhedrin, captured by pagan soldiers, and after having been entertained with an apocryphal legend at the banquet of a pagan monarch, he is sent out into the world without having heard of the name of Christ."

The unanimous adoption of the revised Ritual of the Illustrious Order of the Red Cross by the Grand Encampment, in Denver, on August 10, 1892, explains and settles the misconceptions of these dear Fratres forever, and yet a few words may not be out of place at this time.

The Illustrious Order of the Red Cross is not a pagan rite, nor is it a mere social observance. It is an Order founded upon TRUTH, recognizing the GOD OF TRUTH as the only one true and living God. As such it is a proper preparation for the solemnities of the Order of the Temple.

Darius believed in the same one that Israel did when he registered a vow with that God to rebuild His Temple in the destroyed

[p. 11]

city of Jerusalem. No doubt he registered that vow under the promptings of his Jewish friend, Prince Zerubbabel, who was the recognized Chosen of God. Darius kept that vow, demonstrating his love of TRUTH and his reverence for Judah's Jehovah.

The most exalted TRUTH was present implicitly, in Judaism, and the Law of Judaism was the schoolmaster that brought us to Christianity. The most exalted TRUTH is now explicit in Christianity. In Judaism it was the seed, then the blade, and then Christianity ripened it into the ear. So is the TRUTH of all truths implicitly in the Order of the Red Cross, and the candidate finds that same truth, but explicitly, in the Order of the Temple.

As Judaism was a preparation for Christianity, so let, the Illustrious Order of the Red Cross be a preparation for the Christian Order of the Temple.

  

HISTORICAL SKETCH.

The Scriptures inform us that for their own sins, and those of their forefathers, the Jewish people were led into captivity by Nebuzaradan, chief Captain of Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babylon. As slaves they tilled the valleys of the Euphrates, and of the Tigris, until Cyrus destroyed the Chaldean dynasty.

During that captivity Zerubbabel, Crown Prince of the House of Judah, and Darius, son of Hystaspes, formed an alliance of friendship which was probably terminated with death only.

One of the first acts of the conqueror Cyrus was the liberation of the Jewish captives; he then permitted them to return to Judea, that they might rebuild the city of Jerusalem and its Temple, which Nebuchadnezzar had destroyed.

The foundation stone of the Second Temple was laid 535 years before Christ; Zerubbabel, the Royal Prince, Joshua, the High Priest, and Haggai, the Prophet, laying the same.

Cyrus died, and his son, Cambyses, succeeded him on the Medo-Persian throne. On complaint of the Cutheans, and other contiguous tribes, Cambyses commanded the work upon the city and Temple to cease. During the nine years that followed, scarcely anything was done on the walls of Jerusalem, or its Temple.

Cambyses died and the Magians seized the throne, from which their usurper was driven with great slaughter, in a little over a year. Then the Seven Great Families of Persia laid hold of the government, and Darius ascended the throne. He appointed Zerubbabel,

[p. 12]

his friend, to be the Governor of the Jews that had returned to Jerusalem under the decree of the great Cyrus, and afterwards made him stand in the royal bed-chamber, as the Guard of his body. There were three of these Guards, and they were chosen because of the monarch's implicit confidence in their loyalty.

Fifteen years after the Jews had laid the foundation of the Second Temple they were forced to call a Grand Council to consult about the state of the country. Cambyses was dead, and the Magian usurper, Smerdis, had been driven from the throne, to give place to Darius, son of Hystaspes, whose favoring of the Jews was believed to be almost as marked as was that of the great Cyrus.

Darius spread a feast at his capital, and invited thereto the Princes of Persia and the Rulers of the Medes. That feast having been thoroughly enjoyed, "they every one departed to go to bed at their own houses, and Darius, the King, went to bed."

The King slept lightly, and awakening he fell into conversation with his three Guards. He suggested, as a part of the festivities of the morrow, that they three engage in a public discussion of some interesting question, as had been the custom on similar occasions from time immemorial, and that he would reward with a princely gift the successful contestant. The King then proposed the following question:

"Whether Wine was not the strongest? Whether Kings were not such? Whether Women were not such, or whether TRUTH was not strongest of all?"

Esdras makes the Guards suggest both the questions and the prize, but we follow the story as related by Josephus.

Again the King slept, and the Guards prepared for the contest of the morning. When the King arose he sent for the Princes and Rulers to meet him in the Audience Chamber, and witness the contest between his Guards.

This contest began, in time, by one of the Guards declaiming in favor of the strength of Wine, followed by another in favor of the power of the King. Then the Jew, Zerubbabel, contended for the supremacy of Woman, concluding with a noble deliverance in favor of TRUTH.

The brilliant assembly burst forth into applause when Zerubbabel concluded, and the King awarded him the prize in these words: "Ask for somewhat over and above what I have promised, for I would give it unto you because of your wisdom."

[p. 13]

Then "Zerubbabel put him in mind of the vow he had made in case he should ever have the kingdom. Now this vow was to build Jerusalem, and to rebuild therein the Temple of God, as also to restore the vessels which Nebuchadnezzar had pillaged and carried to Babylon."

And behold the King was pleased to arise and to kiss his eloquent Guard, and to grant his request. Zerubbabel returned to his people in Jerusalem with great joy, and the rebuilding of the city and Temple was immediately resumed. Darius not only kept his vow, but he made large contributions to the rebuilding out of the royal treasury.

The details adapted to more beautifully round out the drama, and to more pointedly teach the lesson of the almighty force and the importance of TRUTH are esoteric.

  

OFFICERS AND SPECIAL MEMBERS

  

OF A COUNCIL OF THE ILLUSTRIOUS ORDER OF THE RED CROSS:

          Sovereign Master

       SM

        

     
      Prince Chancellor

       PC

        

     
      Prince Master of the Palace

       PMP

        

     
      Excellent High Priest

       HP

        

     
      Master of Cavalry

       MC

       1

     
      Master of Infantry

       MI

       2

     
      Master of Finance

       MF

       3

     
      Master of Dispatches

       MD

       4

     
      Standard Bearer

       StB

       5

     
      Sword Bearer

       SwB

       6

     
      Warder

       W

       7

     
      Sentinel

       Sen.

        

     
      Guards

       Gd

       o

     
      Princes and Rulers

       

        

     
   The Sovereign Master, Prince Chancellor and Prince Master of the Palace will wear the regulation oriental robes. The Master of Cavalry should be in Persian Uniform, and not in the Uniform of the Red Cross. The members designated as the Princes and Rulers should be in oriental dress. The Uniform of the Red Cross is as follows:

[p. 14]

Green Sash, Belt and Sword. A Red Cross may be on the Sash. A Cap, with the Red Cross of the Order in front.

A Companion of the Red Cross should always appear in the Audience Chamber clad in dark garments.

______________

The "Fatigue Uniform" of a Knight Templar should not appear in the ceremonies of the Order of the Red Cross. The Templar Baldric turned inside out will serve as a Sash. If the Passion Cross on the Templar Cap is movable it can be replaced by the Red Cross of the Order, or a cover, on which is the Red Cross of the Order, may be put on the Templar Cap. The Templar Sword will be sufficient.

In the Grand Council the High Priest wears the regulation Robes of the Royal Arch Chapter, but these should not be worn by him in the Audience Chamber.

The Grand Council should be clothed in Jewish Robes and Turbans, as should also be the Companion Conductor and Warder, while in attendance upon the Grand Council. The Jewish Guards should also be in Jewish Robes and Turbans.

When a Commandery is unable to furnish these Jewish Robes, the members of the Grand Council, Companion Conductor, Guards and Warder should appear in plain civilian dress, and not in Red Cross Uniform, while in attendance upon the Grand Council.

It is of importance that full equipments should be provided for the ceremonies of the Red Cross. These equipments should be prepared with good taste, and should always be kept in good order and ready for immediate use.

The Fetters, Garb of Slavery, Robe and Coronet should be easily put on and taken off.

The "Altar of Masonry" may be small, so as to be easily moved from place to place, and may be placed in the northwest corner of the Audience Chamber, ready for use when called for.

The "Bridge" and the "Banners" in the discretion of the Commanderies.

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 15]

  

TO OPEN A COUNCIL OF THE RED CROSS.

THE Council Chamber is suitably arrayed under the direction of the Prince Master of the Palace.

  

RECEPTION OF SOVEREIGN MASTER.

  

PRAYER.

ALMIGHTY and Eternal Jehovah, the only living and true God whose throne is in the heavens, yet who regardest alike the princes and the people that dwell upon earth, we

[p. 16]

desire to thank thee for the many mercies and blessings with which thou hast been pleased to crown our lives. We thank thee for this social and fraternal intercourse with our Companions. Be mercifully near us at all times, and give us the aid of thy Holy Spirit to guide us into all TRUTH. Grant us thy grace to cheer and strengthen us in our journey through life, and deliverance from the snares and pitfalls of the Evil One. Incline our hearts to seek thy favor and protection, as our rightful Sovereign, that we may not be impeded in the great work of erecting a spiritual edifice that shall endure forever. Pardon all our sins, we beseech thee, and finally admit us into the presence of the King of Kings, as members of his eternal household. AMEN! Response, AMEN!

_________

  

OR THIS:

MERCIFUL Father, have mercy upon us, we beseech thee; put understanding in our minds, enlighten our eyes, and cause our hearts to cleave to thy law. Because we have trusted in thy Name we will rejoice and be glad in thy salvation, and in thy mercies, O Lord, our God. Cause us to cleave unto thy great Name forever, and bring upon us from the four corners of the earth the blessing of peace, harmony and prosperity. Blessed art thou, O Lord God, who hast chosen thy people in love. And when we have accomplished thy will upon earth receive us to thyself, and unto thy great and holy Name shall be the glory for ever and ever. AMEN! Response, AMEN.

  

SIGNS.

[p. 17]

  

REHEARSAL OF DUTIES.

In this rehearsal each Officer, when addressed, will arise and SALUTE. * * * The Officer will come to Carry Swords, and stand firm until the close of the Ceremonial, or until a subsequent order issued to him * * *

_____________

  

THE WORK.

______

The Council of the Illustrious Order of the Red Cross being open, and the COUNCIL HALL being properly equipped for the formation of the Grand Council.

  

HIGH PRIEST'S ADDRESS.

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 18]

  

THE RECORDS OF OUR FATHERS.

Now in the second year of their coming unto the house of God at Jerusalem, in the second month, began Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua the son of Jozadak, and the remnant of their brethren the priests and the Levites and all they that were come out of the captivity unto Jerusalem; and appointed the Levites, from twenty years old and upward, to set forward the work of the house of the Lord. Then stood Jeshua with his sons and his brethren, Cadmiel and his sons, the sons of Judah, together, to set forward the workmen in the house of God: the sons of Henadad, with their sons and their brethren the Levites. And when the builders laid the foundation of the temple of the Lord, they set the priests in their apparel with trumpets, and the Levites the sons of Asaph with cymbals, to praise the Lord, after the ordinance of David king of Israel. And they sang together by course in praising and giving thanks unto the Lord; because he is good, for his mercy endureth forever toward Israel. And all the people shouted with a great shout, when they praised the Lord, because the foundation of the house of the Lord was laid.

Now when the adversaries of Judah and Benjamin heard that the children of the captivity builded the temple unto the Lord God of Israel; then they came to Zerubbabel, and to the chief of the fathers, and said unto them, Let us build with you: for we seek your God, as ye do; and we do sacrifice unto him since the days of Esarhaddon king of Assur, which brought us up hither. But Zerubbabel, and Jeshua, and the rest of the chief of the fathers of Israel, said unto them, Ye have nothing to do with us to build an house unto our God; but we ourselves together will build unto the Lord God of Israel, as king Cyrus the king of Persia hath commanded us. Then the people of the land weakened the

[p. 19]

hands of the people of Judah, and troubled them in building, and hired counsellors against them, to frustrate their purpose, all the days of Cyrus king of Persia, even until the reign of Darius king of Persia. And in the reign of Ahasuerus, in the beginning of his reign, wrote they unto him an accusation against the inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem. And in the days of Artaxerxes wrote Bishlam, Mithredath, Tabeel, and the rest of their companions, unto Artaxerxes king of Persia; and the writing of the letter was written in the Syrian tongue, and interpreted in the Syrian tongue. Rehum the chancellor and Shimshai the scribe wrote a letter against Jerusalem to Artaxerxes the king in this sort: This is the copy of the letter that they sent unto him, even unto Artaxerxes the king; Thy servants the men on this side of the river, and at such a time. Be it known unto the king, that the Jews which came up from thee to us are come unto Jerusalem, building the rebellious and the bad city, and have set up the walls thereof, and joined the foundations. Be it known now unto the king, that, if this city be builded, and the walls set up again, then will they not pay toll, tribute, and custom, and so thou shalt endamage the revenue of the kings. Now because we have maintenance from the king's palace, and it was not meet for us to see the king's dishonor, therefore have we sent and certified the king; that search may be made in the book of the records of thy fathers: so shalt thou find in the book of the records, and know that this city is a rebellious city, and hurtful unto kings and provinces, and that they have moved sedition within the same of old time: for which cause was this city destroyed. We certify the king that, if this city be builded again, and the walls thereof set up, by this means thou shalt have no portion on this side the river. Then sent the king an answer unto Rehum the chancellor, and to Shimshai the scribe, and to the rest of their companions that

[p. 20]

dwell in Samaria, and unto the rest beyond the river, Peace, and at such a time. The letter which ye sent unto us hath been plainly read before me. And I commanded, and search hath been made, and it is found that this city of old time hath made insurrection against kings, and that rebellion and sedition have been made therein. There have been mighty kings also over Jerusalem, which have ruled over all countries beyond the river; and toll, tribute, and custom, was paid unto them. Give ye now commandment to cause these men to cease, and that this city be not builded, until another commandment shall be given from me. Take heed now that ye fail not to do this: why should damage grow to the hurt of the kings? Now when the copy of king Artaxerxes' letter was read before Rehum, and Shimshai the scribe, and their companions, they went up in haste to Jerusalem unto the Jews, and made them to cease by force and power. Then ceased the work of the house of God which is at Jerusalem. So it ceased unto the second year of the reign of Darius king of Persia.

  

PLEDGES OF FIDELITY.

  

THE SWORD.

The glittering blade of the Sword entrusted to a Representative of the Grand Council should symbolize tie purity of his intentions.

  

THE GREEN SASH.

The color of his Sash should in all places bring him cheering and hallowed memories.

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 21]

  

THE JOURNEY.

The road from Jerusalem to Susa, the chief treasury of Persia, and one of the favorite cities of the Persian kings, lay in part through the country restored to the Jews by the decree of Cyrus, but after crossing the Euphrates it was entirely in the domain of King Darius. Indeed, a more cautious statement would limit the Jewish country to west of the Jordan.

The Jews attempted, in an embarrassed way, to picket their own country, and to provide passes with which to distinguish their friends. The domain of the Persian monarch was under strict military surveillance, and countersigns were absolutely necessary to travel therein with safety.

Darius lived in daily dread of spies and secret enemies front among the defeated, though not destroyed, Magians. The discipline of the empire was sternly strict, and the slightest suspicion of disloyalty led to captivity and death.

  

IN THE PRESENCE OF THE KING.

[p. 22]

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE IMMEMORIAL DISCUSSION.

On the morning succeeding the great feast at the capital of the Persian empire, Darius listened to the oratorical contests of the three Guards of the Bed-chamber, in reply to the question, "Which is the greatest, the strength of WINE, the power of the KING, or the influence of WOMAN?"

  

THE STRENGTH OF WINE.

O ye Princes and Rulers, how exceeding strong is Wine! it causeth all men to err that drink it; it maketh the mind of the King and the beggar to be all one; of the bondman and freeman, of the poor man and the rich; it turneth also every thought into jollity and mirth, so that a man remembereth neither sorrow nor debt; it changeth and elevateth the spirits, and enliveneth the heavy hearts of the miserable. It maketh a man forget his brethren and draw his sword against his best friends. O ye Princes and Rulers, is not Wine the strongest, that forceth us to do these things?

[p. 23]

  

THE POWER OF THE KING.

It is beyond dispute, O Princes and Rulers, that God has made man master of all things under the sun; to command them, to make use of them, and to apply them to his service as he pleases; but, whereas men have only dominion over other sublunary creatures, Kings have an authority even over men themselves, and a right of ruling them by will and pleasure.

Now, he that is master of those who are masters of all things else, hath no earthly thing above him.

  

THE INFLUENCE OF WOMAN.

O Princes and Rulers, the force of wine is not to be denied, neither is that of Kings, that unites so many men in one common bond of allegiance; but, the supereminency of Woman is yet above all this: for Kings are but the gifts of women, and they are also the mothers of those that cultivate our vineyards. Women have power to make us abandon our very country and relations, and many times to forget the best friends we have in the world, and, forsaking all . other comforts, to live and die with them.

But when all is said, neither they, nor Wine, nor Kings are comparable to the almighty force of Truth.

As for all other things, they are mortal and transient, but Truth alone is unchangeable and everlasting; the benefits we receive from it are subject to no variations or vicissitudes of time or fortune.

In her judgment is no unrighteousness, and she is the strength, wisdom, power, and majesty of all ages.

[p. 24]

"Great is TRUTH, and mighty above all things."

"BLESSED BE THE GOD OF TRUTH."

  

THE PLEA FOR REMEMBRANCE.

O King, remember thy vow, which thou hast vowed, to build Jerusalem in the day when thou shouldst come to thy kingdom, and restore the holy vessels which were taken away out of Jerusalem. Thou hast also vowed to build up the Temple, which was burned when Judah was made desolate by the Chaldees.

And now, O King, this is that I desire of thee, that thou make good the vow, the performance whereof with thine own mouth thou hast vowed to the King of Heaven.

  

THE DECREE.

Moreover, I make a decree what ye shall do to the elders of these Jews for the building of this house of God: that of the king's goods, even of the tribute beyond the river, forthwith expenses be given unto these men, that they be not hindered. And that which they have need of, both young bullocks, and rams, and lambs, for the burnt offerings of the God of heaven, wheat, salt, wine, and oil, according to the appointment of the priests which are at Jerusalem, let it be given them day by day without fail: that they may offer sacrifices of sweet savours unto the God of heaven, and pray for the life of the king, and of his sons. Also I have made a decree, that whosoever shall alter this word, let timber be pulled down from his house, and being set up, let him be hanged thereon; and let his house be made a dunghill for this. Ezra vi: 8-11

[p. 25]

  

FOUNDING THE NEW ORDER.

  

THE VOW.

1.      2.      3.      4.      5.      6.

The Princes of Persia and Rulers of the Medes having arisen to witness the Vow, resume their seats with approbation.

  

THE GREEN SASH.

To the Royal Prince it was a perpetual incentive to the performance of every duty; to a Companion of the Red Cross it is a reminder that TRUTH is a divine attribute, and the foundation of every virtue.

  

THE SWORD.

It is worthy of being worn by a Companion of the Red Cross, as well as by the Crown Prince of the House of Judah.

  

MEANS OF RECOGNITION.

  

THE BANNER OF THE ORDER.

The Banner of the Order is of green color. In its center there is a Star of seven points, within which is a red Cross of equal arms and angles, surrounded by the MOTTO: "Magna est Veritas, et Praevalebit,"--"Great is Truth, and it will Prevail."

  

THE CROSS OF THE ORDER.

The Cross of the Order is of equal arms and angles, of blood-red color, with the letters D T J L on the extremities of the arms. The arms indicate DEITY, TRUTH, JUSTICE, LIBERTY.

[p. 26]

  

THE WELCOME.

With joy the new Companion is welcomed to a seat among his Companions.

  

THE BANQUET.

Never was banquet spread under more joyous surroundings. It is invariably served after the Council closes, if served at all.

_______________

  

TO CLOSE THE COUNCIL.

The same precautionary steps precede the Closing as precede the Opening of a Council of the Illustrious Order of the Red Cross.

The Sovereign Master, in his discretion, may hold Rehearsal of Duties before closing.

  

PRAYER

O LORD our God, we thank thee, we praise thee, we magnify thee for the gift of thy holy Light. Make it to shine into our hearts, and write thy Law upon our consciences.

And now as we go out into, the world again may the words of our mouths, and the meditations of our hearts, be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, our strength and our redeemer. AMEN! Response, AMEN!

S.M.--Companions, the priceless Jewels of humanity are "the beauty of LOVE, the charm of FRIENDSHIP, the sacredness of SORROW, the heroism of PATIENCE, the courage of TRUTH"! Go in peace, and, "May the Lord bless thee, and keep thee: the Lord make his face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee: the Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace."

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 27]

  

THREE ANCIENT CITIES OF PERSIA.

PERSEPOLIS.--This was the chief city, or capital, of the Persian kingdom proper. Alexander destroyed it, and Darius Hystaspes is supposed to have founded it. To-day its ruins stand in the valley of Schiraz, the wonder of the world. These ruins are an immense platform, fifty feet above the plain, hewn partly out of the mountain itself, the remainder built of marble blocks from twenty to sixty feet in length, so nicely fitted together that the joints are scarcely discernible to-day. This platform is fourteen hundred feet long, and nine hundred feet wide, and faces the four quarters of the world. The ascent from the plain is made by marble steps, passing colossal figures, until you reach the gigantic columns, with their beautiful capitals, twelve to fifteen feet in circumference, and fifty feet high, which supported the cedar roof that protected the residents from the hot sun. And there you see rows of carved images, men of every nation and clime.

This was the palace of Darius. To this palace Ahasuerus may have brought his fair Jewish wife, Esther, from Tusa, and from there had her conducted to the other palace still farther up the mountain, which the drunken Alexander burned B. C. 330.

SUSA, or SHUSHAN.--So named because of the lilies that abounded in the valley. In Daniel's time it was in possession of the Babylonians, but when Cyrus conquered Babylon he transferred it to Persia.

It was from this city of Shushan that Darius issued his decree for the rebuilding of Jerusalem, and its Temple, it being the winter residence of Darius, and of all the Persian kings after Cyrus. In gratitude for this decree the Jews called the eastern gate of the Second Temple the Gate of Shushan. It is said that a resemblance of the city of Shushan was engraved upon that gate.

ECBATANA.--This was a city of the Medes, a beautiful place, and after the union of the Medes and Persians became a favorite summer residence of the Persian monarchs.

In this city is shown to-day the tombs of Mordecai and Esther, but why they should have been interred in that city is a mystery.

[p. 28]

It was in Ecbatana that Cyrus held his capital, and in its archives, therefore, was found the roll which proved to Darius that Cyrus had made a decree allowing the Jews to rebuild the Temple.

It is held by many that it was in this city of Ecbatana that Zoroaster made his first appearance.

_______________________

  

THE RELIGION OF THE ANCIENT PERSIANS.

Up to the seizure of the throne by Smerdis the Magian religion was dominant among the Medes and Persians. That religion abominated the worship of images, as Judaism did, and worshiped the One God only by fire. This religion fell into disgrace when its chief, Smerdis, was driven from the throne with such awful slaughter. Darius was a Magian at that time, and for some time afterwards.

Sabianism was idolatry, the opposite of Magianism, but it gained favor on the disgrace of the Magians. This religion consisted chiefly in the worship of the host of heaven,--hence the name from tsaba, host,--and the worship of the planets. In his later life this religion became so powerful that Darius gave it his adherence.

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 29]

  

CONCLUDING REMARKS.

Acti labores jucundi.

THE captives released under the decree of the great Cyrus, issued B. C. 536, entered the desolated city of Jerusalem on the 10th day of Tebeth, B. C. 535, under the leadership of Zerubbabel. On the 23d day of Adar, B. C. 515, the Second Temple was completed. It was dedicated, and the Priests and Levites assigned to their duties.

The second installment of returning captives entered Jerusalem on the 10th of Schebet, B. C. 458, under the leadership of Ezra. He began a reformation of the people by compelling them to put away their unbelieving wives. The poor, impoverished, rain-soaked people obeyed the imperative commands of this lineal descendant of Aaron when they had assembled themselves in the city, five months afterwards. They put away the wives they had brought up with them from Babylon, kept a solemn fast, and entered into a covenant to walk in God's law, as given them by his servant Moses.

The third installment entered Jerusalem, under the guidance of Nehemiah, B. C. 445, when Nehemiah became Governor. Those who, for various reasons, preferred to remain in the Persian country, were henceforth known as "The Dispersion."

On the first day of Nisan, B. C. 445, a solemn fast was held, by order of Nehemiah, and on the 24th day of the same month there was another. At these Ezra read the Book of the Law of Moses to the people, and after seven days they "rejoiced and feasted as they had not done since the days of Joshua, the son of Nun." It was then they covenanted to keep the seventh day, and the seventh year.

Thus was Israel re-established in Jerusalem, and the city and its Temple rebuilt. Other cities were built, and peace was within their walls, and prosperity within their palaces.

__________

The ceremonials of the Illustrious Order of the Red Cross furnish ample scope for the best of elocutionary work. Dignity of manner, clearness of enunciation, and careful reading of the lines are absolutely necessary to the full development of the Ritual.

[p. 30]

A true Mason will lay down his life rather than surrender his integrity. A Companion of the Red Cross holds his engagements sacred and inviolable, and will not accept favors or emoluments at the sacrifice of his integrity. Nor will he draw his sword in the cause of Injustice, Falsehood, or Oppression, for JUSTICE, TRUTH, and LIBERTY are the Grand Characteristics of that Illustrious Order.

__________

Endurance, coupled with faith and perseverance, is a shining characteristic of a Companion of the Red Cross. He is taught a lesson he never forgets in the secession of the Ten Tribes of Israel, when told by Rehoboam, the son of Solomon, that his father chastised them with whips, but that he would chastise them with scorpions. They withdrew from their allegiance, and left the tribes of JUDAH and BENJAMIN in possession of Jerusalem, its Temple, and the traditions. Their lack of patience and endurance, under such trying circumstances, resulted in their disappearance as tribes, or as a people. And to-day the Jews, scattered all over the face of the earth, claim descent from the two patient tribes,--Judah and Benjamin.

__________

Those who seek to destroy their neighbors often overreach themselves as did that Governor and nobleman of the Medo-Persian domain,--TATNAI and SHETHAR-BOZNAI. The search among the archives, in Ecbatana, which they petitioned Darius to have made, resulted in the discovery of the Decree made by Cyrus, which overthrew their hopes of preventing the rebuilding of Jerusalem and its Temple. God often causes the wrath of man to praise him.

__________

There is carved upon the Corner-Stone of the Illustrious Order of the Red Cross this Motto: "VERITAS praevalebit." And surely an Order so grounded is of infinite importance to the human family. Verily, TRUTH will prevail.

__________

A Companion of the Red Cross has engraved upon his escutcheon these words: "LIBERTAS et natale solum." Can such a man be other than a good citizen? Aye, such men are willing to shed their blood in defense of liberty and native land.

[p. 31]

"Wo unto them that decree unrighteous decrees, and that write the injustice that they have adjudged. Judge the poor with righteousness, and according to equity relieve the lowly ones of earth. Execute true judgment, and cause every one to show mercy and compassion to his brother; and let none oppress the widow nor the fatherless, the stranger nor the poor."

__________

The origin of the device of the EAGLE on royal banners can be traced to very early periods. It was the ensign of the ancient Kings of the Medo-Persian empire, of Persia and Babylon. The device was adopted by Charlemagne to denote the union of the black eagle of the east with the golden eagle of the west, typifying the "Holy Roman Empire."

__________

Sceptre (Greek, skeptron; Hebrew, shebet) means rod of command, or staff of authority. It is the sign of power and authority, and is therefore to be preferred, in the Creation of a Companion, to the use of a Sword.

__________

This was the promise: Zerubbabel was appointed Governor, or Tirshatha (Ezra ii: 63), of Judah by Darius. Of Zerubbabel God said: "Speak now to Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to Joshua the son of Josedech, the high priest, and to the residue of the people, saying, Who is left among you that saw this house in her first glory? and how do ye see it now? is it not in your eyes in comparison of it as nothing? " Haggai ii: 2, 3.

"The hands of Zerubbabel have laid the foundation of this house; his hands shall also finish it." Zechariah iv: 9.

__________

  

SWORD CUTS--PASSES.

It is important to the purposes of this Monitor to describe only three Cuts, and the Thrust. These are Ritualistic, and not military.

The regular Cuts of the Sword are: On left shoulder, ONE; on right shoulder, TWO; on left leg, THREE; on right leg, FOUR. This is the succession, ritualistically speaking: Two, ONE, THREE, FOUR.

[p. 32]

The following illustrates these Cuts. The Swords numbered "1" are of the First Division, and those numbered "2" are of the Second Division. The Cuts are counted in illustration as given, and not as regularly numbered Sword Cuts.

These Cuts should be executed with the flat of the blade, and not with the edge. The same side of the blade touches in every Cut. It is important to remember this, and thereby avoid the awkward efforts sometimes made to reverse the blade at each Cut.

These Cuts also illustrate "Over an Arch of Steel" (Cut Three) and "Under an Arch of Steel" (Cut One).

  

"SALUTE" AND "PRESENT."

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 33]

  

THE VALIANT AND MAGNANIMOUS

  

ORDER OF THE TEMPLE.

  

Monitorial Instructions, Notes, Comments, and Suggestions.

  

HISTORY OF THE ORDER OF THE TEMPLE.

IN the year of our Lord 1118 the following gentlemen formed themselves into a society, in the city of Jerusalem, whose duty it was to escort pilgrims to and from the Holy City, through the mountain defiles and dangerous passes, en route, viz.: Hugh de Payen, a gentleman named Rossal, Godfrey de St. Omer, Godfrey Bissol, Payen de Montdidier, Archambaud de Saint-Aignan, and two gentlemen named D'Andre and De Gondemare, respectively. These eight were joined by Hugh of Champagne seven years later. And the society thus formed was without rules, and its members wore no particular habit. They lived in a house close by the Temple, and soon came to be known as Knights of the Temple, and Templars. That house was a part of the palace of the western kings, which had been set apart as the home of the pilgrims, and their guards. The Church of the Holy Sepulchre was the chapel of the new society.

Hugh de Payen went to Rome in 1127 to ask of Pope Honorius II a new crusade, and while there besought his Holiness to form the little society at Jerusalem into a religious and military order. The Pope referred him to the Council of Troyes, then in session, which appointed St. Bernard to draw up rules for the Order, and prescribe for it a dress. The white dress prescribed by St. Bernard had a red cross added by Pope Eugenius III, years afterwards.

The name assumed by this society is not known to us with perfect accuracy. They were known as "The Brethren of the Order of the Temple," and as "Brethren of the Soldiery of the Temple," and as "Brethren of the Temple." They were referred to as "Pauperes

[p. 34]

[paragraph continues] Commilitones Christi et Templi Solomonis." It is supposed that their armorial bearing of two knights riding one horse referred to this poverty, but that is not certain. Neither is it clear that the bearing alluded to "Brotherly Love," or even to "Humility." True they were vowed to chastity, poverty, and obedience, but the king supplied all their wants in the beginning, and the Order soon began to revel in opulence.

The enthusiasm which this society of nine gallant young gentlemen aroused all over Christendom tells the story of the popular craze. The Pope, Prelates, Kings, and all the people, praised their chivalry, and eager youths clamored for admission to their ranks. The Pope promised heaven to all who would take the Cross against the Saracens. Kings settled rich estates upon the new Order, on which Priories were founded. The Order increased in numbers with astounding rapidity. They were young nobles of hot blood, of sinews of steel, and of great physical endurance. These became Templars knowing that they were to be forever upon the field, and never to know peace.

The Templars had no lady-love save Mary, Queen of Heaven; they wore no ornaments, their hair was to be kept short, and their dress plain white. They were to eat two and two at the same table, so that each might know that the other did not fast, which was strictly forbidden. They were to attend chapel services, but if on duty at that time they might say their prayers in bed. They were to hold no correspondence with the outer world, nor could a Brother walk alone. Amusements were not encouraged, and all conversation was serious. The Templar had no personal wealth, and if he was taken prisoner by the Saracen he was to be left to his fate,--no ransom could be paid for him. The Templar well knew that his fate was the alternative of the Koran or the sword. Hugh de Payen took three hundred such men back to Jerusalem with him, and before five years had passed every one of these had been killed.

The Hospitalers, which had been organized into a military order by Godfrey de Bouillon, became envious of the reputation of the Templars, and dissensions arose, though both frequently fought gallantly side by side against the common enemy. The dissensions began as early as 1179, and continued, with frequent reconciliations, until the suppression of the Order of the Temple, in 1314. In 1251 the two Orders actually fought a battle, in which the Templars were almost cut to pieces. But their decimated ranks were speedily filled.

[p. 35]

We need not attempt to give even a summary of the great battles that were fought by the Templars, or recite even instances of their almost superhuman prowess. Time and space would fail us. Princes came to fear them, and bishops to hate them. What cared they? They were rich; there were no scandals afloat; they were both churchmen and warriors; their nation was the Catholic Church; their only chief the Pope. They mixed in no struggles unless the Pope's interests were involved; their persons were sacred. They ever held up the Cross against the Crescent. They were proportionally hated, and their counsels were rejected when they could have secured by treaty free access to Jerusalem, and peace with the Soldans in the last crusade. Poor William of Sonnac! His eye had just been dashed out, and he hastened to plead with the Christian chiefs to enter into treaty. His advice was scorned. Then dashing the blood from his eyeless socket he rushed to horse, and wildly shouted, "Beauceant to the front! Beauceant and death!" He and all his companions fell sword in hand that day. Aye, there never was known a Templar who was a coward.

In 1301 Boniface III was Pope, and Philip the Fair was King of France. A feud broke out between them, Boniface claiming temporal power in France. The Templars, as usual, stood by the Pope, and they sent him funds. Boniface died within two years, and his successor, Benedict XI, died within the year of his exaltation. This was the opportunity for Philip, who by intriguing and promises secured the election of the ambitious Archbishop of Bordeaux. He assumed the tiara under the title of Clement V. He had agreed to live in France, and was to do the bidding of Philip. Clement approved the demand which Philip had made upon the priests for subsidies, and said nothing about the Templars being compelled to likewise submit to these taxations. In fact, Philip had called Boniface "His Fatuity" in place of "His Holiness," and burned the Pope's Bull of Excommunication with great eclat. Then he made a prisoner of the Holy Father, which created a great scandal.

Clement V was wiser than Boniface III, and Philip had in him an unswerving ally when he sought to suppress the Templars, who sided with his enemy, Boniface III, and desired to gather into the treasury of France the immense riches of that Order. The Templars never suspected for a moment that their only master, the Pope, would betray them; and, in fact, had not a suspicion of their danger. They lived so haughtily apart from all the world that no hint of the

[p. 36]

[paragraph continues] King's desire to procure testimony against them reached their ears. But it reached the ears of others, among whom were two renegades, one a Knight Templar disgraced from the dignity of Prior, the other a member of the Order dismissed for infamous impieties. These wretches were Esquin von Florian, Prior of Montfaucon, the other one Noffodei. They were in prison at Paris, and under sentence of death.

These villains informed their jailer that if their lives were spared they would put the King in possession of the secret impieties of the Templars. The King examined them himself; and the revelations they made, among others, were:

1. The Templars were more like Mohammedans than Christians.

2. The Novices were required to deny Christ, and to spit upon the Cross.

3. The Templars worshiped idols, despised the sacraments, murdered, and secretly buried all betrayers of their secrets, and practiced theft and sodomy.

4. The Templars betrayed the Holy Land to the Infidels.

Philip took down these accusations, and pretended to believe them, although he knew that no intimation of such crimes had even been whispered in any of the states of Christendom, in which the Templars lived and held rich preceptories.

We may well spare the reader a recital of the deceptions, misrepresentations, hypocrisy and falsehoods that attended the so-called inquiries made into those charges by the Pope and his bishops. De Molai had been to see the Pope, in response to an affectionate letter from His Holiness, although the charges were in his hands over a year before writing so affectionately. The Pope did not allude to the accusations, and De Molai had not heard of them. The Grand Master came with a band of trusted Knights, and twelve mules laden with chests of gold and silver. The wily Philip received him without signs of displeasure. It was now 1306, nearly two years since the accusations had been made. Rumors at last reached the Grand Master, and he grew uneasy. He went again to the Pope (1307) taking with him the four French preceptors, and earnestly denied the stories that he had heard. The Pope dismissed him as if he believed the Order innocent.

The conduct of both the Pope and the King lulled the Templars to absolute security all over France, and they continued to live on in haughty and friendless isolation until the morning of October 13,

[p. 37]

[paragraph continues] 1307, when every Templar in France was seized in his bed and carried to prison. The King gave the secret order of arrest, and the bishops, whom the Templars had so long defied, cordially co-operated, and flung them into their filthy dungeons.

Let us omit the farce of a trial, and relate some incidents. The prisoners died rapidly of hunger and exposure while being plied with promises of liberty if they would confess the guilt of the Grand Master, and of the Order. They were assured that the Grand Master had already confessed. A few said "yes," but the mass denied the infamous accusations. Many cried out,--"If the Grand Master so confessed he lied in his throat." These were brutally tortured, and thirty-six of them perished in the tortures. Some broke down and confessed, but withdrew the confession when the tortures had ceased. The poor Pope in horror protested, but the King accused him of trying to conceal the guilt of the Order. The inquiry went on, traitors confessed, Templars were deceived, and came to Paris under lying promises.

It is probable that under torture De Molai, an old man, emaciated by brutal treatment in prison, confessed to the guilt of the Order. But before the Church Commission he appeared stupefied when he heard the confession read. He cried out that the confession was false, averring that he could stand boiling, roasting, or even killing, but that prolonged tortures were beyond human endurance. His hands had been crushed until the blood ran from his nails. Others had had their feet held to the fire until they had dropped off. Confessions were made, and almost immediately withdrawn. A squabble arose between the Papal Commission and the Court of the Archbishop of Sens. This latter court assumed jurisdiction, and burned fifty-four of the Templars in one batch, on the spot where afterwards stood the infamous Bastile. The Commission mildly objected, and finally agreed upon a report that the Order of the Temple had disgraced itself; and should be suppressed. Pope Clement V approved the recommendation, and the Order was officially suppressed.

The tragic end of Grand Master De Molai is worthy of permanent record. The Bull of Suppression was read on a platform set up in the Cathedral Church, on March 18, 1314, and in the presence of the Grand Master and the Priors of France and Aquitaine. When the Cardinal read the vile charges De Molai cried with a loud voice that they were false, but the two Priors, terrified by death at the stake, adhered to their confessions. On the edge of the platform De Molai spoke: "I declare before heaven and earth, and I avow, although to

[p. 38]

my eternal shame, that I have committed the greatest of all crimes; but only by acknowledging the truth of those so foully charged against an Order, of which the truth to-day compels me to say that Order is innocent. The fearful spectacle that fronts me can not make me confirm a first lie by a second. Upon a condition so infamous, I heartily renounce a life already hateful to me."

As the sun went down that same evening the Grand Master perished in the flames on the island in the Seine, professing the innocence of the Order, and welcoming to the same fate one of the Priors who feared to stand by him in the cathedral, but who rallied, and died beside him. It is said that the dying Grand Master summoned both King and Pope to meet him at the judgment. Clement died within a few weeks, in great physical agony, and a vicious horse sent the cruel Philip to his account within a year thereafter.

So ended the ancient Order of the Templars. They were needed no longer, since Palestine had been abandoned to the Infidel. "Empires, monarchies, guilds, orders, societies, religious creeds, rise in the same way, and disappear when they stand in the way of other things."

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

  

HISTORY OF THE ORDER IN THE UNITED STATES.

"It would be a matter of pride and gratification," said Past Grand Master Hopkins, in his report to Grand Encampment, in 1889, "if we could trace the genealogy of our Templar organizations, by clear and unquestionable steps, back to a legitimate and respected parentage. But as that can not be done--as the very baptismal record of our Grand Encampment has been found to be erroneous--and so many subordinate bodies were formed without formality and without legality, we can only admit the established facts, and trust that the power, the purity, and the renown of our maturer years may soften the disappointment occasioned by the knowledge of an unfortunate origin."

The Grand Encampment was formed on the 10th of June, 1816, by delegates from the Grand Commanderies (then called Encampments) of Massachusetts, Rhode Island and New York.

[p. 39]

  

CONCLAVES AND GRAND MASTERS OF THE GRAND ENCAMPMENT

          NO.

       CONCLAVES.

       GRAND MASTERS.

       REMARKS.

     
      Place.

       Year.

       Name and Residence.

     
      1

       New York

       1816

       DeWitt Clinton, New York

        

     
      2

       New York

       1819

       DeWitt Clinton, New York

        

     
      3

       New York

       1826

       DeWitt Clinton, New York

       Died February 11, 1828.

     
      4

       New York

       1829

       Rev. Jonathan Nye, Claremont

       Died April 1, 1843.

     
      5

       Baltimore

       1832

       Rev. Jonathan Nye, Claremont

        

     
      6

       Washington

       1835

       James M. Allen, Cayuga, N. Y

       Died

     
      7

       Boston

       1838

       James M. Allen, Cayuga, N. Y

        

     
      8

       New York

       1841

       James M Allen Cayuga, N. Y

        

     
      9

       New Haven

       1844

       Archibald Bull, Troy, N. Y

       Died December 22, 1865.

     
      10

       Columbus

       1847

       William B. Hubbard, Columbus

       Died January 5, 1866.

     
      11

       Boston

       1850

       William B. Hubbard, Columbus

        

     
      12

       Lexington

       1853

       William B. Hubbard, Columbus

        

     
      13

       Hartford

       1856

       William B. Hubbard, Columbus

        

     
      14

       Chicago

       1859

       Benjamin B. French, Washington

       Died August 12, 1870.

     
      15

       New York

       1862

       Benjamin B. French, Washington

        

     
      16

       Columbus

       1865

       Henry L. Palmer, Milwaukee

        

     
      17

       St. Louis

       1868

       William S. Gardner, Newton, Mass

       Died April 14, 1888.

     
      18

       Baltimore

       1871

       John Q. A. Fellows, New Orleans

        

     
      19

       New Orleans

       1874

       James. H. Hopkins, Pittsburg

        

     
      20

       Cleveland

       1877

       Vincent L. Hurlbut, Chicago

        

     
      21

       Chicago

       1880

       Benjamin Dean, Boston

        

     
      22

       San Francisco

       1883

       Robert E. Withers, Wytheville, Va.

        

     
      23

       St. Louis

       1886

       Charles Roome, New York

       Died June 28, 1890.

     
      24

       Washington

       1889

       John P. S. Gobin, Lebanon, Pa.

        

     
      25

       Denver

       1892

       Hugh McCurdy, Corunna, Mich.

        

     
      26

       Boston

       1895

        

        

     
      27

        

       1898

        

        

     
      28

        

       1901

        

        

     
   
     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 40]

  

THE ANCIENT ORDER OF THE TEMPLE.

Grand Masters from origin to the death of De Molai:

          1.

       Hugh de Payen

       Chosen

       1118

     
      2.

       Robert of Burgundy

       "

       1139

     
      3.

       Everard de Barres

       "

       1147

     
      4.

       Bernard de Amelai

       "

       1151

     
      5.

       Bertrand de Blanquefort

       "

       1154

     
      6.

       Andrew de Montbar

       "

       1165

     
      7.

       Philip de Naplond

       "

       1169

     
      8.

       Odon de St. Amand

       "

       1171

     
      9.

       Arnold de Troye

       "

       1180

     
      10.

       John Terrio

       "

       1185

     
      11.

       Gerard Riderfort

       "

       1187

     
      12.

       Robert de Sable

       "

       1191

     
      13.

       Gilbert Gralius

       "

       1196

     
      14.

       Philip de Plesseis

       "

       1201

     
      15.

       William de Chartres

       "

       1217

     
      16.

       Peter de Montaigu

       "

       1218

     
      17.

       Armand de Perigord

       "

       1229

     
      18.

       Herman de Petragrorius

       "

       1237

     
      19.

       William de Rupefort

       "

       1244

     
      20.

       William de Sonnac

       "

       1247

     
      21.

       Reginald Vichier

       "

       1250

     
      22.

       Thomas Berard

       "

       1257

     
      23.

       William de Beaujeau

       "

       1274

     
      24.

       Theobald de Gaudin

       "

       1291

     
      25.

       James de Molai

       "

       1298

     
   De Molai burned at the stake, March 18, 1314.

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

  

BANNERS OF THE ORDER OF THE TEMPLE.

The following are the official descriptions of these Banners:

"The GRAND STANDARD is of white woolen or silk stuff, six feet in height and five feet in width, made tripartite at the bottom, fastened at the top to the cross-bar by nine rings; in the center of the field a blood-red Passion Cross, over which is the motto, "In hoc Signo Vinces," and under, "Non Nobis Domine! non Nobis, sed Nomini tuo da Gloriam!" The Cross to be four feet high, and the upright

[p. 41]

and bar to be seven inches wide. On the top of the staff a gilded globe or ball, four inches in diameter, surmounted by the Patriarchal Cross, twelve inches in height. The Cross to be crimson, edged with gold."

"The BEAUCEANT is of woolen or silk stuff, same form and dimensions as the Grand Standard, and suspended in the same manner. The upper half of this standard is black, the lower half white."

The Passion Cross is added in the drawing because the ancient Templars frequently so displayed it. And in that form they came to paint the Beauceant upon their kite-shaped Shields, as an armorial bearing.

Anciently the Beauceant was sometimes divided per pale, that is, perpendicularly, but generally it was divided per fesse, horizontally. The two forms here given were familiar to our ancient brethren.

The Beauceant was the battle flag of the Templars, and the Vexillum Belli of the Order was a white banner, on which was displayed, in full size, the "Red Cross of the Order." This standard was unfurled at the headquarters of the Grand Master during time of war, but the Beauceant was always carried into the battle. This standard was known as the "Red Cross War Banner of the Order," and the Beauceant as the "Battle Flag of the Order."

[p. 42]

  

CROSSES OF THE ORDER OF THE TEMPLE,

UNDER THE JURISDICTION OF THE GRAND ENCAMPMENT.

CROSS OF SALEM.--This is worn by the Grand Master as the proper emblem of his office. It is borne before the Pope in procession, and is therefore called the Pontifical Cross. When in purple enamel, and edged with gold, it is the insignia of the Grand Master and of Past Grand Masters.

PATRIARCHAL CROSS.--This Cross when in purple enamel, and edged with gold, is the insignia of all officers of the Grand Encampment below the Grand Master.

TEMPLAR CROSS.--This Cross is formed of four equilateral triangles joined at the apices, and is called the Cross patee. It is the insignia of the officers of a Grand Commandery.

It is insisted upon by learned antiquarians that this is the Red Cross of the Order which the ancient Templars wore. That Cross is described as of "equal limbs, somewhat wider and somewhat concave at the ends, heraldically called patee." The "Ancient Red," here given, illustrates that Cross, and the author of this Monitor is inclined to accept it in preference to the form adopted by the Grand Encampment of the United States. This Cross was given the Templars by Pope Eugenius, and some think the Cross he gave them had its lower limb longer than the others, as in the Passion Cross.

PASSION CROSS.--When in red enamel, and edged with gold, the Passion Cross is the insignia of a Commander of a Commandery. This Cross appears on the Grand Standard of the Order in the United States.

CROSS OF MALTA.--This Cross has not been adopted as insignia by the Grand Encampment. It is of white enamel, and edged with gold, and formed into eight points, as above, to represent the eight langes into which the Hospitalers (Knights of Malta) were divided.

[p. 43]

  

THE PARAPHERNALIA

OF A COMMANDERY OF KNIGHTS TEMPLAR.

1. A TRIANGLE.--This is a triangular Table, of the height of thirty-two inches, and with sides not less than six feet in length. It may be covered with black velvet, and be draped with silver-fringed valance.

2. THE CHAMBER.--This room to be entirely in black, even. to the floor.

3. THE SEPULCHRE.--The Chamber may be utilized as the Sepulchre by suspending a curtain, with a proper painting thereon, from the ceiling, so as to conceal, at the proper time, the equipments of the Chamber proper.

4. ASCENSION.--Lanterns are becoming popular, but a movable Scene is much to be preferred.

5. Altar, for Prelate's use in Prelate's Hall.

6. Lectern, for Prelate's use in Asylum.

7. Robe, Mitre, Cross, and Crozier, for Prelate.

8. Pilgrim's Garb, Sandals, Staff, and Scrip.

9. Sword and Buckler.

10. Robes and Hats, for Hermits.

11. Three Tents, changeable to Huts.

12. White Robe for Penitential Year.

13. Taper for the P. P.

14. Equipments for Triangle and the Chamber.

These are necessary to the proper rendition of the ceremonies of the Order of the Temple. It is not sufficient excuse for the absence of any of them that the funds of the Commandery do not permit their purchase. A Commandery unable to provide itself with a comfortable Asylum, and the proper equipments, should not try to exist. Templarism is a luxury, and should be looked upon as an expensive one by those seeking to establish and maintain a Commandery.

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE OFFICERS

OF A COMMANDERY OF KNIGHTS TEMPLAR.

          Eminent Commander

       EC

       1

     
      Generalissimo

       G

       2

     
      Captain General

       CG

       3

     
      Excellent Prelate

       P

       4

     
      Senior Warden

       SW

       5

     
      Junior Warden

       JW

       6

     
      [p. 44]

        

        

     
      Treasurer

       Tr

       7

     
      Recorder

       Rec

       8

     
      Standard Bearer

       StB

       9

     
      Sword Bearer

       Sw B

       10

     
      Warder

       W

       11

     
      Sentinel

       Sen

       12

     
      Guards (who are also Hermits)

       Gd

       13

     
   __________________

The officers of a Commandery should wear black clothing, and during the conferring of the Orders should be fully equipped as Knights Templar. The Prelate should wear the regulation Robes during the entire ceremonials.

The members of a Commandery should wear black clothing. Light clothing is not in harmony with the Order of the Temple, nor is it becoming under the regulation uniform.

The Guards must be fully equipped as Knights Templar, and never appear on duty in fatigue uniform.

When the Guards put on dark robes over their Templar equipments, and replace their chapeaux with soft hats, they become Hermits. The Hermits, thus robed, should represent aged men.

When the Pilgrimage ends the Hermits doff their robes, and they are in full Templar equipments as soon as they put on their chapeaux.

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 45]

  

TO OPEN A COMMANDERY.

__________________

KNIGHTS TEMPLAR begin the duties of their Asylums with quiet manner and subdued spirit. At the conclusion there should be only pathetic memories of solemn ceremonials. Levity, loud speech, military drill, are not to be encouraged in the ceremonies of Knighthood.

The Asylum is suitably arrayed under the direction of the Captain General, who is responsible to the Commander that everything is in readiness, both for the transaction of business and the reception of candidates.

  

RECEPTION OF EMINENT COMMANDER.

Each Jurisdiction will conduct this ceremonial according to the Tactics it may have adopted.

[p. 46]

  

COMMUNICATIONS.

ACROSS THE LINES.--      *   *   *

This ceremony admits of very little variation. Nevertheless the Grand Encampment permits each Grand Jurisdiction to conduct the same according to the Tactics it may have adopted for its government.

The ceremony should be conducted with dignity and precision. A knowledge of the use of the sword is necessary to that dignity and precision; therefore the Sword Exercise should not be neglected by the Commanderies.

Commanders will discover a greater precision when the numbers are called by the Captain General.

THROUGH THE LINES.--Care is necessary to make this ceremony effective.

[p. 47]

THROUGH BOTH LINES SIMULTANEOUSLY.--

  

FIRST ANNUNCIATION.

Behold, a virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and they shall call his name (or his name shall be called) Emmanuel, which being interpreted is, GOD WITH US. Matt. i: 23.

  

INSPECTION AND REVIEW,

If the Commander should desire to have Inspection and Review he will order them here. They will be conducted according to the Tactics of the Jurisdiction.

  

PRAYER.

ALMIGHTY and Most Merciful Father, send down upon us at this time the dew of thy heavenly grace; forgive our many transgressions; refresh us with the sweetness of thy love, and enrich our hearts with patience and hope. May

[p. 48]

we bear each other's burdens here, and may we live together hereafter in that blessed kingdom to which thy glorified Son will welcome his disciples. And to thy great and matchless Name shall be all the glory through Jesus Christ, Emmanuel. AMEN.

Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.

And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil: For thine is the kingdom, and the power; and the glory, forever. AMEN.

Other devotional exercises may occur at this point in the opening.

The S--s should be given by the entire Commandery, hence it is proper to give them after the Triangle is reduced.

  

REHEARSAL OF DUTIES.

Each officer being in his station, it is eminently fit and proper that he should rehearse aloud the duties that appertain to his office. He should do so in an attitude of dignified respect.

When an officer is addressed he will arise, and salute as directed in the Ritual. After he has replied he will stand fast until the conclusion of the opening ceremonial, or until addressed again.

  

SENTINEL INFORMED.

[p. 49]

  

IN SHORT FORM.

A Commandery should always be opened in Full Form. What is worth doing at all is worth doing well. Commanders should not gratify a mere desire to shirk formality. But if circumstances render abbreviation imperatively necessary, then there is a Form that MUST be observed. Under no circumstances shall less than that Essential Form be observed. Commanders will not overlook that Ritual requirement.

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

_____________________

  

THE WORK.

The Asylum in suitable array; the Guards ready to take their stations; the Escort selected and conveniently seated; the Chambers properly equipped, and the Questions on the pedestal of the Commander. The reception of a Candidate begins.

During the period that immediately succeeded the Crusades a civil Knight made a vow to visit the Sepulchre of his Lord and Master. Attracted by the chivalrous deeds of the Templars,--for their deeds of charity and pure beneficence had spread their fame both far and wide,--he sought admission to their ranks, the better to fulfill his vow.

The Commander of the House of the Temple to which he made application, finding that he came "under the tongue of good report," and that he was upright in character and moral of conduct, was moved to grant his prayer, but as a trial of his worthiness to be enrolled among the members of the Valiant and Magnanimous Order of the Temple enjoined upon him Seven Years of Preparation. These began with an unarmed pilgrimage towards the Holy Sepulchre.

[p. 50]

  

THE CHAMBER.

The first impressions are almost indelible. How important that they should be solemnized by proper discourse in the sombre surroundings of Reflection.

Sincerity of desire and purity of intention are absolutely necessary to the beginning of a pilgrimage to the Shrine of Emmanuel.

  

THE ASYLUM.

The Report includes the necessary answers, and the avouchment of the sincerity of desire, and the purity of motive. This made, the Seven Years of Preparation begin.

  

THE PILGRIMAGE.

Three years were passed by the petitioning civil Knight in his weary, unarmed pilgrimage, mostly in a friendly country, in which he received from pious Hermits bread and water; coarse diet, but such as he stood sadly in need of. From these pious anchorites he also received lessons of comfort and consolation.

Day after day the manhood of this gallant Knight asserted itself, and he yearned to cast off the pilgrim's garb and take up the sword in defense of his fellow pilgrims en route to the Holy Shrine. Thus yearning and pleading with his Templar escort, he reached, at the end of three years, another House of the Templars.

FIRST HERMIT.--

Let the brother of low degree rejoice in that he is exalted.

Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.

[p. 51]

Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps.

For ye were as sheep going astray; but are now returned unto the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls.

Let brotherly love continue.

SECOND HERMIT.--

To do good and to communicate forget not: for with such sacrifices God is well pleased.

Be not forgetful to entertain strangers: for thereby some have entertained angels unawares.

Remember them that are in bonds, as bound with them; and them which suffer adversity, as being yourselves also in the body.

Let us not be weary in well doing: for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not.

THIRD HERMIT.--

Charity shall cover the multitude of sins.

If a brother or sister be naked, and destitute of daily food, and one of you say unto them, Depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled; notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are needful to the body; what doth it profit?

Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life.

Three years of his Preparation being ended, another House of the Templars was reached.

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 52]

  

SECOND HOUSE OF THE TEMPLARS.

The escort pleaded that the four remaining years might be devoted to deeds of more exalted usefulness. He vouched for the sincerity of the suppliant.

The prayer of the suppliant was granted, and he was admitted to the Vows.

The laying aside of the pilgrim's garb, and the sandals, staff, and scrip, was followed by the taking up of the sword and buckler, and the consecrating of the sword to the noblest of uses.

  

THE VOW.

The gallant Knight sallied forth, armed with sword and buckler, ready to defend the Christian religion, or any pilgrim, or devotee, whether the same should be innocent maiden, destitute widow, or helpless orphan. Onward he pressed, with fortitude undaunted, accepting the duty of clothing the naked, feeding the hungry, and binding up the wounds of the afflicted; thus giving ample proof that he was worthy of drawing the sword he had so solemnly consecrated.

Pride and selfishness came with the accomplishment of valorous deeds, and he began to yearn for those honors and rewards that awaited the valiant Knights Templar, whom he found guarding the dangerous passes. No rewards, and no permanent honors awaited unorganized warfare. He had traveled on during three years with patience and perseverance, and during the three years last past he had given ample proofs of his courage and constancy. "Why should I longer be preparing?" he asked of his warrior escort. While he thus pleaded six years of his Preparation were accomplished, and they reached a third House of the

[p. 53]

[paragraph continues] Templars. Then he pleaded with his Templar companion to beseech the Commander of that House to remit the remaining year of his Preparation.

Naturally his Templar companion hesitated to make such a request, and carefully interrogated his ward. At last it was agreed that if the suppliant could declare in truth and soberness that his heart was right with man, and before God, he would vouch for him to the Commander, and present his petition for remission.

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

  

THIRD HOUSE OF THE TEMPLARS.

There is a legend told beyond seas to this effect: When the Papacy decided to suppress the Templars it sent out spies to apply to the Order as neophytes, and if admitted, to betray the secrets to the Church. Absolution from vows so taken was promised.

The Templars sought to protect themselves from treason of every kind, and it is said that when a neophyte was not absolutely above suspicion the Commander directed that he be tested by a solemn imprecation, accompanied by a draft from a cup containing blood taken from his veins at that moment, and mingled with wine. This in imitation of the blood and water that flowed from the Saviour's side. That ceremony was truly appalling in those days of superstition; it would have small influence were it practiced in this age of intelligence.

  

THE ENTRANCE.

[p. 54]

1. Fear God and keep his commandments.

2. Embalm in acts of charity, and deeds of pure beneficence.

3. Yield up life rather than forfeit integrity.

FIRST LESSON.--Then one of the twelve, called Judas Iscariot, went unto the chief priests,

And said unto them, What will ye give me, and I will deliver him unto you? And they covenanted with him for thirty pieces of silver.

And from that time he sought opportunity to betray him.

Now, the first day of the feast of unleavened bread the disciples came to Jesus, saying unto him, Where wilt thou that we prepare for thee to eat the passover?

And he said, Go into the city to such a man, and say unto him, The Master saith, My time is at hand; I will keep the passover at thy house with my disciples.

And the disciples did as Jesus had appointed them; and they made ready the passover.

Now when the even was come, he sat down with the twelve.

And as they did eat, he said, Verily I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me.

And they were exceeding sorrowful, and began every one of them to say unto him, Lord, is it I?

[p. 55]

And he answered and said, He that dippeth his hand with me in the dish, the same shall betray me.

The Son of man goeth as it is written of him: but woe unto that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed! it had been good for that man if he had not been born. Then Judas, which betrayed him, answered and said, Master, is it I? He said unto him, Thou hast said. Matt. xxvi: 14-25.

The number of the Apostles of our Saviour while on earth was Twelve. One of them betrayed his Lord and Master. His light was extinguished as the symbol of direst condemnation.

The extinguishment of light was the ancient symbol of the direst punishment for crime. Ezekiel xxxii: 7, says: "And when I shall put thee out (extinguish), I will cover the heaven, and make the stars thereof dark." How forcibly is this thought brought to the mind of the neophyte in this ceremonial.

SECOND LESSON.--Then cometh Jesus with them unto a place called Gethsemane, and saith unto the disciples, Sit ye here, while I go and pray yonder.

And he took with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, and began to be sorrowful and very heavy.

Then saith he unto them, My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death: tarry ye here, and watch with me.

And he went a little farther, and fell on his face, and prayed, saying, O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou wilt.

And he cometh unto the disciples, and findeth them asleep, and saith unto Peter, What, could ye not watch with me one hour?

[p. 56]

The lowering of the l--s alludes to the allegory related by Ezekiel, in regard to covering the heavens, and making the stars thereof dark.

Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation: the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.

He went away again the second time, and prayed, saying, O my Father, if this cup may not pass away from me, except I drink it, thy will be done.

And he came and found them asleep again: for their eyes were heavy.

And he left them, and went away again, and prayed the third time, saying the same words.

Then cometh he to his disciples, and saith unto them, Sleep on now, and take your rest: behold, the hour is at hand, and the Son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.

Rise, let us be going: behold, he is at hand that Both betray me.

And while he yet spake, lo, Judas, one of the twelve, came, and with him a great multitude with swords and staves, from the chief priests and elders of the people.

Now he that betrayed him gave them a sign, saying, Whomsoever I shall kiss, that same is he: hold him fast.

And forthwith he came to Jesus, and said, Hail, Master; and kissed him. Matt. xxvi: 41-49.

Uncovering with great solemnity, and with soft music, desirable.

It is the creed of the Templar that all the hopes of his poor perishing body rest upon the truths revealed in the Word of God; and that amid all the vicissitudes of life an unswerving faith in those truths can alone afford him that strong consolation which the world can neither give nor take away.

[p. 57]

THIRD LESSON.--    *   *   *

When Pilate saw that he could prevail nothing, but that rather a tumult was made, he took water, and washed his hands before the multitude, saying, I am innocent of the blood of this just person: see ye to it.

Then answered all the people, and said, His blood be on us, and on our children.

Then released he Barabbas unto them: and when he had scourged Jesus, he delivered him to be crucified.

Then the soldiers of the governor took Jesus into the common hall, and gathered unto him the whole band of soldiers.

And they stripped him, and put on him a scarlet robe.

And when they had platted a crown of thorns, they put it upon his head, and a reed in his right hand: and they bowed the knee before him, and mocked him, saying, Hail, King of the Jews!

And they spit upon him, and took the reed, and smote him on the head.

And after that they had mocked him, they took the robe off from him, and put his own raiment on him, and led him away to crucify him.

And as they came out, they found a man of Cyrene, Simon by name: him they compelled to bear his cross.

And when they were come unto a place called Golgotha, that is to say, a place of a skull,

They gave him vinegar to drink, mingled with gall: and when he had tasted thereof, he would not drink.

And they crucified him, and parted his garments, casting lots: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, They parted my garments among them, and upon my vesture did they cast lots.

And sitting down, they watched him there;

And set up over his head his accusation written, THIS IS JESUS, THE KING OF THE JEWS. Matt. xxvii: 24-37.

[p. 58]

Let each so wear the cross as to be deemed worthy to wear the crown.

The ecclesiastical legend that Simon of Cyrene was the "early friend and companion of our Saviour," and that "he fell a martyr to his faith," is not accepted by the Order of the Temple. It is probable that Simon was a chance spectator of the procession to Calvary, and that the Romans, scorning to burden themselves with the cross of execution, impressed this foreigner, and forced him to bear the fatal tree after Jesus had fallen under its weight. There appears to be some proof that Simon afterwards became a member of the Christian community.

Well might the suppliant, now more haughty than humble, be required to meditate upon the uncertainty of all things earthly. O death! who shall resist thy imperious mandate; who shall bid thee defiance!

The petitioning Knight was now required to devote the remaining year of Preparation to penitence and self-abnegation. Clothed in an emblem of innocence, and bearing symbols of Faith and Humility, he was enjoined to so let his light shine before men that they might glorify his Father which is in heaven.

  

"WHERE THE LORD LAY."

In the end of the sabbath, as it began to dawn toward the first day of the week, came Mary Magdalene and the other

[p. 59]

[paragraph continues] Mary to see the sepulchre. And, behold, there was a great earthquake: for the angel of the Lord descended from heaven,

and came and rolled back the stone from the door, and sat upon it. His countenance was like lightning, and his raiment white as snow: And for fear of him the keepers did shake, and became as dead men. And the angel answered and said unto the women, Fear not ye: for I know that ye seek Jesus, which was crucified. He is not here: for he is risen, as he said. Come, see the place where the Lord lay. Matt. xxviii: i-6.

And as it is appointed unto men once to die, but after this the judgment: So Christ was once offered to bear the, sins of many; and unto them that look for him shall he appear the second time without sin unto salvation. Heb. ix: 27, 28.

And go quickly, and tell his disciples that he is risen from the dead; and, behold, he goeth before you into Galilee; there shall ye see him: lo, I have told you.

And they departed quickly from the sepulchre with fear and great joy; and did run to bring his disciples word. And as they went to tell his disciples, behold, Jesus met them, saying, All hail. And they came and held him by the feet, and worshipped him. Then said Jesus unto them, Be not afraid: go tell my brethren that they go into Galilee, and there shall they see me. Matt. xxviii: 7-10.

  

TOWARDS BETHANY.

I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live. And whosoever

[p. 60]

liveth and believeth in me shall never die. John xi: 25, 26.

And he led them out as far as to Bethany, and he lifted up his hands, and blessed them. And it came to pass, while he blessed them, he was parted from them, and carried up into heaven. Luke xxiv: 50, 51.

  

HYMNS.

AIR, Old Hundred. L. M.

The rising God forsakes the tomb!
   Up to his Father's court he flies;
 Cherubic legions guard him home,
   And shout him welcome to the skies.

Break off your tears, ye saints, and tell
   How high our great deliv'rer reigns,
 Sing how he spoil'd the hosts of hell,
   And led the tyrant, death, in chains.

AIR, Hendon. 7s.

Lo! the heavens its Lord receives,
 Yet he loves the earth he leaves;
 Though returning to his throne,
 Still he calls mankind his own.

[p. 61]

Lord, though parted from our
 Far above the starry height, sight,
 Grant our hearts may thither rise,
 Seeking thee above the skies.

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

  

CLOSE OF SEVEN YEARS OF PREPARATION.

One mode of entrance is thus accomplished. Silence reigns.

Another mode of entrance is thus secured. Silence reigns.

Plaintive music touches the heart of the neophyte while gazing at the solemn observance of Prayer and Meditation. The memorial of the betrayal before him, he laments the disloyalty of the one so fully trusted. Thrilled by the surroundings, he craves admission, that he, too, might seal his faith, never to be renounced.

His allotted year of Penitence had ended, but his need of penitence had not, since all men err, and erring need repentance.

[p. 62]

Alas! men are born to die! Can man be too frequently reminded of this.

Why should the humble follower of Jesus loiter in his footsteps, or fall by the wayside? Is not Jesus sufficient? He is, and should temptation assail; should misfortune befall; should all the world seem to forsake the true Soldier of Christ, he will nevertheless remain faithful to his vows. And he will never bring disgrace upon himself, or reproach upon the name of Him under whose banner he has enlisted.

The casting of lots was an ancient custom, and is frequently mentioned in the Scriptures. Several methods of casting the lots were practiced. Solomon says, Proverbs xvi: 33, "The lot is cast into the lap," That is, the pebble is cast into the bechif,--lap, or bottom of an urn. Perhaps a literal rendering of the verse quoted above will cast some light on that one method.

"In a lot-vase the lots are shaken in all directions; nevertheless, from the Lord is their whole decision,--judgment."

The Order of the Temple has adopted a method of "casting lots" peculiar to itself.

 

And in those days Peter stood up in the midst of the disciples, and said, (the number of names together were about an hundred and twenty,)

Men and brethren, the scripture must needs have been fulfilled, which the Holy Ghost by the mouth of David spake before concerning Judas, which was guide to them that took Jesus.

For he was numbered with us, and had obtained part of this ministry.

[p. 63]

Now this man purchased a field with the reward of iniquity; and falling headlong, he burst asunder in the midst, and all his bowels gushed out.

And it was known unto all the dwellers at Jerusalem; insomuch as that field is called in their proper tongue, Aceldama, that is to say, The field of blood.

For it is written in the book of Psalms, Let his habitation be desolate, and let no man dwell therein: and his bishopric let another take.

Wherefore of these men which have companied with us all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among us,

Beginning from the baptism of John, unto that same day that he was taken up from us, must one be ordained to be a witness with us of his resurrection.

And they appointed two, Joseph called Barsabas, who was surnamed Justus, and Matthias. And they prayed, and said, Thou, Lord, which knowest the hearts of all men, show whether of these two thou hast chosen,

That he may take part of this ministry and apostleship, from which Judas by transgression fell, that he might go to his own place.

And they gave forth their lots; and the lot fell upon Matthias; and he was numbered with the eleven apostles. Acts i: 15-26.

When Judas betrayed his Lord and Master his light became darkness in the college of Apostles. When the divine wisdom selected Matthias to fill the vacancy that light was restored. Sin puts out the divine light in the heart, but it is restored when the heart elects to serve the Master unto death.

[p. 64]

It was the custom of the Grand Master to put his arm about the neck of the initiate, and thus make him a Templar. Anciently kings conferred knighthood in the same way.

The word Accolade is front ad, to, and collum, the neck. The embrace has long passed out of use, and the single blow on the candidate's left shoulder with the blade of the sword has been adopted.

It is generally held that the one blow with the blade of the Sword had its origin in the single blow which the slave of the Romans received at his manumission.

[p. 65]

  

THE BALDRIC.

Such Grand Commanderies as have discarded the Baldric are excused from the ceremony of its investiture.

  

THE SWORD.

The investiture of the Sword is an imposing and an imperative ceremonial.

  

THE SPUR.

The investiture of the Spur is left to the discretion of the Grand Commanderies, and of Commanders where Grand Commanderies have taken no action thereon.

  

MEANS OF RECOGNITION.

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE BANNERS.

There are two which belong to the Order of the Temple at this time. They are the Grand Standard and the Beauceant.

The Grand Standard is of blue field, five by six feet, and made tripartite at the bottom. Over the blood-red Passion Cross in the center is the Motto of the Order, "In Hoc Signo Vinces." Beneath the Cross is the ancient Templar motto, "Non nobis Domine; non nobis, sed Nomini tuo da Gloriam."

The Beauceant is of the same form and dimensions as the Grand Standard. The upper half of this Banner is black, and the lower half is white.

When the Templar looks upon the GRAND STANDARD he is admonished to so live and serve the Master that having passed through the portals of the grave he may receive from his hand the Crown of Victory, while exclaiming, "NOT UNTO US, O LORD; NOT UNTO US, BUT UNTO THY NAME BE THE GLORY."

[p. 66]

THE BEAUCEANT.--This was the Battle Flag of the ancient Templars. It is half black and half white; signifying that these Christian warriors were fair and favorable to the friends of Christ, but dark and terrible to his enemies.

Sometimes this Banner was divided per pale, that is, perpendicularly, but most frequently per fesse, that is, horizontally, the upper half always black.

The red Passion Cross was sometimes on the white, but never on the black. Color upon color would be false heraldry. The cry of the Templars was, "Au Bausant for the Temple," but what that cry really meant is not understood to-day.

The ancient Templars frequently painted the Beauceant upon their kite-shaped shields, as an armorial bearing. It was said to betoken Innocence, Death and Martyrdom.

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

  

HISTORICAL LECTURE.

During the period that succeeded the Crusades a civil Knight made a vow to visit the sepulchre of his Lord and Master. Attracted by the chivalrous deeds of the Knights Templar,--for their deeds of charity and pure beneficence had spread their fame both far and wide,--he sought admission to their ranks, the better to fulfill that vow.

The Prior of the Templars to whom he made his application being satisfied with the report made thereon as to the uprightness of character of the applicant, was moved to grant the prayer of his petition, but as a trial of his worthiness to be enrolled among the members of the valiant and magnanimous Order of the Temple, he enjoined upon him Seven Years of Preparation. These began with an unarmed pilgrimage in the direction of the Holy Shrine. An escort was furnished to guide and protect him. And so, without sword or buckler, and forbidden to do acts unbecoming an humble pilgrim, the journey began. To a man of warlike spirit and chivalrous nature such pilgrimage was indeed a trial of patience and perseverance.

[p. 67]

Three years were passed in this weary way, mostly in a friendly country, in which the pilgrim received from pious anchorites bread and water, as well as lessons of comfort and consolation. But day after day his manhood asserted itself with accumulating vigor, when he beheld indignities offered not only to himself, but to other helpless pilgrims--many of them delicate women. Then he yearned to cast off the garb of a pilgrim, and, laying aside the staff, to grasp the sword and perform deeds of more exalted usefulness. While pleading with his devoted escort for the gratification of his manly ambition he reached a House of the Templars. Three years of his Preparation had passed, and the zealous Knight implored his escort to crave the permission of the Prior to devote the four remaining years to deeds of more exalted usefulness.

The escort was moved by his entreaties, vouched for him to the Prior that he had performed full three years of Preparation, made his burning desires known, and cordially recommended him to official favor. The avouchment of his escort secured the favorable consideration of the Prior, who, after putting him under vows, granted him permission to take up sword and buckler, and go forth under escort of a Templar warrior, manfully wielding his sword in the defense of innocent maidens, destitute widows, helpless orphans and the Christian religion. And such a warfare was indeed a trial of his constancy and courage.

As a warrior this gallant Knight pressed forward with fortitude undaunted, giving ample proof to his warrior escort that he was worthy to draw the sword in the cause to which he had consecrated it. But his deeds of valor soon created in him an ardent desire to be admitted to where honors and rewards await the results of valor and chivalry. He met armed Templars gallantly defending the dangerous passes of his route, and he yearned to be admitted to their ranks.

[p. 68]

[paragraph continues] Three years more passed in this vigorous warfare, and at the close of the third year he reached another House of the Templars. Then he besought his warrior guide to implore the Prior to remit the remaining year of his Preparation.

The warrior escort presented the petition to the Prior, vouched for the valor, courage and constancy of the petitioner, and that he had faithfully performed six of his seven years of Preparation, and even recommended that the remission asked for be granted, if it should so please the Prior. And though the Prior was moved by the recital of the deeds of valor wrought by the petitioner, and by the history of his courage and constancy, he could not shorten the time of Preparation laid on him at the beginning. Moreover, he feared that the memory of those acts of valor filled his heart with pride, and that self-confidence had supplanted an humble reliance upon the strong arm of the Master. He therefore commanded the petitioner to devote the remaining year of Preparation to penitence, as a trial of his faith and humility.

With the accomplishment of the penitential year the term of preparation ended, and the devoted neophyte was permitted to seal his faith and enlist under the banner of the Temple and of Emmanuel.

At the death of De Molai the ancient Order of the Temple was suppressed and its members dispersed. The warlike spirit that gave it birth has passed away, but in this modern Order of the Temple there remains a spirit of refined and moral chivalry which should prompt all of its members to be ever ready to defend the weak, the innocent, the helpless and the oppressed; and in a brother's cause to do all that may be demanded by manhood and fraternity.

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 69]

  

THE CHARGE.

The following Charge may be omitted and the Historical Lecture delivered instead. Or both may be omitted in the discretion of the Commander.

Sir Knight, having passed through the several degrees of our ancient and honorable institution, we bid you a hearty welcome to all our rights and privileges, even to that disinterested friendship and unbounded hospitality which ever has, and we hope and trust ever will, continue to adorn, distinguish and characterize this noble Order.

It will henceforth become your duty to assist, protect and defend the weary, wayworn traveler who finds the heights of fortune inaccessible, and the thorny paths of life broken, adverse and forlorn,--to succor, defend and protect the innocent, the distressed and the helpless, ever standing forth as a champion to espouse the cause of the Christian Religion.

You are to inculcate, enforce and practice virtue; and amid all the temptations which surround you, never to be drawn aside from the path oaf duty, or forgetful of those due guards and passwords, which are necessary to be had in perpetual remembrance; and while one hand is wielding the Sword for the defense of your Companion in danger, let the other grasp the mystic Trowel, and widely diffuse the genuine cement of Brotherly Love and Friendship.

Should calumny assail the character of a Brother Sir Knight, recollect that you are to step forth and vindicate his good name, and assist him on all lawful occasions. Should assailants ever attempt your honor, interest or happiness, remember, also, that you have the counsel and support of your brethren, whose mystic Swords, combining the virtues of Faith, Hope and Charity, with Justice, Fortitude and Mercy, will leap from their scabbards in defense of your

[p. 70]

just rights, and insure you a glorious triumph over all your enemies.

On this occasion permit me, Sir Knight, to remind you of our mutual engagements, our reciprocal ties; for whatever may be your situation or rank in life, you may find those in similar stations, who have dignified themselves and been useful to mankind. You are, therefore, called upon to discharge all your duties with fidelity and patience, whether in the Field, in the Senate, on the Bench, at the Bar, or at the Holy Altar. Whether you are placed upon the highest pinnacle of worldly grandeur, or glide into the humble vale of obscurity, unnoticed, save by a few, it matters not; for a few rolling suns will close the scene, when naught but holiness will serve as a sure passport to gain admission into that REST prepared from the foundation of the world.

If you see a Brother bending under the cross of adversity and disappointment, look not idly on, neither pass by on the other side, but fly to his relief. If he be deceived, tell him the Truth; if he be calumniated, vindicate his cause; for, although he may have erred, still recollect that indiscretion in him should never destroy humanity in you.

Finally, Sir Knight, as memento mori is deeply engraved on all sublunary enjoyments, let us ever be found in the habiliments of righteousness, traversing the straight path of rectitude, virtue and true holiness; so that, having discharged our duty here below, performed the pilgrimage of life, burst the bands of mortality, passed over the Jordan of death and safely landed on the broad shore of eternity, there, in the presence of myriads of attending angels, we may be greeted as brethren, received into the arms of the BLESSED EMMANUEL, and forever made to participate in his HEAVENLY KINGDOM.

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 71]

  

TO CLOSE THE COMMANDERY.

__________________________

THE Commander directs that the same precautionary steps be taken previous to the ceremony of Closing.

  

PRAYER.

The Prelate will lead in the Lord's Prayer, after which he will pronounce this, or some other Benediction:

"The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen."

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

_______________________

  

A RITUALISTIC COMMENTARY.

"The adversaries of Judah and Benjamin heard that the children of the captivity builded the temple unto the Lord God of Israel." Ezra iv: 1.

The "adversaries" are enumerated in verses 7, 8 and 9. The territory assigned to Judah was about forty-five miles long and fifty miles wide, and extended from the Jordan to the Mediterranean. The territory assigned to Benjamin was about twenty-six miles long and twelve miles wide. It extended from the Jordan to seven miles west of Jerusalem.

These were the oldest and the youngest sons of Jacob, and they fell heir to Jerusalem, the Temple, and the glories of the Mosaic traditions, on the secession of the Ten Tribes under Rehoboam. Judah means "the praise of the Lord;" Benjamin means "the son of the right hand."

[p. 72]

"And they shall call his name Emmanuel, which being interpreted is, God with us." Matt. i: 23.

"Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel." Isaiah vii: 54.

Emmanuel is the Greek form of the Hebrew Immanuel. Ahaz is informed of the birth of Messiah by Isaiah, and Matthew says this prophecy was accomplished in the birth of Christ.

It was in its Greek form that the word was familiar to the Templars of old, as well as of to-day.

"And thou shalt call his name Jesus: for he shall save his people from their sins." Matt. i: 21.

Jesus is the Greek form of the Hebrew Joshua, or Jeshua, which is a contraction of Jehoshua, (Numbers xiii: 16.) Its literal meaning is "he of Jehovah," and we define it as "Saviour." Jesus Christ means " Anointed Saviour." As such is he adored by the Templar.

 

"And when they were come unto a place called Golgotha, that is to say, a place of a skull." Matt. xxvii: 33.

Golgotha literally means "a heap of skulls," but three of the Evangelists define it as "a place of a skull." Luke says, "which is called Calvary," that is, "a skull." The Greek word is kranton which the Vulgate renders Calvariam, meaning "a bare skull." It is probable the name was given this elevation because of its peculiarly shaped summit.

The awful tragedy enacted on Golgotha is dear to the true Templar, and he ever holds his sword in readiness to defend the religion founded upon that tragedy.

 

Moreover the Lord said unto me, Take thee a great roll, and write in it with a man's pen concerning Maher-shalal-hash-baz." Isaiah viii: i.

An attempt at literal rendering of this passage would result in, "Take thee a great roll, and write in it with a man's pen concerning Make speed to the spoil, hasten the prey." The phrase is as difficult of translation as is the phrase, "Anathema Maran-atha." It means in its naked form, "Hasten-booty, Speed-spoil." It is pronounced Ma-her shalal hash'baz.

This phrase was cherished by the ancient Templars, who held it to be symbolical of that readiness for action which should characterize a true Soldier of Christ!

[p. 73]

"At the same time came to them Tatnai, governor on this side the river, and Shethar-boznai, and their companions, and said thus unto them, Who hath commanded you to build this house and to make up this wall? " Ezra v: 3.

This Tat na-i was Satrap of the province west of the Euphrates, next to Judea. Shethar-boz na-i was not a Satrap, but an officer of rank, and though his name meant "star of splendor," he united with Tatnai in an effort to shroud with gloom the hopes of the returned children of the captivity. God caused their wrath to praise him.

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

_______________________

  

THE SO-CALLED VISION OF CONSTANTINE.

A fable invented by the sycophants of Constantine has been dignified into a Motto of the valiant and magnanimous Order of the Temple, after passing through various gradations of fortune. The fable is thus related:

Constantine the Great was declared Augustus and Pontifex Maximus after he had vanquished the army of Marentius, under the walls of Rome. He professed Christianity. It was during his march on . Rome, and while encamped near Mentz, that he was reported to have seen in the sky a fiery Cross, bearing the inscription En toytui nika

"With this sign you will conquer." He had this symbol, known as the Cross of Constantine, emblazoned on the Imperial Standard, called the Labarum.

How the Chi Rho Cross came to be changed into the Passion Cross of the Latin Church, and the Greek inscription into corresponding Latin, is clearly explained by the conquest of the Eastern by the Western Church. When the Church of Rome became mistress of the world everything had to submit to its dictation, and all popular myths gravitated to its use and emolument.

It is deeply to be regretted that the name of Constantine, who murdered his father-in-law, his brother-in-law, his nephew, his son, and finally his wife, Fausta, should be associated with this popular myth, and this beautiful symbol. That he was ever converted to Christianity we deny, and his being baptized only in the year in which he died, nearly a quarter of a century after his professed conversion, proves his deception.

It is not established that the ancient Templars used either the Greek or the Latin inscription so popular with the modern Templars.

[p. 74]

[paragraph continues] They did use the Passion Cross on the Beauceant, and as a part of their armorial bearings.

_______________________

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

  

AN HISTORICAL FACT.

Simon of Syracuse, a Templar, betrayed his trust to the Saracens. Saladin, despising this Templar's treason, had his head struck off and sent it to the Grand Master of the Templars, who ordered it placed on the top of the longest spear in camp, as a warning to all traitors.

The Canadians relate that the head was "placed on a pole, or spire." The Scotch say, "on the point of a spear or pike." The head of one so despicable, if to be elevated at all, should be "placed upon the highest spire of Christendom," as a warning to all traitors.

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

_______________________

  

DRESS OF THE ANCIENT TEMPLARS.

The ancient Templars habitually wore a long, white Tunic, or Cassock, cut like that of the priests, with a red Cross before and behind. The Girdle was worn over the Shirt and under the Tunic. The serving brethren wore dark Kirtles to distinguish them from the Knights, all being clad in white. The white Mantle, with its red Cross on the left breast, and a Hood, was worn over all. The material was always light, because of the great heat of Palestine.

In 1162 the Pope permitted the Templars to receive into their houses spiritual persons, not bound by any previous vow. After one year's novitiate these were initiated, as were the lay Knights. The habit of the Chaplain was a white Tunic and red Cross: but none under a Bishop could wear a white Mantle. The Chaplain wore the baret, or Cap.

There is a dispute as to the form of the Red Cross of the Order. We favor the form given elsewhere, on the Vexillum Belli, as the one used by the ancient Templars, though some say the Cross on the left breast of the white Mantle was of "four arms, the under one being the longest."

The arms of a Knight Templar were a Sword, Lance, Mace and Shield, and his head was covered by the Hood attached to his Mantle. He was allowed three horses and an esquire, who was a serving brother; or a hireling, who was a layman.

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 75]

  

THE ANCIENT MOTTO.

The Grand Encampment has adopted this reading of the Motto of the ancient Templars:

"Non nobis Domine; non nobis, sed Nomini tuo da gloriam."

In the "Biblia Sacra," published in Antwerp in 1605, we find this reading of it:

"Non nobis Domine, non nobis: sed Nomini tuo da gloriam."

These words are found in the "Biblia Sacra" as part of Psalm cxiii, verse 31. In the Accepted Version they form part of Psalm cxv: 1. It is probable that the omission of the comma after the second nobis, page 79, St. Louis Ritual, was a typographical blunder. As that Ritual no longer exists, the official reading adopted for the Grand Standard remains in force.

_______________________

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

  

"IT IS FINISHED."

In its Latin form,--"Consummatum est,"--this was a cherished phrase of the ancient Templar usage. It is to be regretted that its use appears to be entirely dropped by the Modern Order in the United States.

Would it not be a proper complement of the phrase, "In hoc Signo Vinces," and on reversing the position to use "Consummatum est"? 

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 76] [p. 77]

  

APPENDIX.

  

CEREMONIAL OBSERVANCES OF THE ORDER.

[p. 78] [p. 79]

  

DEDICATION AND CONSECRATION OF ASYLUMS.

THE Triangle has twelve Tapers properly displayed upon it. No other equipments thereon.

The Commandery is opened, and the Grand Commander and Staff received according to the Tactics of the Jurisdiction.

EC.--Right Eminent Grand Commander, the members of -- Commandery, No. --, animated by zeal for the Order and veneration for the ceremonies thereof, have prepared and furnished this Asylum, and now crave that you dedicate and consecrate the same to the solemn rites of the Order of the Temple.

GC.--Eminent Sir, I congratulate -- Commandery on the appearance of the Asylum which their liberality and good taste have prepared for the observance of the ceremonies of the Order. It receives our entire approbation, and at your request we will proceed to Consecrate the same to the solemn uses for which it is intended.

GCG.--Sir Knights, ATTENTION! UNCOVER!

GC.--Excellent Grand Prelate, lead us in the Prayer of Dedication.

PRAYER.

ALMIGHTY and Most Merciful Father, look upon us, Thy children, bowed in Thy presence, and graciously accept the service in which we are engaged. May the meetings to be held in this Asylum be under Thy protection and guidance, and may all its members be of one mind to honor and

[p. 80]

obey Thee, and love and protect one another. And may the work done in this Asylum receive Thy approval and benediction.

And to thy great and holy Name shall be all the praise and glory, through Jesus Christ our Saviour, AMEN.

GCG.--Sir Knights, RE-COVER!

GC.--Sir Knights, BE SEATED! Give reverent heed to the ceremony of Consecration, to the end that all may be endued with a proper appreciation of the uses to which this Asylum is about to be set apart.

Excellent Grand Prelate, place upon the Triangle the Holy Bible, opened at the third chapter of the Gospel by John.

Prelate places open Bible in center of Triangle.

GC. (Rising and uncovering)--To God the Father, who so loved the world as to give His Son to be the Captain of our Salvation, I dedicate this Asylum. May Peace be within its walls. (Re-covers.)

GC.--Sir Knight Grand Generalissimo, place upon the Holy Bible an emblem of Mortality.

Grand Generalissimo places a skull upon the Bible.

GC. (Uncovering)--To Him who hath abolished death, and hath brought life and immortality to light through the Gospel, I Dedicate this Asylum. May the unity of that Faith be maintained in this place. (Re-covers.)

GC.--Sir Knight Grand Captain General, light the Tapers.

The Grand Captain General lights the Tapers on the Triangle.

[p. 81]

GC.--To the memory of Hugh de Payen, the founder of the Order of the Temple, I set this Asylum apart to the solemn uses of that Order. Sir Knights, may brotherly love prevail, and every moral and social virtue cement you.

MUSIC.

"Nearer, My God, to Thee," or some other appropriate Hymn, will be sung.

GC.--Sir Knights, this Asylum thus solemnly set apart to the ceremonies of our Order must not be profaned by improper assemblies, nor desecrated by observances not in accord with the spirit of Christian Knighthood. Guard well its doors from improper invasions, and allow none to enter but such as are duly qualified when the trumpet of the Sentinel has sounded the Assembly.

Here meet in the fear of God, and with the spirit of true and chivalrous Knights. Be true to each other and to yourselves. Pray for the prosperity of the Order, and diligently labor for the peace of the Commandery of which you are members. You will arise and uncover.

We will now unite with our Excellent Grand Prelate in

PRAYER.

MERCIFUL Father, we again thank Thee for the pleasures of this sacred hour. Consecrate with Thy Benediction this Asylum which Thy servant has so solemnly dedicated to Thee, so that all things done herein may be prospered by Thy goodness and approved by Thy wisdom.

Bless our beloved Order, wherever dispersed, and when the end shall come, as come it will, may we all be received into that Rest which remaineth to the people of God. Through Jesus Christ our Redeemer, AMEN.

[p. 82]

BENEDICTION.

Grace be with you, mercy, and peace, from God the Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the Father, in truth and love.

GC.--Sir Knights, RE-COVER! BE SEATED!

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 83]

  

CONSTITUTING NEW COMMANDERIES.

THE Knights about to be constituted into a Commandery will assemble in the Asylum on the appointed day, and open a Commandery of Knights Templar. The Triangle should be fully equipped, but the Tapers to be unlighted. The Jewels are placed upon a small Table or Altar, in the West, and covered with a white cloth.

The Commandery opened, the Grand Officers will be received according to the Tactics of the Jurisdiction. When the Grand Officers are in their stations, then--

G. MAR.--Right Eminent Grand Commander, a constitutional number of Knights of the Valiant and Magnanimous Order of the Temple, duly instructed in the sublime mysteries of our Order, having received from the proper authority a Warrant or Charter, authorizing them to hold a regular Commandery of Knights Templar, are now assembled for the purpose of being legally constituted, and having their Officers installed, in due and ancient form.

GC.--Let the Constituting ceremonies begin. The Choir will render appropriate Music.

The Choir will sing appropriate Music, as chosen.

GC.--Excellent Grand Prelate, read unto us a Lesson.

Grand Prelate reads Psalm lxiii: 1-8.

GC.--Excellent Grand Prelate, lead us in Prayer.

GCG.--Commandery, ATTENTION! UNCOVER!

PRAYER.

ALMIGHTY God, our Heavenly Father, with whom is life, and from whom cometh every good and perfect gift, unto

[p. 84]

[paragraph continues] Thee do we bow our hearts in reverence and in trust, gratefully acknowledging Thy mercies and the manifold manifestations of Thy providence and Thy love. And now, as we engage in the solemn services of this occasion, we beseech Thy guidance and direction, that all things may be done to Thy glory and to the advancement of the interests we have in charge. Let Thy grace be upon these Thy servants about to be constituted into an organization founded upon the Christian religion and the practice of the Christian virtues. Give unto them a large appreciation of the mission to which they are called, and an earnest purpose to perform the duties which will henceforth devolve upon them. Enlighten their minds, purify their hearts, and help them to attain that true consecration of soul, which will enable them to bear much fruit to the honor and glory of Thy holy Name.

All this we ask, most Merciful Father, through him who is the Resurrection and the Life, our Lord and Saviour, Jesus Christ. AMEN.

LORD'S PRAYER follows (in which all unite).

GCG.--Sir Knights, RE-COVER!

GC.--Sir Knights, BE SEATED!

MUSIC.

GC.--Sir Knight Recorder, read aloud the Charter issued to this Commandery.

Recorder reads the Charter aloud.

GC.--, Sir Knights, do you still approve the Officers named in this Charter, and desire their installation?

If the Knights shall answer--"We do,"--then--

[p. 85]

GCG.--Sir Knights, Draw SWORDS! Present SWORDS!

GC.--By virtue of the high power and authority in me vested, I do now form you, Sir Knights, into a just and regular Commandery of Knights Templar. Henceforth you are authorized and empowered to form and open a Council of Knights of the Red Cross, a Commandery of Knights Templar and Knights of Malta, of the Order of St. John of Jerusalem, and to perform all such things as may appertain to the same; conforming in all your doings to the Laws and Constitution of the Grand Commandery under whose authority you act, and to the Constitution and Edicts of the Grand Encampment of the United States. And may the God of our fathers be with you, guide and direct you in all your undertakings.

The Jewels are now uncovered by the Grand Wardens; solemn Music.

GC.--Excellent Grand Prelate, you will now pronounce the words of CONSECRATION.

GP.--To our Most Eminent and Worthy Patron, St. John the Almoner, I do now solemnly dedicate this -- Commandery, by the name and title of Commandery; and may the God of all grace abundantly bless it and all its members in their laudable undertakings; and may each one of its members so redeem his time, that he may receive the joyful invitation, "Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord."

GP.--Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men.

THE KNIGHTS.--AS it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end. AMEN.

[p. 86]

GCG.--Sir Knights, Carry SWORDS!

The Grand Wardens now light the Tapers on the Triangle.

MUSIC.

The "DOXOLOGY" (in which all will unite).

GP.--The Lord bless thee, and keep thee: the Lord make his face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee: the Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace.

THE KNIGHTS.--AMEN! AMEN! AMEN!

GC.--Sir Knight Grand Marshal, make Proclamation in the East.

G. MAR.--Hear ye! Valiant Knights of the Temple!

I am ordered to proclaim that this new Commandery of Knights Templar and the Appendant Orders, by the name of -- Commandery, has been legally constituted according to the forms and ceremonies of the Order of Knights Templar; and it is now authorized to meet and work as a regular Commandery under the jurisdiction of the Grand Commandery of --.

GCG.--Sir Knights, Return SWORDS!

GC.--Sir Knights, BE SEATED!

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 87]

  

INSTALLATION OF OFFICERS OF A COMMANDERY.

THE Commandery having been duly constituted, the Officers are to be installed with the following ceremony: The Table, on which lie the Jewels, is placed in front of the Grand Commander, and the Tapers on the Triangle are lighted.

The Commandery is opened, and the Grand Commander, and his Staff, are received according to the Tactics of the Jurisdiction.

The Officers to be installed having withdrawn to another room, the ceremonies will begin thus:

GC.--Let the Officers you have chosen, and desire to have installed at this time, enter.

The Grand Marshal conducts the Officers elect into the Asylum. The Grand Commander will cause the Commandery to arise. The Officers elect will he escorted to the East in single file, and so arranged that when their left flank faces the East the Officers will be standing thus:

W. SwB. StB. Rec. Tr. JW. SW. P. CG. G. EC.

The Officers will enter with Swords at Carry, and when they have reached the East the Marshal will command--

MAR.--File RIGHT! (When in proper place) HALT! Left FACE! Present SWORDS!

MAR. (Saluting)--Right Eminent Grand Commander, these are the Officers chosen by this Commandery, whose installation is desired at this time.

GC.--Sir Knights, Carry SWORDS! Return SWORDS! BE SEATED!

All obey these commands, and the Officers are seated on chairs previously located for them.

[p. 88]

GC.--Sir Knight Marshal, present the Eminent Commander for installation.

Marshal lakes the Commander by left arm and conducts him to the Altar, which had been placed, with the Jewels thereon, in front of the GC.

MAR.--Right Eminent Grand Commander, I have the honor to present to you Eminent Sir --, who has been elected to the office of Commander of this Commandery. I find him to be well skilled in our sublime mysteries, and observant of the noble precepts of our forefathers, and therefore I have no doubt but that he will discharge the important duties of his office with fidelity.

GC.--Eminent Sir, are you ready to subscribe to the Vow of office?

If the Commander elect answers that he is, then the Grand Commander will draw his Sword, and hold it horizontally, the edge toward the Commander elect, who will grasp the blade with his left hand, and place his right hand on his left breast.

GC.--You will repeat after me--

I, -- --, do promise and vow that I will support and maintain the Constitution and Code of Statutes of the Grand Encampment of Knights Templar of the United States of America; that I will support and maintain the Bylaws of this Commandery, and the Laws, Constitution, Rules and Edicts of the Grand Commandery under whose immediate authority I act; and I will, to the best of my knowledge and ability, faithfully discharge the various duties incumbent upon the office to which I have been elected.

GC.--Eminent Sir, having been elected to the important and honorable station of Commander of this Commandery,

[p. 89]

it is with unfeigned pleasure that I enter upon the discharge of the duty of installing you into office. As the head of a Christian institution you are charged with important responsibilities and duties, and it is confidently anticipated that your fidelity to these trusts will reflect honor upon yourself and credit upon your Commandery. It now becomes my duty to propose certain questions to you, to which unequivocal answers are required: Do you solemnly promise, upon the honor of a Knight Templar--

I. That you will redouble your endeavors to correct the vices, purify the morals, and promote the happiness of those of your brethren who have attained this magnanimous Order?

II. That you will never suffer your Commandery to be opened, unless there be present nine regular Knights of the Order?

III. That you will not confer the Orders upon any one who has not shown a charitable disposition, or who has not made a considerable proficiency in the foregoing degrees.

IV. That you will promote the general good of our Order, and on all proper occasions be ready to give and receive instructions, and particularly from the General and State Grand Officers?

V. That, to the utmost of your power, you will preserve the solemnities of our ceremonies, and behave, in open Commandery, with the most profound respect and reverence, as an example to your brethren?

VI. That you will not acknowledge or have intercourse with any Commandery that does not work under a constitutional warrant or dispensation?

VII. That you will not admit any visitor into your Commandery who has not been knighted in a Commandery legally constituted, without his first being formally healed?

[p. 90]

VIII. That you will pay due respect and obedience to the instructions of the General and State Grand Officers, particularly relating to the several Lectures and Charges, and will resign the chair to them, severally, when they may visit your Commandery?

IX. That you will support and observe the Constitution of the Grand Encampment of the United States, and the Statutes and Regulations of the Grand Commandery under whose authority you act?

X. That you will bind your successor in office to the observance of the same rules to which you have now assented?

Do you submit to all these things, and do you promise to observe and practice them faithfully?

The Eminent Commander assents. Grand Commander returns his Sword.

GC.--Eminent Commander, having been chosen by the Knights of your Commandery to fill the most exalted station in their power to bestow, I congratulate you upon being the recipient of such honorable preferment, and now invest you with the Jewel of your office, which is a Cross surrounded by rays of light. It is to remind you that humility, love, and pure benevolence are refulgent rays that emanate from the pure and undefiled religion of the blessed Emmanuel, and which should ever characterize the members of this Christian Order. It is to remind you of Him who died that He might give life to the world, and who is indeed the Lord and Saviour of all those who accept His guidance and obey His precepts.

I present you the Charter of your Commandery.

You will receive it as a sacred deposit, and never permit it to be used for any other purposes than those expressed in it, and safely transmit it to your successor in office.

[p. 91]

I also commit to your hands the Holy Bible, the great light in every degree of Masonry. The doctrines contained in this sacred volume create in us a belief in the existence of the Eternal Jehovah, the only true and living God, the Creator and Judge of all things in heaven and on earth; they also confirm in us a belief in the dispensations of His providence. This belief strengthens our Faith, and enables us to ascend the first step of the Grand Masonic ladder. This Faith naturally produces in us a Hope of becoming partakers in the promises expressed in this inestimable gift of God to man, which Hope enables us to ascend the second step; but the third and last, being Charity, comprehends the former, and will continue to exert its influence when Faith shall be lost in sight, and Hope in complete fruition. The Cross Swords, testing upon the Holy Bible, are to remind us that we should he "strong in the Lord, and in the power of His might;" that we should put on the whole armour of God, to be able to wrestle successfully against principalities and powers, and spiritual wickedness in high places.

I also present you the Constitution of the Grand Encampment of the United States of America, the Rules and Regulations of the Grand Commandery of this State, and the By-laws of your Commandery. You will frequently consult them yourself, and cause them to be read for the information of your Commandery, that all, being informed of their duty, may have no reasonable excuse to offer for the neglect of it.

And now, Eminent Sir, permit me to induct you into the chair of your Commandery, and in behalf of the Knights here assembled, to offer you my most sincere congratulations on your accession to the honorable station you now fill. It will henceforth be your special duty to preserve inviolate the Constitution and Laws of the Order; to dispense justice, reward merit, inculcate the almighty force and the importance of truth, and diffuse the sublime principles of universal

[p. 92]

benevolence. You will distribute alms to poor and weary pilgrims traveling from afar, feed the hungry, clothe the naked, and bind up the wounds of the afflicted. You will inculcate the duties of charity and hospitality, and govern your Commandery with justice and moderation. And finally, my brother, may the bright example of the illustrious heroes of former ages, whose matchless valor has shed undying lustre on the name of Knight Templar, encourage and animate you to the faithful performance of every duty.

GCG.--Commandery, ATTENTION! Draw SWORDS! Present SWORDS!

GC.--Sir Knights, Behold your Eminent Commander! Recollect that the prosperity of your Commandery will as much depend on your support, assistance and obedience, as on the assiduity, fidelity and wisdom of your Commander.

Be ye therefore diligent and faithful in the performance of your respective duties.

The new Commander having made any remarks he desired--

GCG.--Carry SWORDS! Return SWORDS!

GC.--Sir Knights, BE SEATED!

GC.--Prepare the remaining Officers for installation.

MAR.--Officers elect, ATTENTION! Prepare for taking the Vow!

The Marshal will cause the odd numbers to draw their Swords. and drop them to the left, in front of the breasts of the even numbers. The even numbers will grasp the blades of these Swords with their right hands. When all is ready--

MAR.--Officers elect, UNCOVER!

[p. 93]

MAR.--Right Eminent Grand Commander, the Officers elect are in proper position to take upon themselves the Vow of office.

GC.--Before proceeding to install you into your respective stations it is my duty to administer to each of you the Vow of office. Do you severally consent to take upon yourselves that Vow?

Each must assent for himself.

GC.--Then repeat after me:

I, -- --, do promise and vow that I will maintain and support the Constitution and Code of Statutes of the Grand Encampment of the United States of America, the Constitution, Rules and Edicts of the Grand Commandery of -- --, and that I will, to the best of my ability, faithfully discharge the duties of the office to which I have been elected.

MAR.--Officers elect, RE-COVER! Carry SWORDS!

GC.--Sir Knights, BE SEATED! Sir Knight Marshal, present the Generalissimo.

MAR.--Right Eminent Grand Commander, I present Sir -- --, who has been chosen Generalissimo of this Commandery, for installation.

CHARGE TO THE GENERALISSIMO.

GC.--Sir, you have been elected Generalissimo of this Commandery. I now invest you with the Jewel of your office, which is a Square, surmounted by a Paschal Lamb. When beholding the Lamb, let it stimulate you to have, at all times, a watchful eye over your own conduct, and an earnest solicitude for the prosperity of the kingdom of the

[p. 94]

blessed Emmanuel, the spotless Lamb of God, who was slain from the foundation of the world.

The Square is to remind you that the same principles of brotherly love and friendship should forever govern the members of Freemasonry and of the Orders of Knighthood. Your station is on the right of your Commander; your duty is to assist him in his various duties, and, in his absence, to preside. I charge you, therefore, to be faithful to the Sir Knights with whom you are associated; put them often in remembrance of those things which tend to their everlasting peace. Finally, "preach the word; be instant in season, out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all longsuffering and doctrine;" ever remembering the promise, "Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life."

The remaining Officers are presented in the same way by the Marshal, when the Grand Commander will deliver the Charges as follows:

CHARGE TO THE CAPTAIN GENERAL.

Sir, you are elected Captain General of this Commandery. I now invest you with the Jewel of your office, which is a Level, surmounted by a Cock. As the undaunted courage and valor of the Cock stimulates him to conquer his competitor, or yield himself a victim to the contest, so should you be stimulated to the discharge of every duty. You should have on "the breastplate of righteousness," so that with patience and meekness you may ever travel on the level of humility, and be so supplied with divine grace as to prevent you from selling your God or denying your Master. Your station is on the left of your Commander. Your duty, among other things, is to see that due preparation is made for the various meetings of the Commandery; that the Chambers and Asylum are in suitable array for the introduction

[p. 95]

of candidates and the dispatch of business. You are also to receive and communicate to the lines all orders issued by the Eminent Commander. You are to assist in Council, and, in the absence of your Commander and Generalissimo, you are to preside over the Commandery. And now, I exhort you, that with fidelity you perform every duty; and whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto men; continue in prayer, and watch in the same with thanksgiving; ever bearing in mind the promise, "Be not weary in well doing: for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not."

CHARGE TO THE PRELATE.

Sir, you are elected Prelate of this Commandery. I have the pleasure of investing you with this Triple Triangle, which is the Jewel of your office, and a beautiful emblem of Jehovah. Your station is on the right of the Generalissimo; your duty is to officiate at the Altar and to offer up prayers to Deity. Your Jewel is to remind you of the importance of the trust reposed in you. And may He who is able, abundantly furnish you for every good work, preserve you from falling into error, improve, strengthen, establish and perfect you; and finally greet you with, "Well done, thou good and faithful servant: enter thou into the joy of thy Lord."

CHARGE TO THE SENIOR WARDEN.

Sir, you are elected Senior Warden of this Commandery. I now invest you with the Jewel of your office, which is a Hollow Square and Sword of Justice. It is to remind you that, as the children of Israel marched in a hollow square in their journey through the wilderness, in order to guard and protect the Ark of the Covenant, so should you be vigilant in guarding every avenue from innovation and error. Let

[p. 96]

the Sword, therefore, be ever drawn to guard the Constitution of the Order. Your station is at the Southwest angle of the Triangle, and upon the right of the First Division. You will attend Pilgrim Warriors, comfort and support Pilgrim Penitents, and after due trial, introduce them into the Asylum. Let it be your constant care that the warrior be not deterred from duty, nor the penitent molested on his journey. Finally, let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven.

CHARGE TO THE JUNIOR WARDEN.

Sir, you are elected Junior Warden of this Commandery. I now invest you with the Jewel of your office, which is an Eagle and Flaming Sword. It is to remind you to perform your various duties with justice and valor, having an eagle eye on the prosperity of the Order. Your station is at the Northwest angle of the Triangle. Your duty is to .attend poor and weary pilgrims traveling from afar, accompany them on their journey, and in due time recommend them to the Eminent Commander. You will be careful that, in addition to the pilgrim's garb, sandals, staff and scrip, their whole preparation and deportment shall be such as to cause them to be recognized as children of humility. Teach them that "Magna est Veritas, et Praevalebit," is the Motto of the Order; and although they will often find the heights of fortune inaccessible, and the thorny path of life crooked, adverse and forlorn, yet, by faith and humility--courage, constancy, patience and perseverance--they may gain admission into the Asylum above; there to enjoy the rewards that await the valiant soldiers of the Lord Jesus Christ. Finally, be ye perfect, always abounding in the work of the Lord, that you may be a shining light in the world. A city that is set on a hill can not be hid.

[p. 97]

CHARGE TO THE TREASURER.

Sir, you are elected Treasurer of this Commandery. I now invest you with the Jewel of your office. Your station is on the right of the Generalissimo, in front. The qualities which should recommend a Treasurer are accuracy and fidelity; accuracy, in keeping a fair and minute account of all receipts and disbursements; fidelity, in carefully preserving all the property and funds of the Commandery that may be placed in his hands, and rendering a just account of the same whenever he is called upon for that purpose. I presume that your respect and attachment to the Commandery, and. your earnest solicitude for a good name, which is better than precious ointment, will prompt you to the faithful discharge of the duties of your office.

CHARGE TO THE RECORDER.

Sir, you are elected Recorder of this Commandery. I now invest you with the Jewel of your office. Your station is on the left of the Captain General, in front. The qualities which should recommend a Recorder are, promptitude in issuing the notifications and orders of his superior officers, punctuality in attending the meetings of the Commandery, correctness in recording their proceedings, judgment in discriminating between what is proper and what is improper to be committed to writing, integrity in accounting for all moneys that may pass through his hands, and fidelity in paying the same over into the hands of the Treasurer. The possession of these good qualities, I presume, has designated you for this important office, and I can not entertain a doubt that you will discharge its duties beneficially to the Commandery and honorably to yourself. And when you shall have completed the record of Your transactions here below, and finished the term of your probation, may you be admitted

[p. 98]

into the celestial Asylum of saints and angels, and find your name recorded in the Lamb's Book of Life.

CHARGE TO THE STANDARD BEARER.

Sir, you are elected Standard Bearer of this Commandery. I now invest you with the Jewel of your office, which is a Plumb, surmounted by a Banner. Your station is in the West, and in the center of the Second Division. Your duty is to display, support and protect the Standard of our Order, which I now, with pleasure, confide to your valor. You will remember that it is our rallying point in time of danger; and when unfurled in a just and virtuous cause, you will never relinquish it to an enemy but with your life. Let, therefore, your conduct be such as all the virtuous will delight to imitate; let the refulgent rays which ever emanate from pure benevolence and humility, diffuse their lustre on all around, that it may encourage and animate all true and courteous Knights, and, at the same time, confound and dismay all their enemies.

CHARGE TO THE SWORD BEARER.

Sir, you are elected Sword Bearer of this Commandery. I now invest you with the Jewel of your office, which is a Triangle and Cross Swords. Your station is on the right of the Standard Bearer, and on the right of the Second Division when separately formed. Your duty is to assist in protecting the Banners of our Order, with a heart devoted to the principles of Faith, Hope and Charity. Holding the mystic sword that is-endowed with justice and fortitude, and tempered with mercy, you may cast your eyes upon the Standard, and recall that "In Hoc Signo Vinces" is not only an expressive Motto of our Order, but is consoling to the heart of every believer.

[p. 99]

CHARGE TO THE WARDER.

Sir, you are elected Warder of this Commandery. I now invest you with the Jewel of your office, which is a Square Plate, with a Trumpet and Cross Swords engraved thereon. Your station is upon the left of the Standard Bearer, and upon the left of the Second Division, when formed in line. Your duty is to sound the Assembly, announce the approach and departure of the Eminent Commander, to post the Sentinels, and see that the Asylum is duly guarded. You will, also, report all petitions from visitors and strangers. I charge you to be punctual in your attendance, and indefatigable in the discharge of your important duties; for, though yours is among the last offices in the Commandery, it is by no means the least in importance.

CHARGE TO THE SENTINEL.

Sir Knight, you are appointed Sentinel. I now invest you with the Jewel of your office, which is a Square Plate, with a Battle Axe engraved thereon. Your post is that of honor as well as of danger. You will, therefore, be vigilant, challenge with spirit, examine with caution, admonish with candor, relieve cheerfully, protect with fidelity, and fight valiantly.

GCG.--Commandery, ATTENTION! Draw SWORDS!

CHARGE TO THE COMMANDERY.

Sir Knights, to manage and conduct the concerns of a Commandery of Knights Templar with that promptitude, integrity and skill which the institution demands, will require the exercise of all the talents and perseverance of its Officers and members. Are any of you solicitous that your

[p. 100]

equals and inferiors should conduct themselves toward you with deference and respect? you will be sure to let no opportunity pass without furnishing them an example in your own conduct. The Officers will recollect that those moral and religious duties and precepts which they, from time to time, so forcibly impress upon the minds of others, should by no means be neglected by themselves; and the most effectual way to insure success is to let precept and example go hand in hand.

I would therefore exhort you to look well to the East, to the West, to the North, and to the South, and see that the entering avenues are strictly guarded, and that you suffer no one to pass the threshold of your Asylum but the worthy children of humility; and, at the same time, that you suffer no one to walk among you disorderly without admonition or reproof. While such is the conduct of the Officers and members, you may rest assured that this valiant, magnanimous Order will forever flourish like the green bay tree.

And now, Sir Knights, I would address you in the language of David to his beloved city, Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces. For my brethren and companions' sakes, I will now say, Peace be within thee.

The Marshal then proclaims the [new] Commandery in the following manner, viz.:

In the name of the Grand Commandery of the State of --, I proclaim this Commandery , by the name of -- Commandery, No.--, to be legally constituted, consecrated, and the Officers duly installed.

After the necessary business is finished, the Commandery is closed.

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 101]

  

GRAND COMMANDERIES.

_________________

  

INSTALLATION OF THEIR OFFICERS.

THE Grand Commander will appoint a Grand Marshal, under whose direction the Officers elect will retire to an adjoining room. The Jewels will be placed on a table, which is in front of the Installing Officer. The Altar is beside this table.

Twelve chairs will be placed just west of the Altar, as seats for the Officers elect when they enter. The chairs will extend from North to South, the seat of the Grand Commander on the right, and of the Grand Warder on the left.

GC.--Let the Grand Officers elect enter.

The Grand Marshal, who is notified by the Captain of the Guard, conducts the Officers elect, in single file, to the East, and halts them in front of the chairs, facing the East.

GC. (As Officers enter)--

If there is an instrument, a March will be played.

G. MAR. (When the Officers are halted, facing East)--Right Eminent Commander, these are the Officers chosen by the Grand Commandery, and they are now ready for installation.

GC.--Excellent Grand Prelate, lead us in an Invocation to the Throne of Grace. Sir Knights, ATTENTION! UNCOVER!

The Grand Prelate offers the following, or some other

[p. 102]

PRAYER.

ALMIGHTY God, our Heavenly Father, from whom cometh every good and perfect gift, we humbly approach Thy presence, and beseech Thee, for the sake of Thine only begotten Son, to look upon us in infinite mercy, and bless this our Commander, and those associated with him in office, with a rich outpouring of Thy grace. Pardon our sins, and blot out our transgressions from before Thee! Incline the hearts of these Officers to follow after Thee! Endow them with wisdom, and give unto each patience, perseverance, courage, constancy, faith, and humility.

LORD'S PRAYER (in which all unite).

GC.--Sir Knights, RE-COVER!

GC.--Sir Knights, before investing you with the Jewels of your official positions, it becomes my duty to receive from you the Vow of office. Are you willing to take such a Vow?

The Grand Commander and all the Officers elect bow in assent.

GC.--Let the Grand Commander elect approach the East.

The Grand Marshal conducts him to the East.

GC. (GC. draws his Sword and holds it vertically)--You will grasp the blade of this Sword with your left hand, and then place your right hand upon your heart. (Done.) Now repeat after me:

VOW OF OFFICE.

I, --, do solemnly promise and vow, that I will maintain and support the Constitution of the Grand Encampment

[p. 103]

of Knights Templar of the United States of America, the Statutes and Regulations of the Grand Commandery of the State of -- and that I will, to the best of my ability, faithfully discharge the duties of the office to which I have been elected.

Installing Officer returns his Sword to scabbard.

CHARGE.

GC.--Right Eminent Sir, having been called by the members of this Grand Body to fill the highest office in their gift, I congratulate you upon having received such distinction at their hands, and I now invest you with the Jewel of your office.

Your authority will at all times be respected and your orders will be cheerfully obeyed. It is expected that you will not only have a watchful care over the interests of the Order in your jurisdiction, and enforce a prompt obedience to its Rules and Regulations, but that you will yourself exemplify, in your daily walk and conversation, the excellent tenets of your profession; that your ears will never be closed to the cry of the widow and the orphan; and that you will not turn aside from injured innocence, or from a frater in distress. Maintain with unfaltering zeal the Statutes and Regulations of this Grand Body, and by your own respect for law prompt others to a cheerful obedience of all lawful requirements. You will now assume your station.

The Grand Commander is escorted by the Grand Marshal to his station, where he stands.

GC.--Sir Knights, Present SWORDS! Behold your Grand Commander! Grand Commander, behold the Grand Commandery!

[p. 104]

Remarks by the new Grand Commander will now be in order. He will install the remaining Officers, or may request the Installing Officer to continue.

GC.--Sir Knights, Carry SWORDS! Return Swords BE SEATED!

GC.--Remaining Officers elect (they arise): Before proceeding to invest you with the honors and responsibilities of your several offices, it becomes my duty to administer to you the Obligation of office. As you have severally consented to take upon yourselves that Obligation, place yourselves in position to take that Vow.

The Grand Marshal will then cause each Sir Knight in the line of Officers elect occupying the odd number from the right of the line, to draw his Sword, and drop it to the left to a horizontal position. The Sir Knight on his left will lay his left hand upon the Sword, then each places his right hand upon his left breast, and repeats after the Grand Commander the following Vow:

GC.--Repeat after me:

I, --, do solemnly promise and vow, that I will maintain and support the Constitution, Laws, and Statutes of the Grand Encampment of the United States, the Constitution, Statutes, and Regulations of this Grand Commandery, and that I will, to the best of my ability, discharge the duties of the office to which I have been chosen.

GC.--Escort the Deputy Grand Commander to the East, and the remainder of the Officers elect will resume their seats.

G. MAR.--Right Eminent Grand Commander, I present unto you Very Eminent Sir --, who has been elected Deputy Grand Commander of this Grand Commandery, and who is now ready for installation.

[p. 105]

GC.--In the exalted station to which you have been chosen, Very Eminent Sir, you are the immediate representative of the Grand Commander, and in case of unforeseen casualty to him--which God forbid--you are to enter upon his functions and assume his responsibilities. The elevated position you are thus called to occupy demands a corresponding zeal and devotion on your part, which, I doubt not, you will ever be found ready to exercise. I now invest you with the Jewel of your office, and will only remind you that you are henceforward on duty, and that the faithful soldier and valiant Knight sleeps not at his post.

The Grand Marshal will present the remaining Officers in the same manner, when the Installing Officer will deliver to them the following Charges:

CHARGE TO THE GRAND GENERALISSIMO.

Eminent Sir, having been elected to the important station of Grand Generalissimo, I take great pleasure in investing you with the appropriate Jewel of your office. Your station is on the right of the Grand Commander, and the exercise of all your talents and zeal will be necessary in the discharge of your various duties. In the absence of your superior officers, the command will devolve upon you. I charge you, therefore, to be faithful to your associates; put them often in remembrance of those things which tend to their everlasting peace; be instant in season, out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all longsuffering and doctrine, ever remembering the promise, "Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life."

CHARGE TO THE GRAND CAPTAIN GENERAL.

Eminent Sir, the office of Grand Captain General, to which you have been elected, is one of the most important in the

[p. 106]

gift of the Grand Commandery, and I now invest you with the Jewel of your office. Your station is on the left of the Grand Commander, and you are to assist him and your associate officers in council, and in their absence to govern the Grand Commandery. You are to have in charge the Grand Asylum, and see that it is in suitable array for the dispatch of business. Improve your opportunities in extending knightly courtesy and hospitality to all true and faithful Sir Knights, and in the preservation of harmony within the bounds of our jurisdiction; and whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto men; continue in prayer, and watch in the same with thanksgiving; ever bearing in mind the promise, "Be not weary in well doing: for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not."

CHARGE TO THE GRAND PRELATE.

Revered Sir, to you has been assigned the sacred duties of the office of Grand Prelate, and I invest you with the appropriate Jewel of your office. Your station will be on the right of the Grand Generalissimo. The duties of your office are sacred and important, and will require your attendance at every Conclave. And may He who is able, abundantly furnish you for every good work, preserve you from falling into error, improve, strengthen, establish and perfect you; and finally greet you with, "Well done, thou good and faithful servant: enter thou into the joy of thy Lord."

CHARGE TO THE GRAND SENIOR WARDEN.

Eminent Sir, you have been elected Grand Senior Warden in this Grand Commandery, and I now invest you with the Jewel of your office. Your station is at the Southwest angle of the Triangle. Let it be your constant care that the Warrior be not deterred from duty, nor the Penitent molested on his journey.

[p. 107]

CHARGE TO THE GRAND JUNIOR WARDEN.

Eminent Sir, having been elected Grand Junior Warden, I now invest you with the Jewel of your office. Your station is at the Northwest angle of the Triangle. Your duty will be to attend on all visiting Knights, and, if found worthy, to introduce them, on the order of the Grand Commander, into the Asylum. Be ye therefore perfect, always abounding in the work of the Lord.

CHARGE TO THE GRAND TREASURER.

Eminent Sir, you have been elected Treasurer of the Grand Commandery, and I now invest you with the Jewel of your office. Your station is on the right, in front of the Grand Generalissimo. The qualities that should especially distinguish the incumbent of your station are accuracy and fidelity--accuracy, in keeping a fair and minute account of all receipts and disbursements; fidelity, in carefully preserving all the property and funds of the Grand Commandery that may lawfully come into your hands, and rendering a just account of the same whenever called upon. Your respect for and attachment to this Grand Commandery and the great Order of the Temple, will stimulate you to a zealous, faithful, and prompt discharge of the trust confided to you.

CHARGE TO THE GRAND RECORDER.

Eminent Sir, by the suffrages of the Grand Commandery you have been chosen Grand Recorder, and I now invest you with the Jewel of your office. In selecting you to discharge the duties of this most important trust, the Sir Knights have been guided by a belief that you possess in a large degree the qualities that should distinguish a Grand Recorder. I can not doubt your resolve to discharge these important duties with benefit to this Grand Commandery, and with

[p. 108]

honor to yourself. Your station, to which you will now repair, is on the left, and in front, of the Grand Captain General.

CHARGE TO THE GRAND STANDARD BEARER.

Eminent Sir, to you has been awarded the distinction of Grand Standard Bearer, and I now invest you with the Jewel appropriate to that office. Your station is in the West. Your duty is to display, support, and protect the Banner of our Order, which I now place in your official custody. Let your conduct be such that the virtuous will delight to imitate it.

CHARGE TO THE GRAND SWORD BEARER.

Eminent Sir, having been elected Grand Sword Bearer, I now invest you with the Jewel of your office. Your station is on the right of the Grand Standard Bearer. You are to assist in the protection of the Banner of our Order with that mystic Sword which is endowed with justice and tempered by mercy.

CHARGE TO THE GRAND WARDER.

Eminent Sir, the Grand Commandery has selected you to fill the office of Grand Warder, and I now invest you with the Jewel of your office. Your station is on the left of the Grand Standard Bearer. Your duty is to announce the approach of the Grand Commander, and to announce all visiting Sir Knights who may be admitted to the privileges of our Conclaves. You will therefore be punctual, and by a strict performance of duty merit not only the honor now conferred upon you, but the commendation of all Sir Knights who may experience your official courtesy.

CHARGE TO THE GRAND CAPTAIN OF THE GUARD.

Eminent Sir, you have been elected to the responsible station of Grand Captain of the Guard, and I now invest you

[p. 109]

with the Jewel appropriate to your office. Holding the post of danger and of honor, your vigilance should be sleepless, your courage undaunted, and your courtesy beyond question. See to it that the avenues of approach are strictly guarded. Your courage should keep the unworthy at bay, but the valiant and the true should receive from you the knightly welcome due to a Soldier of the Cross.

GC.--Sir Knight Grand Marshal, make Proclamation in the East.

G. MAR.--Sir Knights, ATTENTION! In the name and by authority of the Grand Commandery of Knights Templar of the State of --, I proclaim the Officers thereof duly elected and installed.

GC.--Grand Commandery, BE SEATED!

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 110]

  

INSTALLATION OF GRAND ENCAMPMENT.

________________

THE Grand Encampment has adopted only the Vow to be taken by its Officers, but certain ceremonies are usually observed in administering that Vow, and in installing each into his office. The following is offered to the consideration of the Grand Encampment at its Conclave of 1895:

GM.--Sir Knights, your Grand Master, and the other Grand Officers whom you have chosen, are in readiness for installation. The Grand Marshal will announce to them our readiness to install the Grand Master, and he will escort the Grand Master and the Officers elect to the East.

The Grand Marshal repairs to the room in which the Officers elect are assembled, and will escort them, in single file, to the Asylum. When they reach the door of the Asylum--

GW.--The Grand Master elect, and his associate Officers, approach.

The Grand Master calls up the Grand Encampment; a March is played as they pass down the Asylum, and halt in the East, in front of chairs prepared as seats for them.

G. MAR.--Most Eminent Grand Master, the Grand Officers elect are before you, and await your pleasure.

GM.--Excellent Grand Prelate, lead us in a solemn Invocation to the Throne of Grace. Sir Knights, UNCOVER!

The Grand Prelate will offer the following, or some other appropriate

[p. 111]

PRAYER.

OUR FATHER, who art in Heaven, bow down Thine ear, we beseech Thee, and hearken unto the voice of our supplication. Pardon our sins, and blot our transgressions, and give unto each of us a broken and a contrite spirit.

Give unto these, Thy servants, whom we have chosen to rule over us, wisdom from on high. Give unto each the spirit of the Master, and may the words of their mouths and the meditations of their hearts be acceptable in Thy sight, through Jesus Christ, our Lord, and our Redeemer. AMEN!

GM.--Sir Knights, RE-COVER! Officers elect, before I can install you into your respective stations, I must receive from you a solemn Vow to be faithful to the trust about to be reposed in you. Most Eminent Grand Master elect, are you ready to take such a Vow?

He answers in the affirmative.

GM.--Very Eminent Deputy Grand Master, are you so ready?

He answers in the affirmative.

GM.--Are you all so ready?

They all say, each for himself, "I am".

GM.--Let the Grand Master elect approach the East.

Grand Marshal escorts him to the East.

GM.--Most Eminent Sir, you will now uncover, place your right hand upon your heart, and repeat after me:

The Grand Master uncovers.

[p. 112]

I, --, do promise and vow that I will support and maintain the Constitution and Statutes of the Grand Encampment of Knights Templar of the United States of America, and will use my best endeavors to cause a proper observance of the same, according to the authority which is in me vested; and that I will, to the best of my ability, faithfully discharge the duties pertaining to the office to which I have been elected.

GM.--Most Eminent Sir, I now with pleasure invest you with the Jewel of your high office, the highest in the gift of the great Order of the Temple.

The GM. takes the Jewel from his own breast, goes down and places it on the breast of the new Grand Master.

GM.--One so distinguished in the Order needs no admonition from me as to how this Jewel should be worn. The interests of the Order are placed in your hands, whether for weal or woe depends upon the fulfillment of the promises you have made to yourself, and to us. This body, whose chief you now are, feels confident that you will not abuse or pervert the powers conferred upon you as Grand Master.

It is known to you that to rule well has not been the lot of all called to such duty. And it is further known to you that it is not by a strong arm, or by an iron will, that order and obedience are secured, but by holding the key to the hearts of men. We hope and believe that you now and ever will hold such a key.

You will ascend to your station in the Grand East, and receive the salutations of your Companions-in-arms.

The Grand Master is escorted to his chair by the Grand Marshal. He stands in his station.

[p. 113]

GM.--Most Eminent Sir, I now salute you, and proclaim you Grand Master of the Grand Encampment of Knights Templar of the United States of America!

GM.--Sir Knights, Behold your Grand Master!

The Grand Encampment will salute with the sign of the Order. The new Grand Master will make such remarks as he desires.

IN. OF.--Most Eminent Grand Master, the remaining Officers elect await your pleasure.

The Grand Master will install the remainder of the Officers, or he may ask the Installing Officer to continue.

GM.--Sir Knights, BE SEATED!

IN. OF.--Officers elect, ATTENTION! Place your right hands upon your hearts, uncover, and repeat after me:

Same Vow as that taken by the Grand Master.

IN. OF.--Present the Deputy Grand Master, and the remaining Officers elect will be seated.

G. MAR.--Most Eminent Sir, I present Very Eminent Sir --, who has been chosen Deputy Grand Master, and is now ready for installation.

IN. OF.--Very Eminent Sir, you are aware that in case of incapacity of the Grand Master to act, you are to succeed to his duties. Remember that you are placed in most intimate relations with him, as head of the Order.

I now invest you with the Jewel of your office, and the Grand Marshal will conduct you to your station, on the right of the Most Eminent Grand Master.

[p. 114]

The Grand Marshal will present the remaining Grand Officers as the Installing Officer may direct.

GRAND GENERALISSIMO AND GRAND CAPTAIN GENERAL.

IN. OF.--Invest the Eminent Fratres with the Jewels of their offices. (Done by Grand Marshal.) Sir Knights, repair to your stations, and be not weary in well doing, for in due season you shall reap if you faint not!

THE GRAND WARDENS.

IN. OF.--Invest the Eminent Fratres with the Jewels of their offices. (Done.) Sir Knights, repair to your stations, and see that the courtesies of the Grand Encampment are extended to all worthy visiting Knights of the Order of the Temple.

THE GRAND TREASURER AND GRAND RECORDER.

IN. OF.--Sir Knights, you have been chosen to responsible stations, because the Grand Encampment believed you worthy and competent. See to it that their confidence has been well reposed. Repair to your stations.

STANDARD BEARER, SWORD BEARER, AND WARDER.

IN. OF.--Place the Grand Standard in possession of its new Bearer. (Done.) Sir Knight, bear it worthily, and so display its precious emblem--in which Sign we shall all conquer--that each valiant Knight may be prompted to exclaim in the words of its gracious inscription, "Not unto us, O Lord; not unto us, but unto thy Name be the glory."

And you, Sir Knight Sword Bearer, protect that Banner at peril of your life. And if, in the vicissitudes of the next three years, it should fall from the hands of its Bearer, raise it aloft, for unto that honor you temporarily succeed.

[p. 115]

Sir Knight Warder, be vigilant in the discharge of your responsible duties. Look well to the avenues of the Asylum, and see that all are duly guarded.

Sir Knights, repair to your stations, and remember that zeal and vigilance are necessary prerequisites to your offices.

IN. OF.--The Grand Marshal will make Proclamation. Grand Encampment, ATTENTION!

G. MAR.--In the name and by the authority of the Grand Encampment of Knights Templar of the United States of America, I now proclaim the Officers thereof duly elected and installed.

GM.--Grand Encampment, BE SEATED!

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 116]

  

TEMPLAR UNIFORM.

______________

  

EDICT OF 1886.

1. The Uniform of Knights Templar, Knights of Malta, and Knights of the Red Cross, under the immediate jurisdiction of the Grand Encampment, is that prescribed by the Grand Encampment. No other Uniform is allowed, except in case of Washington Commandery, No. 1, of District of Columbia, whose members are permitted to wear the Uniform prescribed and worn in that Commandery before the adoption of the regulation of 1882.

2. Each Grand Commandery shall have full power and authority to prescribe the Uniform to be worn by those belonging to its own jurisdiction, except that the Insignia of Rank shall always be under the exclusive control and regulation of the Grand Encampment, and no other authority shall alter, modify, or in any way interfere therewith.

______________

  

INSIGNIA OF OFFICE.

______

  

TO BE FOREVER UNDER THE EXCLUSIVE CONTROL OF THE GRAND ENCAMPMENT.

______

  

SHOULDER STRAPS.

  

EDICT OF 1892.

For the Grand Master, and Past Grand Masters of Grand Encampment:

Royal purple silk velvet, two inches wide by four inches long (outside measurement), bordered with two rows of embroidery, of gold, three-eighths of an inch wide; the Cross of Salem embroidered, of gold, in the center, lengthwise.

[p. 117]

For all other Grand Officers of the Grand Encampment:

The same as the Grand Master, except for the Cross of Salem the Patriarchal Cross, of gold, with the initials of the office, respectively, embroidered, of silver (Old English characters), at the foot of the Cross, narrowwise of the Strap.

For Officers and Past Grand Officers of Grand Commanderies, except Past Grand Commanders:

Bright red silk velvet, two inches wide by four inches long, bordered with one row of embroidery, of gold, a quarter of an inch wide; the Templar's Cross, of gold, with the initials of the office, respectively, to be embroidered (Old English characters) in silver on the lower end of the Strap.

For Past Grand Commanders:

The same as above, except that the color of the Shoulder Strap shall be royal purple, and the lettering omitted.

For the Commander of a Subordinate Commandery:

Emerald green silk velvet, one and a half inches wide by four inches long, bordered with one row of embroidery, of gold, one-quarter of an inch wide; the Passion Cross, with a halo, embroidered, of silver, in the center.

For Past Commanders of Subordinate Commanderies:

The same as for Commanders, except that the color of the Strap shall be bright red.

For the Generalissimo of a Subordinate Commandery:

Same as the Commander, except for the Passion Cross the Square, surmounted with the Paschal Lamb.

For the Captain General of a Subordinate Commandery:

Same as the Commander, except for the Passion Cross the Level, surmounted with the Cock.

[p. 118]

  

CROSSES.

Commanders and Past Commanders will wear the Passion Cross.

Grand and Past Grand Officers of Grand Commanderies will wear the Templar Cross.

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 119]

  

BURIAL SERVICE.

______________

  

GENERAL REGULATIONS.

1. No Knight Templar can be buried with the funeral honors of Knighthood, unless he be in regular standing.

2. It is the duty of the Eminent Commander to convene the Commandery, upon notice of the death of a Sir Knight who may be entitled to receive funeral honors, upon request, made when living or by his family after his decease, for the purpose of attending the funeral ceremonies.

3. The Knights, on such occasions, will attend in full uniform, pursuant to the regulations; their sword hilts and the Banner of the Commandery suitably dressed in mourning.

4. On the coffin of the deceased will be placed his hat and sword; and if an Officer, his jewel, trimmed with crape.

5. The Eminent Commander will preside during the services, and, assisted by the Prelate, lead in the ceremonies, pursuant to the Ritual. If Grand Officers or Past Grand Officers be present, they will be allotted a place in the procession according to their rank.

6. The Knights will assemble at their Asylum, and march to the residence of the deceased, in the usual order of processions, swords at Carry; the line being headed by the Warder, and the Officers being in the rear, according to rank; that is, the Eminent Commander last.

______________

The military movements necessary to the Burial Service will be conducted according to the Tactics of the Jurisdiction.

When desirable, the part of the service set down for the "Residence or the Church" may be deferred until the procession reaches the grave.

During the reading of the Scriptures, and during Prayer, all will Uncover without commands or signals, and Re-cover at conclusions.

If it is inconvenient to form the Triangle at the grave, the Commandery can be formed in two lines, one on each side of the grave,

[p. 120]

the Commander and Prelate at the head, pall-bearers beside the coffin, and mourners and friends at the foot.

The Ritual directs that the body be lowered into the grave immediately after the address by the Prelate, and when the Junior Warden removes the sword from the coffin. It has been the practice of the author of this MONITOR to not lower the coffin until the service was concluded, and the Lord's Prayer repeated. Then, while being lowered, to sing a hymn, which always proved a great relief to the mourners, as well as adding to the solemnities of the entire service.

It is effective to have the "Responses" made, in unison, by the Generalissimo and Captain General, only.

______________

  

THE RITUAL.

  

AT THE RESIDENCE, OR IN THE CHURCH.

EC.--Sir Knights, in the solemn rites of our Order, we have often been reminded of the fact that we were born to die. Mortality has been brought to view, that we might more earnestly seek an immortality beyond this fleeting life, where death comes no more forever. The sad and mournful knell has betokened that another spirit has winged its flight to a new existence. An alarm has come to the door of our Asylum, and the messenger was Death. None presumed to say to the awful presence: "Who dares approach?" A pilgrim warrior has been summoned, "and there is no discharge in that war." A burning taper of life in our Commandery has been extinguished, and none save the High and Holy One can re-light it. All that remains of our beloved companion lies mute before us, and the light of the eye, and the breathing of the lips, in fraternal greeting, has ceased to us forever on this side of the grave. His Sword, vowed to be drawn in the cause of truth, justice, and liberty, only, reposes in its scabbard, and we can no longer shield him from wrong and oppression.

[p. 121]

The Knights here return Swords without command, on the signal of the Eminent Commander.

It is meet, at such a time, that we should be silent, and allow the words of the Infinite and Undying to speak, that we may gather consolation from His revelations, and have impressed upon our minds lessons of wisdom, instruction, and the meetness of preparation for the last great change which must pass upon us all.

Let us be reverently attentive while our Prelate reads unto us a lesson from the Holy Scriptures.

P.--Help, Lord: for the faithful fail from among the children of men.

RES.--Help us, O Lord.

P.--The righteous cry, and the Lord heareth, and delivereth them out of all their troubles.

RES.--Hear us, O Lord.

P.--The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart: and saveth such as be of a contrite spirit.

RES.--Be nigh unto us, O Lord.

P.--The Lord redeemeth the soul of his servants: and none of them that trust in Him shall be desolate.

RES.--Redeem us, O Lord.

P.--For I will not trust in my bow, neither shall my sword save me.

RES.--Redeem us, O Lord.

[p. 122]

P.--But God will redeem my soul from the power of the grave: for he shall receive me.

RES.--Redeem us, O Lord.

P.--Wilt thou shew wonders to the dead? Shall the dead arise and praise thee? Shall thy lovingkindness be declared in the grave? or thy faithfulness in destruction?

RES.--Save us, O Lord.

P.--We spend our years as a tale that is told. The days of our years are threescore years and ten; and if by reason of strength they be fourscore years, yet is their strength labor and sorrow; for it is soon cut off, and we fly away. So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.

RES.--Teach us, O Lord.

P.--For he knoweth our frame; he remembereth that we are dust. As for man, his days are as grass: as a flower of the field, so he flourisheth. For the wind passeth over it, and it is gone; and the place thereof shall know it no more. But the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him.

RES.--Show mercy, O Lord.

P.--We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed, In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump: for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed. For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality. So when this corruptible shall have put on in-

[p. 123]

corruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory. O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?

RES.--O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?

P.--The sting of death is sin; and the strength of sin is the law. But thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ..

RES.--Thanks be unto God.

EC.--Shall the memory of our departed brother fade from among men?

RES.--It is cherished in our souls forever.

EC.--Shall no record be left of his virtues and worth?

RES.--It is inscribed upon our hearts; it is written in our archives; the heart may cease to throb, and the archives may moulder and decay, but the tablets of the Recording Angel on high can never perish.

The Recorder here opens the Book of Records of the Commandery, on which a page is set apart, suitably inscribed, and says:

RECORDER.--Thus it is written.

The Knights bow their heads.

EC.--He was a true and courteous Knight, and has fallen in life's struggle full knightly, with his armor on.

P.--Rest to his ashes and peace to his soul.

[p. 124]

RES.--Rest to his ashes and peace to his soul.

P.--Sovereign Ruler of the Universe! into thy hands we devoutly and submissively commit the departed spirit.

RES.--Thy will be done, O God.

A Hymn will then be sung.

The following, or an extemporaneous, Prayer will then be made by the Prelate, or by any clergyman present:

FATHER OF LIGHT, in this dark and trying hour of calamity and sorrow, we humbly lift our hearts to Thee. Give us, we pray, that light which cometh down from above. Thou hast mercifully said in Thy holy word, that the bruised reed Thou wouldst not break; remember in mercy, O Lord, these bereaved ones now before Thee. [Be Thou, at this hour, the Father of the fatherless, and the widow's God. Administer to them the consolations which they so sorely need.] Cause us to look away from these sad scenes of frail mortality to the hopes which lie beyond the grave, and bind us yet closer together in the ties of brotherly love and affection. While we see how frail is man, and how uncertain the continuance of our lives upon the earth, and are reminded of our own mortality, lead us, by Thy grace and spirit, to turn our thoughts to those things which make for our everlasting peace; and give us a frame of mind to make a proper improvement of all the admonitions of thy providence, and fix our thoughts more devotedly on Thee, the only sure refuge in time of need. And at last, when our earthly pilgrimage shall be ended, or ever the silver cord be loosed, or the golden bowl be broken, wilt Thou, in that moment of mortal extremity be indeed Emmanuel--God with us! May the lamp of Thy love dispel the gloom of the dark valley, and may we be enabled by the intercession of Thy

[p. 125]

[paragraph continues] Son, to gain admission into the blessed Asylum above; and in Thy glorious presence, enjoy a union with the spirits of the departed, perfect as is the happiness of heaven, and durable as the eternity of God. AMEN!

RES.--AMEN AND AMEN!

All Re-cover.

The procession will then form and march to the place of interment, in the same order as before.

AT THE GRAVE.

On arriving at the place, while forming in order, a suitable Dirge may be played by the band.

The Knights will form, if convenient, a Triangle around the grave, the base being at the foot, the Eminent Commander and Prelate being at the head, and the friends and relatives at the foot. If a Triangle is inconvenient, form in two lines on the sides of the grave.

P.--Sir Knights, there is one sacred spot upon the earth where the footfalls of our march are unheeded; our trumpets quicken no pulse and incite no fear; the rustling of our banners and the gleam of our swords awaken no emotion. It is the silent city of the dead where we now stand. Awe rests upon every heart, and the stern warrior's eyes are bedewed with feelings which never shame his manhood. It needs no siege, nor assault, nor beleaguering host to enter its walls; we fear no sortie, and listen for no battle shout. No Warder's challenge greets the ear, nor do we wait awhile with patience for permission to enter.

Hither must we all come at last; and the stoutest heart and the manliest form that surrounds me will then be led a captive, without title or rank, in the chains of mortality and the habiliments of slavery to the King of Terrors.

But if he has been faithful to the Captain of his Salvation,

[p. 126]

a true Soldier of the Cross; if he has offered suitable gifts at the shrine of his departed Lord, and bears the signet of the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, then play he claim to be of that princely house and to be admitted to audience with the Sovereign Master of Heaven and Earth. Then will he be stripped of the chains of earthly captivity and clothed in a white garment, glistening as the sun, and be seated with princes and rulers, and partake of a libation, not of death and sorrow, but of that wine which is drunk forever new in the Father's kingdom above.

We can not come here without subdued hearts and softened affections. Often as the challenge conies which takes from our side some loved associate, some cherished companion-in-arms, and often as the trumpet sounds its wailing notes to summon us to the death-bed and the brink of the sepulchre, we can not contemplate "the last of earth" unmoved. Each successive death-note snaps some fiber which binds us to this lower existence and makes us pause and reflect upon that dark and gloomy chamber where we must all terminate our pilgrimage. Well will it be for our peace then, if we can wash our hands, not only in token of sincerity, but of every guilty stain, and give honest and satisfactory answers to the questions required.

The sad and solemn scene now before us stirs up these recollections with a force and vivid power which we have hitherto unfelt. He who now slumbers in that last, long, unbroken sleep of death was our brother. With him have we walked the pilgrimage of life and kept ward and watch together in its vicissitudes and trials. He is now removed beyond the effect of our praise or censure. That we loved him our presence here evinces; and we remember him in scenes to which the world was not witness, and where the better feelings of humanity were exhibited without disguise. That he had faults and foibles is but to repeat what his mortality

[p. 127]

demonstrates--that he had a human nature, not divine. Over these errors, whatever they may have been, we cast, while living, the mantle of charity; it should, with much more reason, enshroud him in death. We who have been taught to extend the point of charity even to a foe when fallen, can not be severe or merciless toward a loved brother.

The memory of his virtues lingers in our remembrance and reflects its shining lustre beyond the portals of the tomb. The earthen vase which has contained precious odors will lose none of its fragrance, though the clay be broken and shattered. So be it with our brother's memory.

The Junior Warden removes the Sword from the coffin, which will then be lowered into the grave, while the Prelate repeats as follows: (See General Regulations for a different ceremony.)

P.--I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die. To the earth we commit the mortal remains of our deceased brother,--we have already commended his soul to his Creator,--with humble submission to Divine Providence. (Here cast some earth on the coffin.) Earth to earth (cast earth again); ashes to ashes (cast more earth); dust to dust--till the morn of the resurrection, when, like our risen and ascended Redeemer, he shall break the bonds of death, and abide the judgment of the great day. Till then, Friend, Brother, Sir Knight, farewell! Light lie the ashes upon thee, and may the sunshine of heaven beam bright on thy waking!

RES.--AMEN AND AMEN!

The Junior Warden presents the Sword to the Eminent Commander, who says:

EC.--Our departed brother was taught, while living, that

[p. 128]

this Sword, in his hands, as a true and courteous Knight, was endowed with three most estimable qualities: Its hilt with justice impartial; its blade with fortitude undaunted; and its point with mercy unrestrained. To these lessons, with their deep emblematical significance, we trust he gave diligent heed. He could never grasp its hilt without being reminded of the lively significance of the attributes it inculcated. He has borne the pangs of dissolving nature,--may we trust that with the same fortitude he sustained the trials of this passing existence. To his name and memory be justice done, as we hope to receive the like justice ourselves. And may that mercy unrestrained, which is the glorious attribute of the Son of God, interpose in his behalf to parry the sword of Divine Justice, and to admit him to the blessed companionship of saints and angels in the realms of light and life eternal.

RES.--AMEN AND AMEN!

The Senior Warden presents a Cross to the Prelate, who says:

P.--This symbol of faith--the Christian's hope and the Christian's trust--we again place upon the breast of our brother, there to remain till the last trumpet shall sound and earth and sea yield up their dead. Though it may, in the past history of our race, have been perverted into an ensign of oppression and wrong; though it may have been made the emblem of fraud and superstition and moral darkness, its true significance remained,--the badge of the Christian warrior. To-day it calls to mind Gethsemane and its sorrowful garden; the judgment hall of Pilate and the pitiless crown of thorns; Golgotha and Calvary, and their untold agonies, that fallen man might live and inherit everlasting life. If an inspired apostle was not ashamed of the

[p. 129]

[paragraph continues] Cross, neither should we be; if he gloried in the significance of the truths it shadowed forth, so ought we to rejoice in it as the speaking witness of our reliance beyond the grave. May this hope of the living have been the anchor to the soul of our departed brother--the token to admit him to that peaceful haven where the wicked cease from troubling and the weary are at rest.

RES.--AMEN AND AMEN!

The Prelate drops the Cross into the grave, or lays it on the coffin, and continues:

P.--The Orders of Christian Knighthood were instituted in a dark period of the world's history, but their mission was high and holy. To succor and protect the sorrowing and destitute, the innocent and oppressed, was their vow and their life-long labor and duty. For long, long years they well and nobly performed their vows and did their devoirs. In those rude ages the steel blade was oftener the arbiter of justice than the judgments of judicial tribunals or the decrees of magistrates. So long as the Templars adhered to their vows of poverty they were virtuous and innocent, and their language was in truth, "Silver and gold have I none; but such as I have give I thee." But, with the accession of wealth and civil power, they were tempted, and fell from their high estate, and their possessions attracted the cupidity and their prowess incurred the hatred of the despots of those times. When the martyred De Molai had perished and the Order was proscribed, they united with the fraternity of Free and Accepted Masons, and returned to their primitive simplicity of manners; and a rough habit, coarse diet and severe duty was all that was offered to their votaries.

[p. 130]

In our land we have perpetuated only the distinctive rites, with the appellations and regulations of the defenders of the Holy Sepulchre--the early champions and soldiers of the Cross--and this as a guerdon of merit, not a badge of rank. The Sword in our hands is more as a symbol of the duties we have vowed to fulfill than an instrument of assault or defense. We claim to exercise practical virtues in the holy bonds of our confraternity, in humble imitation of those renowned Knights of the olden time; for there is still in this refined age innocence to be guarded, widowed hearts to be relieved of their burdens, and orphanage to be protected from the chill blasts of a wintry world; and to be true and courteous is not limited to any age or clime.

Our brother, whose cold and lifeless remains have just been committed to the earth, was one of our fraternal band, bound by the same ties and pledged to the same duties. To his bereaved and mourning friends and relatives we have but little worldly consolation to offer, but we do tender them our heartfelt sympathies. And if the solemn and interesting ceremonies in which we have been engaged have not pointed them to a higher hope and a better consolation, then all our condolence would be in vain.

Sir Knight Companions, let us pray.

Here all repeat the LORD'S PRAYER.

The Prelate will then pronounce the following

BENEDICTION.

The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Ghost, be with you all. AMEN!

Lines are reformed, and the Commandery returns to the Asylum.

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 131]

  

THE ORDER OF MALTA,

  

OR

  

KNIGHT HOSPITALER,

  

OF THE ORDER OF

  

SAINT JOHN OF JERUSALEM, PALESTINE, RHODES AND MALTA.

______________________

  

According to the Ritual Adopted by Grand Encampment in 1883.

______________________

  

TO OPEN A PRIORY.

ALL being suitably equipped, and the Priory suitably arrayed, the necessary precautionary steps will be taken. This is the array:

Click to enlarge

[p. 132]

  

KNIGHT OF SAINT PAUL.

  

PAUL AT MELITA (MALTA).

And when they were escaped, then they knew that the island was called Melita. And the barbarous people shewed us no little kindness: for they kindled a fire, and received us every one, because of the present rain, and because of the cold. And when Paul had gathered a bundle of sticks, and laid them on the fire, there came a viper out of the heat, and fastened on his hand. And when the barbarians saw the venomous beast hang on his hand, they said among themselves, No doubt this man is a murderer, whom, though he hath escaped the sea, yet vengeance suffereth not to live. And he shook off the beast into the fire, and felt no harm. Howbeit they looked when he should have swollen, or fallen down dead suddenly: but after they had looked a great while, and saw no harm come to him, they changed their minds, and said that he was a god. Acts xxviii: 1-6.

  

PAUL'S EXHORTATION.

And now I exhort you to be of good cheer: for there shall be no loss of any man's life among you, but of the ship. For there stood by me this night the angel of God, whose I am, and whom I serve, saying, Fear not, Paul; thou must be brought before Caesar: and, lo, God hath given thee all them that sail with thee. Wherefore, sirs, be of good cheer: for I believe God, that it shall be even as it was told me. Acts xxvii: 22-25.

  

F N. P.

[p. 133]

  

KNIGHT HOSPITALER.

B. L. D. R. A.

  

VOW.

Admitted.                Raised.

  

THE BEATITUDES.

Blessed are the poor in spirit: for their's is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted. Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth. Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be filled. Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy. Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God. Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God. Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness' sake: for their's is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake. Matt. v: 3-11.

  

DOUBTING THOMAS.

But Thomas, one of the twelve, called Didymus, was not with them when Jesus came. The other disciples therefore said unto him, We have seen the Lord. But he said unto them, Except I shall see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I will not believe. And after eight days again his disciples were within, and Thomas with them: then

[p. 134]

came Jesus, the doors being shut, and stood in the midst, and said, Peace be unto you. Then saith he to Thomas, Reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands; and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side; and be not faithless, but believing. And Thomas answered and said unto him, My Lord and my God. John xx: 24-28.

  

THE INSCRIPTION.

And Pilate wrote a title, and put it on the cross. And the writing was, JESUS OF NAZARETH THE KING OF THE JEWS. John xix: 19.

Here endeth the third lesson.

  

RECOGNITION.

NOTE.--As a new ORDER OF MALTA will (D. V.) be submitted to the Grand Encampment, at its Triennial, Boston, 1893, the above will be sufficient for the Commanderies at present.

[p. 135]

  

FLOOR PLAN

  

OF THE PROPOSED REVISED RITUAL OF THE ORDER OF MALTA.

Click to enlarge

Stations same as in K. T. at Opening. The dotted lines show course of second entrance.

This plan contemplates the use of a single Hall, which is most desirable. The Bulwarks are Cyprus, Rhodes, and Malta. Meditations at these are on the Birth, Life, Death, Resurrection and Ascension of our Saviour.

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 136] [p. 137]

  

SECOND APPENDIX

[p. 138] [p. 139]

  

ANNO DOMINI.

The Christian Era was first used by a Roman abbot, Denys le Petit, or Dionisius Exigus, about the year 527. It was generally adopted in England in the eighth century. The Council of Chelsea, July, 816, ordained that all bishops should date their acts from the year of the incarnation of our Saviour. In the Eastern Empire it was not in general use until after the capture of Constantinople by Mahomet II, in 1453.

Down to 1752 the Historical year in England commenced on January 1st, and the Ecclesiastical, Civil (Legal) year commenced on March 25th. This led to great confusion, to avoid which it was long the custom to add the date of the Historical to that of the Legal year, when speaking of any day between January 1st and March 25th, thus:

Others wrote it thus: January. 30, 1645-9. The lower, or last, figure always indicated the year according to the present calculation.

  

MASONIC CALENDARS.

The various bodies of Freemasonry have adopted Calendars for their special use. In the following table the figures are carried out for the year 1893.

KNIGHTS TEMPLAR founded 1118. Hence Anno Ordinis 775.

SECOND TEMPLE began to be built by Zerubbabel, B. C. 330.

Hence the ROYAL ARCH, Anno Inventionis (Year of Discovery) 2423.

ROYAL AND SELECT MASTERS refer to completion of the Temple, 1000 B. C.

Hence R. AND A. MASTERS, Anno Depositionis (Year of Deposit) 2893.

ANCIENT CRAFT MASONS use Anno Lucis (Year of Light)--Creation 5893.

SCOTTISH RITE uses Anno Mundi (Year of World)--Creation 5653.

  

THE MOON'S RISING AND SETTING.

At 4 days old the moon sets at about 10 at night.

At 5 days old at about 11 at night.

At 6 days old at about 12 at night.

At 7 days old at or near I in morning.

[p. 140]

At 15 days old at full it rises about 6 in evening.

At 16 days old at a quarter past 7 in evening.

At 17 days old at half past 8 in evening.

At IS days old about Lo at night.

At 19 clays old about 11 at night.

At 20 days old about 12 at night.

  

THE DIVISION OF TIME.

  

DAYS OF THE WEEK.

SUNDAY (Anglo-Saxon, Sunnandaeg), day of the sun.

MONDAY (Anglo-Saxon, Monandaeg), day of the moon.

TUESDAY (Anglo-Saxon, Tiwesdaeg), from Tiw, the god of war.

WEDNESDAY (Anglo-Saxon, Wodnesdaeg), from Odin, the god of storms.

THURSDAY (Anglo-Saxon, Thunresdaeg), day of Thor, the god of thunder.

FRIDAY (Anglo-Saxon, Frigedaeg), day of Freya, goddess of marriage.

SATURDAY (Anglo-Saxon, Saterdaeg; Latin, Dies Saturnus), day of Saturn, the god of time.

The Chinese and Thibetans have a week of five days, named after iron, wood, water, feathers and earth.

  

NAMES OF THE MONTHS.

JANUARY.--The Roman Janus presided over the beginning of everything; hence the first month of the year was called after him.

FEBRUARY (Latin, Februarius).--The month of purification; on the 15th day of this month the Feast of Expiation was held.

MARCH.--Named from the Roman god of war, Mars.

APRIL, (Latin, Aprilis).--Probably derived from aperire, to open; because spring generally begins and the buds open in this month.

MAY (Latin, Maius).--From Maia, a feminine divinity worshiped at Rome on the Ist day of this month.

JUNE.--From Juno, a Roman divinity worshiped as the queen of heaven.

JULY (Julius). Julius Caesar was born in this month.

AUGUST.--Named by the Emperor Augustus Caesar, B. C. 30, after himself. He regarded it as a fortunate month, being that in which he had gained several victories.

[p. 141]

SEPTEMBER (Septem, or seven).--September was the seventh month in the old Roman calendar.

OCTOBER (Octo, or eight).--Eighth month of the old Roman year.

NOVEMBER (Novem, or nine).--November was the ninth month in the old Roman year.

DECEMBER (Decem, or ten).--December was the tenth month of the early Roman year. About the twenty-first of this month the sun enters the Tropic of Capricorn, and forms the winter solstice.

  

THE YEAR.

The Solar or astronomical year was, 265 years B. C., determined to comprise 365 days, 5 hours, 48 minutes, 51 seconds. The Lunar year, comprehending 12 moons, or 354 days, 8 hours, 48 minutes, was the regulator of time among the Chaldeans, Persians and Jews. Till the time of William the Conqueror the English began their year on the 25th of December. Down to 1732 the year did not legally commence till the 25th of March. In Scotland, at that date, the year began on the 1st of January.

To adjust the Calendar, a new one was published by Pope Gregory XIII in 1582, omitting ten days, the 5th of October becoming the 15th. The New Style was not adopted in Great Britain till 1752, when eleven days were jumped, the 3d of September being reckoned the 14th. In Russia and the East the Old Style is still in force, and all Russian dates are twelve days earlier than English.

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 142]

  

GENERAL INFORMATION

  

FOR ALL MEMBERS OF THE ORDER OF THE TEMPLE.

  

KNIGHT TEMPLAR GRAND JURISDICTIONS OF THE UNITED STATES.

 

           

       ADMITTED
   TO THE
   UNION.

       ORGANIZED
   GRAND
   COM'ND'RY.

       GRAND RECORDERS.

     
      STATES.

       Name.

       Post   Office.

     
      Alabama

       1819

       1862

       E. R. Hastings

       Montgomery.

     
      Arkansas

       1836

       1872

       James A. Henry

       Little Rock.

     
      California

       1850

       1858

       T. H. Caswell

       San Francisco

     
      Colorado

       1876

       1876

       E. C. Parmelee

       Denver.

     
      Connecticut

        

       1827

       Joseph K. Wheeler

       Hartford.

     
      Georgia

        

       1860

       S. P. Hamilton

       Savannah.

     
      Illinois

       1818

       1857

       Gil. W. Barnard

       Chicago.

     
      Indiana

       1816

       1854

       W. H. Smythe

       Indianapolis.

     
      Iowa

       1846

       1864

       Alfred Wingate

       Des Moines

     
      Kansas

       1861

       1868

       Dwight Byington

       Leavenworth.

     
      Kentucky

       1792

       1847

       L. D. Croninger

       Covington.

     
      Louisiana

       1812

       1864

       Richard Lambert

       New Orleans.

     
      Maine

       1820

       1852

       Stephen Berry

       Portland.

     
      Maryland

        

       1871

       J. H. Miller

       Baltimore.

     
      Massachusetts and Rhode Island

        

       1805

       Benjamin W. Rowell

       Lynn.

     
      Michigan

       1837

       1857

       John A. Gerow

       Detroit.

     
      Minnesota

       1858

       1865

       Thomas Montgomery

       St. Paul.

     
      Mississippi

       1817

       1857

       John L. Power

       Jackson.

     
      Missouri

       1821

       1860

       William H. Mayo

       St. Louis.

     
      Montana

       1889

       1888

       Cornelius Hedges

       Helena.

     
      Nebraska

       1867

       1871

       William R. Bowen

       Omaha.

     
      New Hampshire

        

       1860

       George P. Cleaves

       Concord.

     
      New Jersey

        

       1860

       Charles Bechtel

       Trenton.

     
      New York

        

       1840

       Robert Macoy

       Brooklyn.

     
      North Carolina

        

       1881

       H. H. Munson

       Wilmington.

     
      North Dakota

       1889

       1890

       F. J. Thompson

       Fargo.

     
      Ohio

       1802

       1843

       John N. Bell

       Dayton.

     
      Oregon

       1859

       1887

       J. F. Robinson

       Eugene City.

     
      Pennsylvania

        

       1844

       M. H. Smith

       Philadelphia.

     
      South Dakota

       1889

       1884

       W. H. Holt

       Sioux Falls.

     
      Tennessee

       1796

       1859

       Wilbur F. Foster

       Nashville.

     
      Texas

       1845

       1855

       Robert Brewster

       Houston.

     
      Vermont

       1791

       1831

       W. G. Reynolds Burlington.

        

     
      Virginia

        

       1822

       William B. Isaacs

       Richmond.

     
      Washington

       1889

       1887

       Yancy C. Blalock

       Walla Walla.

     
      West Virginia

       1863

       1874

       R. C. Dunuington

       Fairmont.

     
      Wisconsin

       1848

       1859

       J. W. Laflin

       Milwaukee.

     
      Wyoming

       1890

       1888

       A. J. Parshall

       Cheyenne.

     
   
     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 143]

  

THE NAME OF GOD IN TWENTY-TWO LANGUAGES.

[Sic.--JBH]

Assyrian, Eleah; Celtic, Diu; Chinese, Prussa; Arabic, Allah; Dutch, Godt; Danish, Gut; English, God; French, Dieu; Greek, Theos; Hebrew, Elohim; Hindoostanee, Rain; German, Gott; Irish, Dia; Italian, Dio; Japanese, Goezur; Latin, Deus; Norwegian, Gud; Portuguese, Deos; Persian, Sire; Peruvian, Puchecammac; Spanish, Dios; Turkish, Alah.

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

  

POPULAR ABBREVIATIONS.

  

SPECIALLY FOR RECORDERS OF COMMANDERIES.

A. C. (Ante Christum), Before Christ.

B. C., Before Christ.

A. D. (Anno Domini), Year of our Lord.

AeT., Aged.

A. V., Authorized Version.

D. V. (Deo Volente), God willing.

G. M., Grand Master.

IBID. (Ibidem), In the same place.

ID. (Idem), The same.

I. E. (Id est), That is.

I. H. S. (Jesus Hominum Salvator, or In Hoc Salus), Jesus Saviour of men, or In Him is Salvation.

I. N. R. I. (Iesus Nazarenus Rex Judaeorum), Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews.

K. T., Knight Templar.

K. M., Knight of Malta.

L. S. (Locus Sigilli), Place of the seal.

N. B. (Nota Bene), Take notice.

NEM. CON. (Nemine contradicente), Unanimously.

OB. (Obiit), Died.

PRO TEM. (Pro tempore), For the time being.

PROX. (Proximo), Next.

Q. V. (Quod vide), Which see.

SC. (Sculpsit), Engraved.

ULT. (Ultimo), Last.

V. (Vide), See.

VIZ. (Videlicet), Namely.

ETC. (Et cetera), And so forth.

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 144]

  

SOME WORDS NOT FULLY UNDERSTOOD

ACRE, Ack'-er, A city of Syria of Crusade interest.

ACACIA, Acay'-shi-a, An evergreen, thorny plant.

ADONAI, Ay-do'-nah, Lord, used where Jehovah occurs.

AGNUS DEI, Ag'-nus Dee'-i, Lamb of God.

AHASUERUS, Ay-has-yu-ee'-rus, King of Persia.

ALMONER, Al'-mo-ner, One who distributes alms.

ANNO ORDINIS, An'-no Or'-din-is, Year of the Order.

ARTAXERXES, Ar-tax-erks'-eez, King of Persia.

BARABBAS, Bah-rab'-bas, One of the Robbers.

BEAUCEANT, Bo'-see-an, Battle Flag of Templars.

BELSHAZZAR, Bel-shaz'-zar, King of the Chaldees.

BOAZ, Boh'-az, A Pillar of the Porch of the Temple.

CHAPEAU, Shah'-po, A hat.

CLANDESTINE, Klan-des'-tin, Hidden, Fraudulent.

CONSUMMATUM EST, Kon-sum-mah'-tum est, It is finished.

CRUX ANSATA, Kroox An-sah'-ta, Cross with a handle.

DARIUS, Day-ri'-us, King of Persia.

DIEU LE VEUT, Dyuh la Voot, God's will.

DEUS VULT, Dee'-us Vult, God's will.

DIMIT, Dy-mit', To let go.

ECCOSAISE, Ay'-ko-zayze, (Rite) Scotch.

ECBATANA, Ec-bat'-ah-nah. Capital cf the Medes.

ELU, Ayl'-yu, Elect.

EMERITUS, Ee'-mer-i-tus, Out of active service by honorable discharge.

EMMANUEL, Em-man'-u-el, (Immanuel) God with us.

FRATER, Fray'-ter, or Frah'-ter, Brother.

FRATRES, Brethren.

GAVEL, Gah'-vel, The mallet of a Presiding Officer.

GETHSEMANE, Geth-sem'-a-nee, Garden where Jesus was arrested.

GOLGOTHA, Gol'-go-thah, A place of a skull.

HEREDOM, Her'-ee-dom, Holy House.

HOURI, Hoo'-ree, Black-eyed nymph.

IMPOSTOR, Im-pos'-tor, One who deceives.

INSIGNIA, In-sig'-ni-ya, A badge.

JAKIN, Jah'-kin, A pillar of the Porch of the Temple. (Yahkin.)

KABALA, Kah'-bah-lah, Jewish Theosophy.

KADOSH KADOSHIM, Kay-doash' Kay-doash'-im, Holy of Holies.

KORAN, Ko-ran', Mahometan sacred book.

[p. 145]

LAUS DEO, Laws Dee'-o, Praise God.

LEGEND Lej'-end, A story handed down from ancient times.

LIBANUS, Ly-bah'-nus, Lebanon.

LUX E TENEBRIS, Lux ee Ten'-e-bris, Light out of darkness.

MAGDALENE, Mag-day-lee'-nay, She of New Testament fame.

MAGUS, May'-jus, Persian Wise Mau.

MAGI, May'-ji, Priest of Magian religion.

MAGIAN, May'-ji-an, Believer in religion of the Magi.

MAHER-SHALAL-HASH-BAZ, Mah'-her-shal'-al-hash-baz, Make speed to the spoil, hasten the prey.

MELITA, Mel'-i-ta, Malta.

NEBUCHADNEZZAR, Neb-uk-ad-nez'-zar, King of the Chaldeans.

NEBUZARADAN, Neb-yu-zar-ah'-dan, General of Nebuchadnezzar.

NE VARIETUR, Nee Var-i'-tur, To prevent change.

OMNIFIC, Om-nif'-ik, All creating.

PALESTINE, Pal'-es-tine, The Holy Land.

PRO DEO ET PATRIA, Pro Dee'-o et Pay-tree'-a, For God and my country.

PAX VOBISCUM, Pax Voh-bis'-kum, Peace be with you.

PENTATEUCH, Pent'-ah-tuke, Five books of Moses.

PERSEPOLIS, Per-sep'-o-lis, Chief city of Persia.

PRELATE, Prel'-ate, Officer of a Commandery,

PURSUIVANT, Pur'-swee-vant, A messenger.

PYTHAGORAS, Py-thag'-oh-ras, A Philosopher of Greece.

ROSE CROIX, Roze Krwah, Rose Cross.

SATRAP, Sat'-rap, A Persian Governor.

SHETHAR-BOZNAI, Shee'-thar-boz'-nay-i, Persian nobleman.

SHUSHAN, Shoo'-shan, A Persian Capital.

TATNAI, Tat'-nay-i, A Persian Satrap, or Governor of a province.

TETRAGRAMMATON, Tet-ra gram' mah-ton, The concealing number Four.

TIRSHATHA, Tur-shah'-thah, Persian Governor of Judea.

TURCOPOLIER, Tur-ko-po'-ly-er, An ancient Officer of Knights of Malta.

VIVA VOCE, Vy'-vah Voh'-see, By the living voice.

XERXES, Zerks'-eez, King of Persia.

ZERADATHA, Zer-e-dah'-thah, Ancient city of Judea.

ZERUBBABEL, Zer-ub'-bah-bel, Judean Prince, and Tirshatha.

ZOROASTER, Zoh-roh-as'-ter, Founder of Magian religion.

ZARATHRUSTRA, Persian name of Zoroaster.

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 146]

  

FRATERNITY MUSIC.

  

OLD HUNDRED. L. M.

(SEE PAGE <page 60>.)

Click to enlarge

[p. 147]

  

HENDON. 7s.

(SEE PAGE <page 60>.)

Click to enlarge

[p. 148]

  

NEARER, MY GOD, TO THEE.

Click to enlarge

[p. 149]

  

AULD LANG SYNE.

Click to enlarge

[p. 150]

  

TO A SKULL.

Part of a poem found beside a skeleton in the Museum of the London Royal College of Surgeons, author unknown. It was published in the Morning Chronicle early in the present century.

Behold this ruin! 'Twas a skull
 Once of ethereal spirit full.
 This narrow cell was life's retreat;
 This space was thought's mysterious seat.
 What beauteous visions filled this spot!
 What dreams of pleasure long forgot!
 Nor hope, nor joy, nor love, nor fear
 Has left one trace of record here.

Beneath this mouldering canopy
 Once shone the bright and busy eye:
 But start not at the dismal void--
 If social love that eye employed,
 If with no lawless fire it gleamed,
 But through the dews of kindness beamed,
 That eye shall be forever bright
 When stars and sun are sunk in night.

Within this hollow cavern hung
 The ready, swift and tuneful tongue:
 If falsehood's honey it disdained,
 And when it could not praise was chained;
 If bold in virtue's cause it spoke--
 Yet gentle concord never broke--
 This silent tongue shall plead for thee
 When Time reveals Eternity!

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 151]

  

TEMPLAR FORMS.

I have transcribed each 'blank' in the forms below with exactly one em-dash; some blanks are represented by several contiguous em-dashes for legibility.--JBH.

ALTHOUGH the Grand Encampment has not adopted permanent "Templar Forms," the author of SHIBBOLETH suggests the following, to be used until supplanted by Forms adopted by the supreme governing body:

  

FORM OF PETITION FOR DISPENSATION.

To the Right Eminent Sir --

Grand Commander of Knights Templar of --

The undersigned petitioners respectfully represent that they are Knights Templar in good and regular standing, that they have the prosperity of the Order at heart, and that they desire to promote its influence. In order that a greater opportunity may be afforded them for the same, they are desirous of forming a new Commandery, to be located at --, and to be known as Commandery, No. --. They have nominated and do hereby recommend Sir -- to be the first Commander, Sir -- to be the first Generalissimo, and Sir -- to be the first Captain General of said new Commandery; and they pray for a dispensation empowering them to meet as a regular Commandery at --, in the county of --, there to discharge the duties of Knights Templar in a constitutional manner.

Should the prayer of the petitioners be granted, they promise a strict obedience to the commands of the R. E. Grand Commander, to the statutes and regulations of the Grand Commandery of --, the Constitution and laws of the Grand Encampment, as well as to the usages of the Order.

Dated, -- 18--

The petition must be signed by at least NINE Knights of the Order, and must be recommended by the Commandery nearest to the place where the new Commandery is to be located.

[p. 152]

RECOMMENDATION OF NEAREST COMMANDERY.

Asylum of -- Commandery, No. --,

--, 18--

At a stated meeting of -- Commandery, No. --, held at its Asylum in --, on the -- day of --, 18--, the foregoing petition for the formation of a new Commandery at --, in -- County, was presented and considered; whereupon it was

Resolved, That in the opinion of this Commandery good reasons exist for the organization of a Commandery at this time at that place, and the same is hereby recommended by this Commandery. It is hereby certified that said petitioners are Knights Templar of good moral character, and the Sir Knights recommended as officers of said Commandery are capable of conferring correctly the orders of Knighthood.

By order of -- Commandery, No. --,

[SEAL.], -- Eminent Commander.

Attest:

--, Recorder.

CERTIFICATE OF A PAST COMMANDER.

I, --, Past Commander of -- Commandery, No. --, do hereby certify that I have examined Sir Knights A B, C D, and E F, the officers recommended in the foregoing petition, in the Rituals of the Orders of the Red Cross, Temple, and Malta, and I find that they are fully capable to confer these Orders correctly.

--, Past Commander.

[SEAL.]

Attest:

--, Recorder.

  

DISPENSATION FOR NEW COMMANDERY.

IN HOC SIGNO VINCES.

To all whom it may concern:

Know ye, that I, --, Right Eminent Grand Commander of Knights Templar of the State of --, having received a petition from a constitutional number of Fratres, who have

[p. 153]

been properly vouched for as Knights Templar in good standing, setting forth that, having the prosperity of the Order at heart, they are desirous of establishing a new Commandery at --, under our jurisdiction, and requesting a Dispensation for the same; and,

Whereas, the consent of the nearest Commandery has been granted, and there appears good and sufficient cause for granting the prayer of the said petition, I do, therefore, by virtue of the power in me vested by the Constitution and Laws of the Order, grant this Dispensation, empowering Sir to act as Eminent Commander, Sir -- to act as Generalissimo, and Sir -- to act as Captain General of a Commandery to be held under our jurisdiction, at --, in the County of --, by the name -- of Commandery, No. --.

And the said Fratres and their associates are authorized to confer the Orders of Knighthood according to the Constitution of the Order, its customs and usages, and the Rules and Regulations of the Right Eminent Grand Commandery of --, and not otherwise.

This Dispensation shall continue of force until the next Annual Conclave of the Grand Commandery, unless revoked by the Grand Commander.

Given under my hand, and the seal of the Grand Commandery, at --, this -- day of -- , A. D. 18--, A. O. 7--.

[SEAL.]

--, Grand Commander.

Attest:

--, Grand Recorder.

  

CHARTER.

IN HOC SIGNO VINCES

The Right Eminent Grand Commandery of Knights Templar of the State of --,

The Right Eminent --, Grand Commander,

The Very Eminent --, Deputy Grand Commander,

The Eminent --, Grand Generalissimo,

The Eminent --, Grand Captain General,

do, by these presents, appoint, authorize and empower our Frater, Sir --, to be the Eminent Commander; our Frater, Sir --, to be the Generalissimo; and our Frater, Sir --, to be the Captain General, of a Commandery of Knights Templar, to

[p. 154]

be, by virtue hereof, constituted, formed, and held in --, County of --, which Commandery shall be distinguished by the name and style of -- Commandery, No. --.; and the said Eminent Fratres, and their successors in office, are hereby respectively authorized and directed, by and with the consent and assistance of a quorum of the members of the said Commandery, duly summoned and present upon such occasion, to elect and install the officers of the said Commandery, as vacancies happen, in manner and form as is or may be prescribed by the Constitution and Regulations of this Grand Commandery.

And further, the said Commandery is hereby invested with full power and authority to assemble upon proper and lawful occasions, to make Knights Templar and to admit members, as also to do and perform all and every such acts and things appertaining to the Order as ought to be done, for the honor and advantage thereof, conforming in all their proceedings to the Constitution and Regulations of this Grand Commandery and the Grand Encampment of the United States; otherwise, this Warrant or Charter, and the powers thereby granted, to cease and be of no further effect.

Given under our hands, and the seal of the Grand Commandery, in the city of --, this -- day of --, A. D. 18--, A. O. 7--.

[SEAL.]

--, Grand Commander,

--, Deputy Grand Commander,

--, Grand Generalissimo,

--, Grand Captain General.

Attest:

--, Grand Recorder.

  

POWER TO CONSTITUTE A COMMANDERY.

To all whom it may concern:

Whereas, the Right Eminent Grand Commandery of Knights Templar of the State of --, at its last Annual Conclave, empowered by Charter, duly and regularly issued, Sir Knights --, Commander; --, Generalissimo, and --, Captain General, and their successors, to assemble as a regular Commandery, by the name of -- Commandery, No. --., and the Constitution of the Order requiring that the same should be duly constituted;

[p. 155]

Now, therefore, I, --, Grand Commander of Knights Templar of the State of --, reposing especial trust and confidence in the skill and ability of our Eminent Frater, Sir --, Past Commander of Commandery, No. --, do authorize and empower him, being unable to attend in person, to constitute in form the Sir Knights named in said Charter into a regular Commandery, to be known and hailed by the name aforesaid, and to install the officers elect, agreeably to the Constitution and customs of the Order.

Given under my hand, this -- day of --, A. O. 7--.

--, Grand Commander.

  

FORM OF PETITION FOR THE ORDERS.

To the Eminent Commander, Officers and Members of -- Commandery, No. --., Knights Templar, stationed at --, State of --:

I hereby declare that I am a Royal Arch Mason in good standing; that I received the degree of Master Mason in -- Lodge, No. --., of --, and the degree of R. A. Mason in -- Chapter, No. --, of --, and that I am desirous of receiving the Orders conferred in your Commandery.

I further declare that I am a firm believer in the Christian religion.

Should my petition be favorably considered, I promise a cheerful conformity to the rules and usages of the Order and of your Commandery.

This is my -- application for the Orders of Knighthood.

If the petitioner has applied previously, he must name the Commandery to which he applied, after this statement.

My age is -- Residence -- Occupation -- Dated at --, --, A. D. 18--.

------------

We recommend Companion -- to the favorable consideration of the Commandery as a worthy Royal Arch Mason.

------------

------------

[p. 156]

REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON ABOVE PETITION.

The undersigned, a committee appointed to report upon the foregoing petition, respectfully state that they have discharged the trust confided to them, and report --.

------------

------------

------------

--, this -- day of --, A. D. 18--.

  

FORM OF PETITION FOR MEMBERSHIP.

To the Eminent Commander, Officers and Members of -- Commandery, No. --., Knights Templar, stationed at --:

I hereby declare that I am a Knight Templar in good standing, and late a member of -- Commandery, No. --., stationed at --, as appears by my dimit, herewith presented; and that I am desirous of becoming a member of your Commandery.

My age is -- Residence -- Occupation --

--, --, A. D. 18--.

------------

We recommend Sir -- to the favorable consideration of the Commandery as a worthy Knight Templar.

------------

------------

A committee must report on this petition.

  

FORM OF DIMIT.

To all whom it may concern:

-- Commandery, No. --., Knights Templar, stationed at --, acknowledging the jurisdiction of the Grand Commandery of --, Knights Templar.

[p. 157]

NE VARIETUR......

This certifies that Sir --, whose name appears in the margin hereof, is a member of this Commandery in good and regular standing, and having expressed a desire to withdraw his membership, and having paid all his dues to date, is hereby dismissed from the membership of -- Commandery, and granted this certificate of the same.

Done at a Stated Conclave of -- Commandery, No. --, on the day of --, 18--, A. O. --.

In testimony whereof we have subscribed our names, and affixed the seal of the Commandery.

[SEAL.]

--, Eminent Commander.

--, Recorder.

  

FORMS FOR TEMPLAR TRIALS.

The important requisites of a Complaint against a Knight Templar are comprehensiveness and clearness. The nature of the offense charged must be clearly defined, and the time, place and circumstances accurately stated, together with the names of the persons who witnessed the commission of the offense. The form of the specification, is important so that there may be no ambiguity. The following is suggested:

COMPLAINT.

To the Eminent Commander, Officers and Members of -- Commandery, No. --., K. T:

Sir Knight is hereby charged with immoral and unknightly conduct:

FIRST SPECIFICATION.--That the said Sir --, on the day of -- --, 18--, at --, in the county of --, , State of --, did ------------.

[Carefully and accurately describe the offense committed.]

in violation of his duty as a Knight Templar, and to the scandal and disgrace of the Order of the Temple.

There should be a Specification for each distinct offense charged, and all should conclude as above. When all the Specifications are set up, then the Complaint may conclude with these words:

[p. 158]

It is therefore demanded, that the said Sir -- be dealt with according to the law and usages of Templar Knighthood.

------------

-- this -- day of --, 18--.

The Complaint thus drawn will be presented in open Commandery, and if the Commandery receives the same the Eminent Commander will appoint a committee to take testimony, unless the Commandery decides by vote to hear the testimony in open Commandery. These facts must be recorded in the minutes. The full Complaint need not be entered upon the minutes, unless the Commandery so directs, but the nature of the charges should be entered.

The next step is for the Recorder to furnish the accused a complete copy of the Complaint, and its Specifications, and a transcript of the action taken by the Commandery thereon. This form is suggested as the official

NOTICE TO THE ACCUSED.

Sir --:

Take notice that the foregoing (or the within) charges were preferred against you at a Stated Conclave of -- Commandery, No. --, on the -- day of, 18--, and that the Commandery decided to hear the testimony in open Commandery (or appointed Sir Knights --, --, --, a committee to take testimony). It (or they) will meet for that purpose on the -- day of, 18--, at --, and at -- o'clock, -- M., at or before which time you are to answer the said charges.

Witness our hand, and the seal of the Commandery, this -- day of --, 18--.

[SEAL.]

--, Recorder.

These papers may be delivered to the accused in person, or may be mailed to his known address. Great care should be taken to serve these papers in a proper manner. The case should not proceed until service is made, if possible. But if the accused absents himself and purposely avoids service, the delivery of the papers at his home, place of business, or a known place that he resorts, either by personal delivery or through the United States mail, is sufficient.

The papers having been served, the accused will answer, and he may first object to any or all members of the Commission. The Commandery, or Commander, as the procedure maybe, hears his objection, and if the grounds are valid, may select other Fratres to serve as Commissioners.

The accused will answer in his own way, no particular form being of any importance. He may admit and plead extenuating circumstances, or he may deny in part or the whole.

At the time appointed to talk the testimony the accused, if he desires to do so, should appear and first file his answer to the charge, and then proceed to the

[p. 159]

taking of the testimony. The accused, either by himself or counsel (the latter must be a Knight Templar), has the right to cross-examine witnesses introduced by the opposite party, and also, when the accuser is through with the testimony in support of the charges, to introduce witnesses in leis defense, the opposite party having the right to cross-examine. The accused may, if he prefer, file the answer with the Recorder before the time fixed for taking testimony.

ANSWER OF ACCUSED.

A. B., in person, denies the charges made against him, and every matter and thing contained in the several specifications of the same, and demands trial thereon.

------------

The answer will vary, of course, according to the facts. One specification may be admitted and another denied, or all of them may be admitted, and matters set up in extenuation or excuse. Assuming that the answer is a denial, the next step, unless the witnesses are in attendance at the request of the parties, is to issue, at the request of both parties, process to secure the attendance of the witnesses. The Commandery, or the Committee, should fix the times of meetings, and meet at such times as will secure a prompt investigation of the matter, and at the same time not require such haste as may do injustice to any.

SUMMONS FOR WITNESS.

Sir Knight --:

You are hereby summoned and required to attend as a witness before -- Commandery, No. --, at a meeting to be held at its Asylum, on the -- day of --, 18--. (or before a Special Committee of -- Commandery, No. --, appointed to take testimony, at a meeting to be held by said Committee, at --, on the -- day of --, 18--.), then and there to testify as to charges preferred against Sir Knight --, and this you will in no wise omit.

--, Eminent Commander.

-- this -- day of, 18--.

This may be made to answer for several witnesses by inserting their names, and adding the words "and each of you" after the words "you." This summons can be used, of course, for Knights Templar only. Others attend, if at all, before a Committee, and at their option.

At each meeting of the Commandery (or the Committee) the Recorder of the Commandery, or the Secretary of the Committee, and at its first meeting it should select a Chairman and Secretary, should keep accurate and full minutes of all that transpires on the trial. All motions, exceptions to the competency of testimony, or to the ruling of the Commander or the Committee, should he fully and accurately stated, and the testimony reduced to writing in the exact language of the witness as nearly as may be.

[p. 160]

When the testimony is closed on both sides, if taken before a Committee, a report should be made to the Commandery by the Committee. This report should be filed with the Recorder a sufficient time in advance of a Stated Conclave, to enable him to cause to be summoned all the resident members of the Commandery to attend at the next Stated Conclave. The trial may take place at a Special Conclave called by the Commander for that purpose, but the resident members must be notified of the time and place, and summoned to attend.

REPORT OF COMMITTEE.

To the Eminent Commander, Officers and Members of -- Commandery, No. --, K. T.:

The Committee appointed to take testimony upon the charges preferred against Sir Knight A. B. by Sir Knight C. D. has attended to the duty assigned, and submits herewith, as a part of this report, full minutes of the action of the Committee, as well as the testimony taken.

-- this -- day of, 19--.

Committee:

------------

------------

------------

Should the accused admit the charges when served upon him, proof of such admission or confession will be all that the Committee is required to have made, and they will make up their minutes and report accordingly.

If the accused fails to appear and answer the charges, after personal service, the Committee may proceed, after taking proof of such service, to take proof of the charges.

When this report is submitted to the Commandery, or the testimony is closed, when taken before the Commandery, the parties concerned may comment thereon. This, of course, is optional. Before proceeding to vote the accused should retire.

The Commandery then proceeds to consider the matter in the following manner:

FIXING PUNISHMENT.

"Are the charges sustained?" is the first question, and if decided in the affirmative, the Commandery then proceeds, by vote, to fix the punishment. This is done by putting the question:

1st. "Shall the accused be expelled?" If this is decided in the negative;

2d. "Shall the accused be indefinitely suspended?" If this is decided in the negative;

3d. "Shall the accused be definitely suspended?" If this is decided in the affirmative, then, on motion, the time should be fixed by vote; but if decided in the negative;

[p. 161]

4th. "Shall the accused be reprimanded?" Which, of course, the other questions having been negatived, will be decided in the affirmative, the charges having been sustained, and this being the lightest punishment which can be inflicted. It would be error for a Commandery to sustain the charges, and then refuse to inflict any punishment.

When the matter is disposed of by the Commandery, the Recorder should at once give notice thereof to the accused.

NOTICE OF JUDGMENT.

To Sir Knight --

Take notice that the foregoing (or the within) is a copy of the action of -- Commandery, No. --., upon the charges preferred against you by --, as the same appears of record on the minutes of the Lodge.

--, Recorder.

Either party may, within -- months from the date of the action of the Commandery, appeal to the Grand Commandery. Notice of the appeal should be given within that time, and the appeal, giving the grounds relied upon, must be filed with the Recorder of the Commandery within -- days after notice of appeal, and a copy of the notice and appeal must be forwarded to the Grand Recorder.

NOTICE ON APPEAL.

To, --, Recorder of -- Commandery, No. --., Knights Templar:

Take notice, that I shall bring an appeal from the action of said Commandery, on the -- day of --, 18--, in passing sentence of -- on me, to the R. E. Grand Commandery of the State of --, on the grounds to be stated in my appeal.

A-- B--

-- this -- day of--, 18--.

APPEAL.

To the R. E. Grand Commandery Knights Templar of the State of --:

The undersigned hereby appeals to you from the decision of -- Commandery, No. --., made on the -- day of --, 18--, in passing sentence of -- on him, and he specifies the following as the ground of his appeal:

[p. 162]

1st. That -- ----------.

[State the grounds clearly and truthfully.]

A-- B--

this -- day of --, 18--.

When the appeal is filed with the Recorder, the Commandery should cause an answer thereto to be prepared, and must furnish the transcript of the proceedings to the Grand Recorder.

ANSWER TO APPEAL.

-- Commandery, No. --., answers the appeal of Sir --, and says:

That --------------.

--, Eminent Commander.

-- this -- day of --, 18--.

[SEAL]

Attest:

--, Recorder.

The Recorder of the Commandery, in the preparation of a transcript, should be very careful to give fully and exactly all that transpired on the trial, never giving copies unless ordered by the Commandery as to some particular document used, always sending up original papers. The transcript should be made in a plain, legible handwriting, and fastened at top of the paper, and the Recorder should, under the seal of the Commandery, certify to the correctness of the transcript in words like unto the following:

CERTIFICATE TO TRANSCRIPT.

I --, Recorder of -- Commandery, No--, Knights Templar, do certify that the foregoing is a full, true, and perfect transcript of all the records and proceedings had by and before said Commandery upon the charges preferred by -- against --, as the same appear upon the minutes of said Commandery, and on file in the archives thereof.

In testimony whereof, I hereto subscribe my name and affix the seal of said Commandery this -- day of --, A. D. 18--, A. O. 7--.

[SEAL]

--, Recorder.

[p. 163]

Recorders should examine with great care the Edicts and Regulations of the Grand Commandery and Grand Encampment upon the subject of trials and appeals, and should strictly conform thereto, varying the foregoing forms as circumstances may require, in order to comply with the requirements of said governing bodies.

APPEAL TO THE GRAND ENCAMPMENT.

In case of a proper appeal to the Grand Encampment, the following form may be substantially adopted:

To the Grand Encampment of Knights Templar of the United States:

The undersigned, your petitioner, respectfully represents that on or about the -- day of --, 18--, charges for immoral and unknightly conduct (stating the general nature of the charges) were preferred against him by Sir Knight, in -- Commandery, No.--, under the jurisdiction of the Grand Commandery of Knights Templar of the State of, and such proceedings were thereupon had in the said -- -- Commandery; that your petitioner was adjudged by the same Commandery guilty of the offense so charged against him, and was therefore adjudged to (state the penalty imposed). That from such determination and sentence or judgment, your petitioner appealed to the said Grand Commandery, and thereupon such proceedings were had in and by said Grand Commandery; that afterward, and on or about the day -- of --, 18--, the said determination and sentence, or judgment, were in all things affirmed (state the decision in fact given on the appeal) by the said Grand Commandery; and now your petitioner, feeling himself aggrieved by the action and determination of the said Grand Commandery, in the premises, and being advised that the same is erroneous, appeals therefrom to the Grand Encampment of the United States, and specifies, among other grounds of error therein, the following:

[State the several errors in, and objections to, the proceedings and determination of the Grand Commandery relied upon separately, and numbering them distinctly.]

Your petitioner, therefore, prays that the said Grand Commandery may be required to answer this petition; and that the testimony, proceedings, determination and judgment aforesaid, as well of the said -- Commandery, as of said Grand Commandery, may, upon this appeal, be reviewed, and that such sentence and determination,

[p. 164]

or judgment, may be reversed, modified or amended, as may be agreeable to knightly usage, justice or equity.

------------

-- this -- day of --, 18--.

This appeal should be delivered to the Grand Recorder of the Grand Commandery, and a duplicate thereof delivered to the Grand Recorder of the Grand Encampment. As soon thereafter as practicable, and before the next Triennial Conclave of the Grand Encampment, the Grand Recorder of the Grand Commandery should transmit to the Grand Recorder of the Grand Encampment a transcript of all the testimony, papers, and proceedings in the case which were before the Grand Commandery, together with its action and final determination therein, all duly authenticated under the seal of the Grand Commandery.

PETITION FOR RESTORATION.

To the Eminent Commander, Officers and Members of -- Commandery, No. --.:

The undersigned respectfully represents that, on the -- day of --, 18--, he was, by the judgment and sentence of said Commandery, expelled (or indefinitely suspended) front the rights and privileges of Knight Templary, and from membership in said Commandery.

For the following reasons (here state them) he prays to be restored to the rights and privileges of which he was thus deprived, and promises, if his prayer shall be granted, to conform to the legal conditions of his restoration.

------------

-- this -- day of --, 18--.

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 165]

  

THIRD APPENDIX.

[p. 166] [p. 167]

  

RECEPTION OF GRAND VISITORS.

THE following suggestions will aid Subordinate Commanderies in receiving Grand Visitors:

  

THE GRAND MASTER.

The Grand Master is to be received in the Asylum with the highest honors of the Order.

The Grand Master is received by a Committee, and escorted to the quarters of the Eminent Commander.

The Asylum is put in suitable array, Banners unfurled, and the Organist at his post. All Knights in full uniform.

The Lines are formed according to the Tactics of the Jurisdiction, ready to form the Arch of Steel at the proper moment. All Officers in their stations.

The announcement, by the Grand Warder, if present, if not, by one of the Committee attending the Grand Master, is made at the door of the desire of the Grand Master to officially visit the Commandery, whereupon the Warder salutes the Eminent Commander, and says:

W.--Eminent Commander, Most Eminent the Grand Master has arrived, and desires to visit this Commandery officially.

EC.--Sir Knights Generalissimo and Captain General (these Officers arise, draw and salute), repair to the quarters

of the Most Eminent the Grand Master and escort him hither.

When the Grand Master and suite reach the open door of the Asylum--

W.--THE GRAND MASTER OF TEMPLARS!

Immediately the Organist will play "Hail to the Chief," the Banners will be drooped, and the Officers will salute.

[p. 168]

EC.--Form Arch of Steel.

The Grand Master enters, and passes down the avenue, the Generalissimo and Captain General one pace in rear of him, under the Arch of Steel, to the East, where the Eminent Commander receives him, standing on the lowest step of the Dais. He welcomes him in appropriate words, and hands him the Gavel. The Grand Master ascends to the Commander's station, the Eminent Commander, the Generalissimo and Captain General remain standing on the lowest step, and on the floor.

GM.--Sir Knights, Carry SWORDS!

He will then make such remarks as he desires, after which the Captain General will dismiss the Lines, and all are seated.

  

ARRAY OF ASYLUM DURING RECEPTION OF GRAND MASTER.

The following diagrams illustrate formations at two periods of the reception of the Grand Master:

Click to enlarge
Diagram 1.

[p. 169]

Click to enlarge
Diagram 2.

In the first diagram the Grand Master is seen moving towards the East under the Arch of Steel, the Generalissimo and Captain General one step in his rear, and the Eminent Commander awaiting his arrival on the lowest step of the Dais. The Prelate is in his station, standing, and the Senior Warden, the Junior Warden, the Treasurer and Recorder are saluting. The Standard is drooped, and the Senior Warden and the Warder are saluting.

In the second diagram the Grand Master has reached the East, and, Gavel in hand, is about to command "Carry Swords."

  

THE GRAND COMMANDER.

The Grand Commander is received under the Arch of Steel, Banners drooping, and Officers saluting. Organ plays a March. He is conducted to the Asylum by an escort under command of the Generalissimo. The Grand Commander passes under the Arch of Steel to the East, where the Eminent Commander receives him, standing on the second step of the Dais, the Captain General on the lowest step.

[p. 170]

The Warder will announce--

THE GRAND COMMANDER OF ---------- !

____________________

The Grand Master and the Grand Commander, and their representatives, are the only visitors that are to be received under the Arch of Steel, or that are to be recognized by any descent from the official positions on the Dais.

THE DEPUTY GRAND MASTER is received like the Grand Master, except the Arch of Steel, the "Hail to the Chief," and the descent from the Dais. The Knights forming the avenue present Swords, the Officers salute, and the organ plays a March.

THE DEPUTY GRAND COMMANDER is received like the Deputy Grand Master, except the organ plays three flourishes.

ALL OTHER GRAND OFFICERS are received with the Officers and members in their regular stations, Officers saluting, members at Present, and Banners drooping. Organ will play one flourish when the visitor enters, and before the Knight escorting him begins his words of introduction. The visitor will stand in the West during the presentation, the Officers and members remaining at Salute and Present until the visitor reaches the East, when the Captain General will bring all to a Carry.

The Eminent Commander will welcome the visitor and assign him a seat.

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 171]

  

HINTS TO EMINENT COMMANDERS.

1. Give unremitting attention to the protection of the Ritual, and the Paraphernalia of your Commanderies. The first should never be out of your care, the other should be kept in perfect repair.

2. Be certain that the Sentinel, or Janitor, has everything in readiness for the Conclaves of the Commanderies. The comfort of your Fratres should be an unremitting solicitude. Their attendance will be largely affected by your attention to this hint.

3. See to it that your Fratres are provided with uniforms, but in doing so be not forgetful of the tenderness of many on matters that affect their purses. Persuade, but do not command. Some Grand Commanderies have a rule on this matter of uniforming. Enforce it in love.

4. Do not begin the Opening Ceremonies until you are certain that the Asylum is in proper array, and all necessary arrangements are made.

5. Permit no admissions during the Opening Ceremonies. Allow no conversation, not even whispering, while opening. Such interruptions seriously affect the solemnities.

6. Never begin the Work until you are certain that everything is ready, in place, and in order. Halts to make search for missing paraphernalia are destructive to good Work.

7. Permit no moving about the Asylum, conversation, or comments during the Work. This is of vital importance. Fratres who think they can not refrain from these disturbances should quietly withdraw to the Reception Room, or some other outer apartment. Be certain to make your request for absolute silence before you begin Work.

8. Do not permit military drill during the Work. Form the Escort by arrangements made by the Captain General before the Work begins. Let the chosen Knights so sit that at the low-given command--"Fall in"--they may quietly step to their places, with Swords at a Carry. The formation by counting and facing breaks up all solemnity. And all military commands given should be in subdued tones of voice.

[p. 172]

9. This Monitor favors the appearance of none at the D--a, on the First Entrance, but the Eminent Commander, Senior Warden, and Cand. All others seated, and in silence. Asylum in full lights. This is one scene. Second Entrance finds Nine b--d at D--a, and only D--a lights burning. This scene is entirely unlike the former,--an important matter of progression. When the PP. re--, the vacancy is symbolized as filled, and he and the two Wardens, with the Nine, make twelve also. The First is a series of Tests by the Chief; the Second is the Filling of the Vacancy caused by apostasy. If these points are kept in view the Lessons will be most imposing.

10. The author of this Monitor believes that the laying down and taking up the C--s at the Libs is destructive of solemnity. By the method herein suggested there are only two C--s,--one for the Eminent Commander, the other for the Cand. Nothing distracts his attention from the solemn Tests if practiced this way.

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

  

RULES OF ORDER.

The following simple rules will be about all that Commanders will find necessary in conducting the business of the Conclaves:

1. On the demand of a member, a motion must be reduced to writing.

2. A motion, when stated by the Commander, can not be withdrawn without the consent of the Commandery.

3. A motion to postpone to an indefinite time is debatable; a motion to postpone to a time definite is not debatable.

4. No amendment beyond an amendment to an amendment can be entertained.

5. A question will be divided on request of a member.

6. A proposition to be referred to a committee with instructions is debatable; if without instructions, it is not debatable.

7. A Frater voting in the majority may move to reconsider; such a motion is not debatable.

8. When a proposition is reconsidered it is before the Commandery in the exact form it was in at the moment it was voted upon.

9. Before a member is required to vote upon a paper he may require its reading.

10. When the report of a Committee is read, or received, it is the property of the Commandery, and the Committee is discharged without a vote. It may be revived.

[p. 173]

11. When the Commander desires the debate to cease he arises, and proceeds to take the necessary steps.

12. A proposition subject to debate is open to debate until the negative is put, unless the Commander decides the debate should cease.

The following motions are not allowable in a Conclave of Knights Templar:

To lie on the table.

The previous question.

To close, or call to rest.

The following questions are not debatable:

To read papers.

To grant leave to withdraw a proposition.

To postpone to a time definite.

To reconsider a proposition.

To commit without instructions.

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 174]

  

A FORM OF DIVINE WORSHIP

  

FOR THE USE OF KNIGHTS TEMPLAR ON ASCENSION DAY, AND OTHER OCCASIONS.

THE following service is so arranged that, by omitting and adding, it will be applicable to general public occasions, and to Ascension Day.

__________

  

THE LITURGY.

When the Knights are entering the church or hall they will uncover as they pass the door, and remain standing beside their seats. It is desirable that Swords be not worn; they are so productive of noise and disorder.

Then will be sung, all present participating:

          Holy Father, Holy Son,
   Holy Spirit, Three in One,
   Praise and glory be to thee
   Now and through eternity.

     
   P.--The Lord is in his holy temple; let all the earth keep silence before him.

All seated.

Choir will sing some Anthem appropriate to the occasion.

All arise.

P.--What doth the Lord require of thee?

KNIGHTS.--To do justly, love mercy, and walk humbly with our God.

P.--O God, thou art my God; early will I seek thee.

[p. 175]

KNIGHTS.--My soul thirsteth for thee, my flesh longeth for thee in a dry and thirsty land, where no water is.

P.--My soul followeth hard after thee.

KNIGHTS.--Thy right hand upholdeth me.

P.--Hear my prayer, O God.

KNIGHTS.--Attend unto my cry.

P.--God be merciful unto us, and bless us.

KNIGHTS.--And cause his face to shine upon us.

P.--Not unto us, not unto us, O Lord.

KNIGHTS.--But unto thy great name be all the glory.

P.--Blessing, and honor, and glory, and power be unto Him that sitteth upon the throne.

KNIGHTS.--And unto the Lamb for ever.

P.--Brethren, let us pray.

The Knights, standing, will unite with the Prelate.

OUR FATHER who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses as we forgive those who trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, for thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever and ever. AMEN.

[p. 176]

P.--God be merciful unto us, and bless us, and show us the light of His countenance, and be very merciful unto us. AMEN.

Then shall be sung:

THE CORONATION HYMN.

1. All hail the power of Jesus' name,
    Let angels prostrate fall;
 Bring forth the royal diadem,
    And crown Him Lord of all!

2. Let every kindred, every tribe,
    On this terrestrial ball,
 To Him all majesty ascribe,
    And crown Him Lord of all!

3. O that, with yonder sacred throng,
    We at His feet might fall
 We'll join the everlasting song,
    And crown Him Lord of all!

Or the Te Deum may be sung instead of this Hymn.

Then the Prelate will read:

THE LESSON.--Ezra vi: 1-15; Psalm li.

If the occasion is Ascension Day--

THE LESSON.--Acts I: 1-9; Mark xvi: 14-20

If Ascension Day, then will be sung (and the Coronation Hymn will be omitted in place where given, but the Te Deum maybe sung)--

KING OF KINGS AND LORD OF LORDS.

1. Look ye, saints, the sight is glorious,
   See the man of sorrows now;
 From the fight returned victorious,
   Every knee to Him shall bow;
        Crown Him, crown Him;
   Crowns become the Victor's brow.

[p. 177]

2. Crown the Savior, angels crown Him;
   Rich the trophies Jesus brings;
 In the seat of power enthrone Him,
   While the heavenly conclave rings;
        Crown Him, crown Him;
   Crown the Savior King of kings.

3. Hark! those bursts of acclamation;
   Hark! those loud triumphant chords;
 Jesus takes the highest station;
   O what joy the sight affords!
        Crown Him, crown Him;
   King of kings, and Lord of lords.

If not Ascension Day the above will be omitted, and the Prelate will say, immediately after the Lesson:

P.--Let us pray.

All will kneel.

ALMIGHTY God, our Heavenly Father, King of kings, and Lord of lords, we humbly bow ourselves at thy footstool, and beseech thee to forgive our sins, and blot our transgressions from before thee. Give unto each of us a clean heart, and renew within us a right spirit. Lift upon us the light of thy countenance, and be reconciled to us; and may the words of our mouths, and the meditations of our hearts all be acceptable in thy sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord. AMEN.

God spake these words and said: I am the Lord thy God; thou shalt have no other gods before me.

KNIGHTS, OR CHOIR.--Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our. hearts to keep this law.

P.--Thou shalt not make unto me any graven image, or any likeness of anything that is in heaven above, or that is

[p. 178]

in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them; for I, the Lord thy God, am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me; and showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my commandments.

KNIGHTS.--Lord have mercy upon us, and incline out hearts to keep this law.

P.--Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh His name in vain.

KNIGHTS.--Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.

P.--Remember the sabbath day to keep it holy. Six days shalt thou labor, and do all thy work; but the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God; in it thou shalt not do any work, thou nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor the stranger that is within thy gates; for in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day; wherefore the Lord blessed the sabbath day, and hallowed it.

KNIGHTS.--Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.

P.--Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long upon the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee.

[p. 179]

KNIGHTS.--Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.

P.--Thou shalt not kill.

KNIGHTS.--Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.

P.--Thou shalt not commit adultery.

KNIGHTS.--Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.

P.--Thou shalt not steal.

KNIGHTS.--Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.

P.--Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

KNIGHTS.--Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.

P.--Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's house, thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor anything that is thy neighbor's.

KNIGHTS.--Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.

____

Should it be desired to omit the Litany, on Ascension Day, the following prayers shall be said by the Prelate instead:

[p. 180]

PRAYERS.

GRANT we beseech thee Almighty Father, that like as we believe thy Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, to have ascended into heaven, so may we now in heart and mind thither ascend, and with Him continually dwell, who liveth and reigneth with thee and the Holy Spirit, world without end AMEN.

O GOD our Father, who hast exalted thy Son to thy right hand, leave us not comfortless we beseech thee, but send down upon us the outpouring of thy Holy Spirit, the Comforter; and in due time, if it so pleases thee, exalt us into thy presence, through Jesus Christ, our Lord and Redeemer. AMEN.

MERCIFUL Father, who on the Pentecostal day didst illuminate the hearts of thy faithful children by sending unto them the light and comfort of thy Holy Spirit, grant us at this time the same spirit, that we may overcome the world and the allurements of the flesh, for Jesus Christ's sake. AMEN.

Should it be desired to omit the Commandments on other occasions than Ascension Day, the Prelate will say the following prayers:

WE THANK THEE Almighty Father, for the memory of thy faithful servants who have fought the good fight, have finished their course, and who kept the faith. Help us to imitate their examples of holy living, and to follow them in all virtuous and godly ways, through Jesus Christ, Emmanuel. AMEN.

MAY it please thee, O God, to guard and govern with thy love our beloved Order of the Temple, its officers and

[p. 181]

members; its widows and orphans; its sick and afflicted; its poor and distressed. Bestow upon all the spirit of truth, charity, unity and peace; help us to keep our vows, and maintain the faith; endue us with innocency of life, purity of thought and conduct, and firmness of purpose to do the right, through Jesus Christ, our Saviour. AMEN.

FATHER in heaven give to all nations the promised time of peace; build up thy holy temple upon earth, and fill it with thy glory; refresh all hearts with the sweetness of thy grace, and may all done here below soon become pleasing in thy sight, for Jesus Christ's sake. AMEN.

OUR FATHER who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, for thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever and ever. AMEN.

The Lord's Prayer shall be said at the close of the Ascension Day prayers above.

All will arise.

The Prelate and Knights will repeat together on all occasions--

THE CHRISTIAN'S CREED.

I believe in God, the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth; and in Jesus Christ His only Son, our Lord, who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried; He descended into hell; the third day He arose from the dead, He ascended into heaven, and sitteth on the right hand of God, the Father Almighty; from thence He shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

[p. 182]

I believe in the Holy Ghost, the holy catholic church, the communion of saints, the forgiveness' of sin, the resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting. AMEN!

OR THIS:

I believe in God, the Father Almighty; and in Jesus Christ, His only Son, our Lord, who was by the Holy Ghost born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified and buried; the third day He arose from the

dead; He ascended into heaven, and sitteth at the right hand of the Father; from thence He shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

I believe in the Holy Ghost, the Holy Church, the forgiveness of sin, the resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting. AMEN!

If the occasion is Ascension Day, the following will be sung:

1. In the cross of Christ I glory,
   Towering o'er the wrecks of time;
 All the light of sacred story,
   Gathers 'round its head sublime.

2. When the woes of life o'ertake me,
   Hopes deceive, and fears annoy,
 Never shall the Cross forsake me;
   Lo! it glows with peace and joy.

3. Bane and blessing, pain and pleasure,
   By the Cross are sanctified.
 Peace is there, that knows no measure,
   Joys that through all time abide.

If the occasion is other than Ascension Day, the following will be sung:

1. From every stormy wind that blows,
 From every swelling tide of woes,
 There is a calm, a sure retreat,
 'Tis found beneath the Mercy Seat.

[p. 183]

2. There is a scene where spirits blend;
 Where friends hold fellowship with friends;
 Though sundered far, by faith they meet
 Around one common Mercy Seat.

3. There, there on eagle wings we soar,
 And sin and sense molest no more,
 And heaven comes down our souls to greet,
 And glory crowns the Mercy Seat.

__________

Sermon or Address.

__________

DOXOLOGY.

Praise God from whom all blessings flow,
 Praise Him all creatures here below,
 Praise Him above, ye heavenly host,
 Praise Father, Son and Holy Ghost.

BENEDICTION.

The blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, be amongst you, and remain with you always. AMEN!

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 184]

  

RITUAL OF A COMMANDERY OF SORROW.

GRAND COMMANDERIES often desire to hold imposing Memorial Services in honor of their distinguished dead. Subordinate Commanderies have the sane privilege. When the Ceremonials are pathetic and tender, the results are most beneficial.

The ceremonies are public, and may be held in the Asylum, or in a public hall.

Click to enlarge
ARRAY OF THE HALL.

This diagram represents an elevated stage. 1, Commander; 2, Generalissimo; 3, Captain General; 4, Prelate; 5, Commander of the deceased Knight's commandery.

The three triangular tables should be 30 inches high, and have sides 15 inches long. They should each have a valance reaching to the floor. On each table should be three tall tapers, all burning.

The Catafalque is properly shaped thus (end view):

[p. 185]

It should be 32 inches long at the base, and the top part 24 inches long. This gives a terrace 6 inches wide all around, on which should be 12 lighted tapers, four on the front, and four on each side. On the top of the Catafalque a white urn may be placed, and all properly draped, and decked with white flowers.

A large bell, best made out of a bar of steel, is suspended near the chair of the commander, who will toll the same at the proper time.

A floral crown, and a floral cross should be prepared, and placed convenient to the proper officers. A floral wreath should be wound around a sword, and placed near the chair of the Captain General.

The Officers should be in full Templar costume, and the Prelate in regulation robes. If possible, all the knights should be in full Templar costume.

The music should be effectively rendered, and should be solemn and pathetic.

The ceremonials should be conducted in a slow and measured manner, solemnity and tenderness being the chief characteristics.

The officers enter in procession, and when they have taken their stations the ceremonies will begin.

THE CEREMONIES.

Choir sings "Rock of Ages," or other appropriate music:

COMMANDER.--Sir Knights, a Pilgrim Warrior, a soldier of the Cross, a Companion beloved, has been summoned hence. He has obeyed the summons and laid aside his armor. There is a vacancy in the Grand Commandery of --;a vacant chair in our council chamber. A taper has been extinguished here, to be relighted up yonder.

When the Commander says, "extinguished here," he will pause, and extinguish the taper at the apex of his triangular table. When he says, "to be relighted up yonder," he will relight the taper.

Beloved, we have gathered together to honor the memory of a Companion in arms, Sir Knight --; to tender condolence to the bereaved, and to crave permission to mingle our tears with theirs. The occasion is stricken with sorrow,

[p. 186]

but its poignancy is mollified by the preciousness of the hope of that other life, where tears and sorrows are unknown. In the midst of life we are in death; but unto whom shall we go for succor but unto Him who tempers the wind to the shorn lamb. Excellent Prelate, read unto us from the Father's will.

FIRST LESSON.

Prelate reads Job xiv: 1, 2, 5-14; 1 Corinthians xv: 12-23.

P.--Man that is born of a woman is of few days, and full of trouble. He cometh forth like a flower, and is cut down; he fleeth also as a shadow, and continueth not. Seeing his days are determined, the number of his months are with thee, thou hast appointed his bounds that he can not pass, turn from him that he may rest till he shall accomplish, as an hireling, his day. For there is hope of a tree if it be cut down that it will sprout again, and that the tender branches thereof will not cease. Though the root wax old in the earth, and the stock thereof die in the ground, yet through the scent of water it will bud and bring forth boughs like a plant.

But man dieth and wasteth away; yea, man giveth up the ghost, and where is he? As the waters fail from the sea and the flood decayeth and drieth up, so man lieth down and riseth not; till the heavens be no more they shall not awake nor be raised out of their sleep.

If a man die shall he live again? All the days of my appointed time will I wait, till my change come. Thou shalt call, and I will answer thee.

But if there be no resurrection of the dead, then is Christ not risen. And if Christ be not risen, then is your preaching vain, and your faith is also vain. * * * For if the dead rise not, then is not Christ raised; and if Christ is not

[p. 187]

raised, your faith is vain; ye are yet in your sins. * * * If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable.

But now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of them that slept. For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive. But every man in his order; Christ the first fruits, afterward they that are Christ's at his coming.

Brethren, let us pray.

PRAYERS.

ALMIGHTY and most Merciful Father, who has commended us to love one another as thy children, send down upon us at this time the dew of thy heavenly grace; pardon all our transgressions; renew within us right spirits, and refresh us with the sweetness of thy love; give unto us faith and hope so that this, our sorrow, may conduce to our eternal happiness. Look with compassion upon these bereaved ones, and pour into their bleeding hearts the consolations of thy grace; and may they have part and lot with all thy saints, through Jesus Christ, our Lord. AMEN.

COMMAND thy blessing, O God, to abide with all who are sick or afflicted; with the widow and the orphan; with the dying and the convalescent; with the poor and the distressed. Bestow upon all the spirit of thy grace, and help us to bear each other's burdens, so that having lived together in love here, we may, through the merits of our once crucified, but now risen and exalted Redeemer, ascend unto that peace that remaineth to the people of God, and forever unite in singing the praises of redeeming love. And to thy great and matchless name shall be all the praise and glory, through Jesus Christ, Emmanuel. AMEN.

[p. 188]

The grace of our Lord, Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of the Holy Ghost be with us all evermore. AMEN.

CHOIR.--

ASLEEP IN JESUS.

TUNE, Zephyr.

1. Asleep in Jesus! blessed sleep!
 From which none ever wake to weep;
 A calm and undisturbed repose.
 Unbroken by the last of foes.

2. Asleep in Jesus! O how sweet
 To be for such a slumber meet;
 With holy confidence to sing
 That death bath lost its venomed sting.

3. Asleep in Jesus! O for me
 May such a blissful refuge be;
 Securely shall my ashes lie,
 And wait the summons from on high.

4. Asleep in Jesus! far from thee
 Thy kindred and their graves may be;
 But there is still a blessed sleep
 From which none ever wake to weep.

While the last verse is being sung the Commander will toll the Bell, and the hall lights will be slowly lowered, until a dim light pervades.

THE CEREMONIES.

The Captain General will arise with the wreathed sword in hand.

CG.--In the hands of our deceased Companion this sword was endowed with three inestimable qualities--Justice, Fortitude and Mercy. Whenever he grasped this glittering sword, his hand first laid hold upon the cross, (holding cross of sword upwards), and before he drew it from its scabbard he was well assured of the JUSTICE of his cause.

[p. 189]

I lay his Sword, wreathed with emblems of our affection, on this Triangle dedicated to JUSTICE.

The Captain General remains standing, and after a pause the Generalissimo rises.

G. (With floral Cross in hand)--Our Companion delighted to wear upon his breast this emblem of the Christian Faith. He could exclaim with the apostle, "God forbid that I should glory save in the cross of our Lord, Jesus Christ." May this (raising the Cross) be the token to admit him where the wicked cease from troubling, and the weary are at rest.

To the memory of his Christian fidelity, courage and constancy, I lay this emblem on the Triangle dedicated to FORTITUDE.

The Generalissimo remains standing. A pause, then the Commander rises.

C. (With floral Crown in hand)--" Be thou faithful unto death and I will give thee a crown of life." Because our Companion was faithful do we hope that a crown awaited him in that "house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens." This emblem of that hope, (raising floral Crown) I now deposit on the Triangle dedicated to MERCY.

Excellent Prelate, lead our Devotions.

P.--Beloved, let us kneel in prayer.

The Choir will sing in soft, low voices:

1. Just as I am, without one plea,
 But that thy blood was shed for me,
 And that thou bidst me come to thee,
     O Lamb of God I come.

[p. 190]

2. Just as I am, thou wilt receive,
 Wilt welcome, pardon, cleanse, relieve;
 Because thy promise I believe,
 O Lamb of God I come.

3. Just as I am, thy love unknown,
 Hath broken every barrier down;
 Now, to be thine, yea, thine alone,
 O Lamb of God I come.

The Prelate will then offer the following, all still kneeling:

PRAYER.

HEAVENLY Father, in whose holy sight centuries are but as days, look down upon these bowed, weary pilgrims who are traveling through this vale of tears, and soften their afflictions with the consolations of thy Holy Spirit, the Comforter. Accept the homage we bring, and permit us to come unto thee, O Lamb of God, our Redeemer, so that there may be revived in each heart the hope of eternal felicity, through Jesus Christ, our Saviour. AMEN.

As the word Amen is pronounced the lights of the hall will be flashed up, and all will be seated.

THE CHANT OF MOURNING.

The Choir will then chant the following selection of Scripture:

In the day when the keepers of the house shall tremble, and the strong men shall bow themselves and the grinders cease because they are few, and those that look out of the windows be darkened.

And the doors shall be shut in the streets, when the sound of the grinding is low, and he shall rise up at the voice of the bird, and all the daughters of music shall be brought low;

[p. 191]

Also when they shall be afraid of that which is high, and fears shall be in the way, and the almond tree shall flourish, and the grasshopper shall be a burden, and desire shall fail; because man goeth to his long home, and the mourners go about the streets;

Or ever the silver cord be loosed, or the golden bowl be broken, or the pitcher be broken at the fountain, or the wheel broken at the cistern.

Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was; and the spirit return unto God who gave it.

ADDRESS BY THE COMMANDER.

C.--Sir Knights, each bereavement severs a sordid cord that binds us to this lower life, and stretches a golden one from earth to heaven. These severings command a halt, send us into the solitude of reflection, and enquire if we are able to answer the necessary questions, and wash our hands in innocency, in token of our sincerity.

Brethren, the memory of him who falls in a just cause is forever blessed. That just cause to us means defense of holy religion, feeding the hungry, clothing the naked, and binding up the wounds of the afflicted. It was in such a cause our Brother was engaged when he fell, and his memory shall forever flourish in immortal green. Though he now sleeps the long, undisturbed repose of death, his virtues are fresh, and live in our hearts. In the darkness of the tomb his ashes but await the summons of the resurrection, and his glorified spirit, we trust, is now engaged in hymning the praises of redeeming love.

Let us, therefore, having hope in God, lay aside the drapery of our mourning, and ascending out of the darkness of our grief into the light of the promises of our Great Captain, perform this last duty to the memory of our friend.

[p. 192]

Companion Commander of -- Commandery, on whose rolls the name of our Frater was inscribed, receive the instructions of this Grand Commandery.

The Commander arises, and meets the Grand Commander in middle of stage.

Here on this scroll is inscribed the name, age and advancements of our beloved Frater, now deceased. Bear it to your Asylum, and there deposit it in the archives, in constant and perpetual memorial.

C.--Right Eminent Sir, I accept this memorial scroll in the name of -- Commandery. It shall be sacredly deposited in the archives.

Both remain, facing the audience, when the Prelate will say:

P.--"I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, WRITE: from henceforth blessed are the dead who die in the Lord; even so saith the spirit, for they rest from their labors."

The Commanders go to their stations, and all are seated except Grand Commander.

C.--Sir Knights, these ceremonies have refreshed us, comforted our hearts, and strengthened our faith. Let us all henceforth so let our light shine that the world seeing, our good works may glorify our Father who art in heaven. May we so live that when we die our friends will deem it a pleasant duty to bestrew our graves with flowers, and thereby cherish the memory of our virtues.

THE EULOGIUM.

The Eulogium will then be pronounced by the orator selected

[p. 193]

After the Eulogium the Choir will sing, and the congregation will arise and join.

THE CONSOLATORY.

1. Forever with the Lord!
 Amen! so let it be;
 Life from the dead is in that word,
 'Tis immortality.

2. Here in the body pent,
 Absent from thee I roam,
 Yet nightly pitch my moving tent
 A day's march nearer home.

3. Forever with the Lord!
 Father, if 'tis thy will,
 The promise of that faithful word
 E'en here to me fulfill.

The Excellent Prelate will then pronounce the

BENEDICTION.

The grace of the Lord, Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all. AMEN.

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 194]

  

THE CHRISTMAS OBSERVANCE.

THE Grand Encampment, at its Triennial Conclave, Denver, 1892, gave its sanction to the Christmas Toast and Response, which had been inaugurated by Sir Stephen Berry, of Portland, Maine, and it made him Chairman of the Committee, ad vitam! He is charged with the duty of annually preparing the sentiment.

_____

On Christmas Day the Knights will assemble in their Asylum one hour before the official Hour of Observance, without uniforms. The hours are:

          Eastern Time, 12 noon.

       Central Time, 11 o'clock.

     
      Western Time, 10 o'clock.

       Pacific Time, 9 o'clock.

     
   The Triangle will be placed in position, on which will be twelve goblets, also one on the pedestal of the Commander. Glasses will be provided for all the Templars present.

Allowing a sufficient time in which to perform the following exercises before the Official Hour arrives, the Commander, Prelate and Recorder will take their stations, the Knights will be seated as usual, and the Commander will sound his gavel.

CHOIR--

HARK, THE HERALD! 7s.

1. Hark the herald! angels sing
 Glory to the new born king;
 Peace on earth, and mercy mild,
 God and sinners reconciled.

2. See He lays his glory by;
 Born that man no more may die,
 Born to raise the sons of earth;
 Born to give them second birth!

[p. 195]

3. Hail the holy Prince of peace!
 Hail, the Son of righteousness!
 Light and life to all He brings,
 Risen with healing in His wings!

More elaborate Music may be used if desired by the participants.

EC.--Excellent Prelate, read us the old, old story.

Prelate reads Isaiah xi: I-5; Matthew is 18; Luke ii: 4, 18-14.

P.--And there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a branch shall grow out of his roots. And the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and the fear of the Lord; and shall make of him quick understanding in the fear of the Lord; and he shall not judge after the sight of his eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of his ears.

With righteousness shall he judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of the earth; and he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked. And righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins.

*    *    *

Now the birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise: when as his mother Mary was espoused to Joseph, before they came together, she was found with child of the Holy Ghost. Then Joseph her husband, being a just man, and not willing to publicly expose her, was minded to put her away privily.

But while he thought on these things, behold, the angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a dream, saying, Joseph, son of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife; for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost. And

[p. 196]

she shall bring forth a son, and thou shalt call his name JESUS; for he shall save his people from their sins.

Now all this came to pass, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying, Behold a virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and they shall call his name Emmanuel, which being interpreted is, God with us.

*    *    *

And Joseph went up from Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth, into Judea, unto the city of David, which is called Bethlehem.

And lo, an angel of the Lord came upon them, and the glory of the Lord shone round about them; and they were sore afraid. And the angel said unto them, fear not: for behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people. For unto you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord. * * * And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God, and saying,

CHOIR.--Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will among men.

Then shall be sung in an adjacent room, but which singing must be quite distinct in the Asylum, a solo:

LO! A STAR, YE SAGES HOARY.

1. Lo! a star, ye sages hoary;
 Lo! a wondrous star above!
 He is born, the King of glory,
 He, our wondrous star of love.

2. Lord of life, Redeemer, Master,
 Loud the shepherd's welcome rolls,
 He is born, the people's shepherd,
 Aye, the shepherd of our souls.

[p. 197]

CHOIR--(Arranged as an Anthem.)

Praise God from whom all blessings flow;
 Praise Him all creatures here below;
 Praise Him above, ye heavenly host,
 Praise Father, Son and Holy Ghost.

If sung in long measure merely, all Templars present should join.

EC.--Sir Knights, on this joyous day we commemorate the Birth of JESUS of Nazareth, Emmanuel, author of our salvation, and the Great Captain under whose Banner all of us have enlisted.

On this day 189-- years ago, there was born in Bethlehem of Judea, one who laid aside the god-head, and assumed mortal flesh; one whose glory, worth and grace no language can express; one who was horn that our lives might be purified, and who died that our souls might be redeemed from the penalty of sin.

Let us, as true Soldiers of the Cross, strive to profit by the birth, life, death, resurrection and ascension of that divine Master, and remain His faithful soldiers unto death. Seeking strength to continue that struggle let us now accompany our Excellent Prelate to the throne of the heavenly grace. Excellent Prelate, lead our devotions.

All arise, then kneel on the right knee, and how heads. 

The Excellent Prelate will offer the following

PRAYER.

ALMIGHTY and most merciful Father, remember us with pity, we beseech thee, and blot out the multitude of our transgressions, for thy beloved son's sake. And may the words of our mouths, and the meditations of our hearts be acceptable in thy sight, through Jesus Christ, our Lord.

ALL.--AMEN!

[p. 198]

FATHER in heaven command thy blessing to rest upon all true Knights of the Temple wherever dispersed; bestow upon them a spirit of Truth, Justice, Courage, Constancy, Faith and Humility, and make of them valiant defenders of thy holy religion. Teach them to feed the hungry, clothe the naked, and bind up the wounds of the afflicted, for Jesus' sake.

ALL.--AMEN!

O LORD command thy benediction to rest upon our Grand Master. Help him to rule over us in love, and with an eye single to thy glory. Save him from error, prejudice and pride; and while giving him firmness of purpose to do right, help him to know the right, for Christ's sake.

ALL.--AMEN!

FATHER, let thy choicest blessings be with the President of the United States, and upon all in authority over us. Endue them with wisdom from on high, and may it be their chiefest joy to labor for thy glory, and the good of the people for whom they legislate, and over whom they rule. Which we ask in the name of Jesus, Emmanuel.

ALL.--AMEN!

If there are any minutes to spare, conversation and congratulations will now occur, while twelve Knights are being selected to form around the Triangle. At exactly five minutes before the Official Hour the Eminent Commander will sound his gavel, when all will he seated.

The Eminent Commander will then say:

EC.--Let the chosen twelve form around the Triangle. (Done) .

Let the water be poured into the goblets on the Triangle, and on the Pedestal. (Done).

[p. 199]

Let every Knight be furnished with a prepared goblet. (Done)

Thus prepared, there will be silence until two minutes before the Hour. This Monitor does not suggest what the fluid shall be, save at the Triangle, and on the Commander's pedestal. Some will prefer wine, some water. The writer simply suggests to his Fratres that even a semblance of intemperance should not be witnessed within an Asylum of Knights Templar. Just two minutes before the hour:

THE TOAST.

EC.--Sir Knights, arise! Sir Knight Recorder, read the sentiment.

The Recorder will read the sentiment, clear and loud.

EC.--(On the first stroke of the Hour.) To our Grand Master! Drink.

The Knights repeat," To our Grand Master," and drink.

EC.--Sir Knight Recorder, read Grand Master' s Response.

The Recorder will read the Response in a clear, loud voice.

OTHER TOASTS.

The Eminent Commander will then offer the following Toasts, which will be drank in the same manner as that to the Grand Master.

1. To the Grand Commander, Knights Templar, of --

2. To all Knights Templar wherever dispersed.

3. To all Knights Templar who have shed their blood in defense of liberty and Christianity. (Silence, and heads bowed; no drinking).

4. To the Grand Master of Masons in --

5. To the Grand High Priest of the Royal Arch Chapter of --

[p. 200]

IN MEMORIAM.

EC.--Let us recall the virtues of the Fratres of our own jurisdiction who have joined the silent majority.

The Knights at the Triangle will lay their goblets on the Triangle.

EC.--In memory of the dead of this jurisdiction during the year 189--

The Knights at the Triangle will drop on the right knee, all the Knights will bow their heads, and then will be sung, in soft tones, by the Choir:

Nearer, my God to thee
     Nearer to thee!
 E'en though it be a cross
     That raiseth me;
 Still all my song shall be,
 Nearer, my God to thee,
     Nearer to thee!

EC.--Sir Knights, arise. We have been refreshed by these hallowed memories, now let us receive the benediction of our Excellent Prelate.

BENEDICTION.

P.--May the Lord bless thee and keep thee; may the Lord make His face to shine upon thee and be gracious unto thee; may the Lord lift up His countenance upon thee, and give thee peace.

_____

END OF THE OBSERVANCE.

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 201]

  

FORM OF RECORDER'S MINUTES.

ASYLUM OF -- COMMANDERY, No. --., K. T.

--, January 1, 189--, A. O. 77--.

-- Commandery, No--, met in Stated (or [**] Called) Conclave, in its Asylum, the -- day of--, 189--, and a Commandery of Knights Templar was opened in due form, with

OFFICERS:

          Eminent

       Sir --, Commander.

     
       

       Sir --, Generalissimo.

     
       

       Sir --, Captain General.

     
       

       Sir --, Prelate.

     
       

       Sir --, Senior Warden.

     
       

       Sir --, Junior Warden.

     
       

       Sir --, Treasurer.

     
       

       Sir --, Recorder.

     
       

       Sir --, Standard Bearer.

     
       

       Sir --, Sword Bearer.

     
       

       Sir --, Sentinel.

     
   Members--Sirs A. B., D. E., etc.

Visitors--Sir X. Y., Mary Commandery, No. 4, Philadelphia, etc.

It was announced that the Right Eminent Grand Commander had arrived, and desired to visit the Commandery officially. Whereupon, the Arch of Steel was formed, and the distinguished visitor was received with the honors befitting his rank.

[p. 202]

After a few pleasant remarks by the Right Eminent Grand Commander, the Lines were dismissed, and the business of the Commandery continued.

Minutes of the preceding Conclave were read, and approved as correct.

Petition from Companion --, member of -- Lodge, No. --, and of, Hamilton Chapter, No. --, for the Orders of Knighthood, was read, and referred to the following

Committee--Sirs A. B. C., X. Y. Z., and G. W. P.

The following bills, approved by the Finance Committee, were read and ordered paid, viz.: [insert bills.]

The committee on the petition of Companion -- reported, whereupon the ballot was spread, and he was declared duly elected to receive the Orders of Knighthood.

The committee on the petition of Sir --, for affiliation, reported, whereupon the ballot was spread, and he was declared rejected.

Sir Knight -- offered the following, which was adopted:

Resolved, That, etc. [insert resolution.]

The business of the Commandery was then suspended, and a

COUNCIL OF THE RED CROSS

was opened, the officers assuming the titles thereof.

Companions A. B. C., G. F. S. and H. Y. T., who had been duly elected, were in waiting, and, there being no objection, were introduced and created and constituted Companions of the Illustrious Order of the Red Cross.

The Council was then closed, and the business of the Commandery was resumed.

[p. 203]

Sir Knight -- petitioned for a demit, and he being clear of the books, the same was granted.

The Commandery was then closed in due form.

After closing the Commandery, the Right Eminent Grand Commander was escorted by the Fratres, without uniform, to the banquet hall.

[Make the record of this as full as may be desired.]

 ------------------
 Commander.

--------------------
                       Recorder.

__________

When the Minutes are approved they should be signed at once by the Commander and Recorder.

The Minutes should not record the nature of the report of a Committee on Petitions. The above form is the correct one.

The Records should he carefully paragraphed, written in a clear style of writing, as well as composition. Many Recorders crowd the records, thus making them indistinct.

Use a Record Book that has a ruled margin, and give marginal notes.

Prompt Recorders always have the "Rough Minutes" ready at the close of each Conclave. They can then be corrected by those who participated. The minutes are read to the next Conclave as information.

Reports of Treasurer and Recorder are spread on the Minutes as information, and should not be voted upon, and never inserted as "adopted."

Footnotes

^201:* At Called Conclaves no business, save that specially permitted by law, can be transacted.

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 204]

  

ASYLUM, AND PRELATE'S HALL.

THIS plate illustrates how a Commandery that has only one large apartment can utilize the same for the Asylum and Prelate's Hall, during the conferring of the Order of the Temple.

Click to enlarge

The same arrangement is available in the Red Cross. The Asylum becomes the Audience Chamber, and the Prelate's Hall becomes the Council Chamber. Of course the Standard Bearer removes his chair to allow the entrance of the Candidate.

As a rule this arrangement is to be preferred except in Temples where there is a large Prelate's Hall separate from the Asylum.

     
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 205]

  

HINTS ON TEMPLAR BANQUETS.

THE social features of the assemblies of the Knights of the Temple will not be neglected by prudent Commanders. A reception and Banquet, which include the ladies, and given at least annually, is one of the very best investments a Commandery can make.

The management of the Reception need not be commented upon, but as a Templar Banquet is somewhat unique, hints may be of value to many Commanders.

De not form a Passion Cross with the tables. That cross is a sacred symbol in the Order of the Temple, and is not associated with the hilarity usual to a Banquet. The following form is suggested. It is very desirable that the banqueters sit as compactly as possible, and close up to the Commander, so as to be easily governed at proper intervals.

Click to enlarge

[p. 206]

This form allows the waiters easy access, and permits all to see the Commander, or Toastmaster.

The placing of the speakers at various points at the table is helpful to the listeners. It will be wise to seat the speakers in the places selected before the doors are thrown open.

Not more than five distinct courses, nor more than five speakers, beginning at nine and closing not later than midnight, will make the entertainment agreeable to most.

A few crisp remarks by the Commander, in introducing each speaker, may add to the brilliancy of the toast and the response. Do not he personal unless you know your speaker.

Never permit smoking when ladies are present.

    
Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor, by George Cooper Connor, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 207]

  

INDEX

Abbreviations, Popular <page 143>

Across the Lines <page 46>

Ancient Cities of Persia <page 27>

Ancient Motto <page 75>

An Historical Fact <page 74>

Anno Domini <page 139>

Appendix <page 77>

Appendix, Second <page 137>

Appendix, Third <page 165>

Arch of Steel <page 167>, <page 170>

Ascension Day Ceremonies <page 174>

Asylum (the Work) <page 50>

Asylum, and Prelate's Hall, (diagram) <page 204>

Audience Chamber and Council Chamber, R. C <page 204>

Auld Lang Syne, song and music <page 149>

Baldric <page 65>

Banner of Red Cross <page 8>, <page 25>

Banners, Jewish and Persian <page 9>

Banners of the Temple <page 40>, <page 65>

Banquet <page 26>

Banquets, Templar <page 205>

Beatitudes <page 133>

Burial Service <page 119>

General Regulations <page 120>

Ritual at the Residence or Church <page 120>

Ritual at the Grave <page 125>

Chamber . <page 50>

Charge <page 69>

To Captain General <page 94>

To Commandery <page 99>

To Generalissimo <page 93>

To Grand Captain General <page 105>

To Grand Captain of the Guard <page 103>

[p. 208]

Charge to Grand Commander <page 103>

To Grand Generalissimo <page 105>

To Grand Prelate <page 106>

To Grand Junior Warden <page 107>

To Grand Recorder <page 107>

To Grand Senior Warden <page 106>

To Grand Standard Bearer <page 108>

To Grand Sword Bearer <page 108>

To Grand Treasurer <page 107>

To Grand Warder <page 108>

To Junior Warden <page 96>

To Prelate <page 95>

To Recorder <page 97>

To Senior Warden <page 95>

To Sentinel <page 99>

To Standard Bearer <page 98>

To Sword Bearer <page 98>

To Treasurer <page 97>

To Warder <page 99>

Christian's Creed <page 181>

Christmas Observance <page 194>

Close of Seven Years of Preparation <page 61>

Closing Council of Red Cross <page 26>

Closing Commandery <page 71>

Commandery of Sorrow <page 184>

Comments on the Order of the Red Cross <page 10>

Communications <page 46>

Conclaves of the Grand Encampment <page 39>

Concluding Remarks, Red Cross <page 29>

Constantine's Vision <page 73>

Constituting New Commanderies <page 83>

Crosses of the Order of the Temple <page 42>, <page 117>

Cross, R. C . <page 9>, <page 25>

Days of the Week, origin of names of <page 140>

Decree, Red Cross <page 24>

Dedication <page 3>

Dedication and Consecration of Asylums <page 79>

Dimit <page 156>

Distinctions <page 118>

Division of Time <page 140>

[p. 209]

Dress of the Ancient Templars <page 74>

Entrance <page 53>

First Annunciation <page 47>

Floor Plan, New Ritual, Order of Malta <page 135>

F. N. P <page 132>

Form of Charter <page 153>

Form of Dimit <page 156>

Form of Dispensation for New Commandery <page 152>

Form of Petition for Dispensation <page 151>

Recommendation of Nearest Commandery <page 152>

Certificate of Past Commander <page 152>

Form of Petition for Membership <page 156>

Form of Petition for the Orders <page 155>

Report of Committee on above Petition <page 156>

Forms for Templar Trials <page 157>

Complaint <page 157>

Notice to the Accused <page 158>

Answer of Accused <page 159>

Summons for Witness <page 159>

Report of Committee <page 160>

Fixing Punishment <page 160>

Notice of Judgment <page 161>

Notice of Appeal <page 161>

Appeal <page 161>

Answer to Appeal <page 162>

Certificate to Transcript <page 162>

Appeal to the Grand Encampment <page 163>

Petition for Restoration <page 164>

Founding the New Order <page 25>

Fraternity Music <page 146>

General Information <page 142>

Grand Masters of the Ancient Order of the Temple <page 40>

Grand Masters of the Grand Encampment <page 39>

Grand Visitors, and their Reception <page 167>

Green Sash <page 20>, <page 25>

Hermit Lessons <page 50>, <page 54>

High Priest's Address <page 17>

Hints to Commanders <page 7>, <page 171>

Hints on Templar Banquets <page 205>

Historical Lecture <page 66>

[p. 210]

Historical Sketch, Red Cross <page 11>

History of the Order of the Temple <page 33>

History of the Order in the United States <page 38>

Hymns--Asleep in Jesus <page 188>

Chant of Mourning <page 190>

Coronation Hymn <page 176>

Doxology <page 183>, <page 197>

Hark, the Herald <page 194>

Hendon <page 60>, <page 147>

Just as I am <page 189>

King of Kings and Lord of Lords <page 176>

Lo! a Star, ye Sages Hoary <page 196>

Nearer, My God to Thee <page 148>

Old Hundred <page 60>, <page 146>

The Consolatory <page 193>

The Cross of Christ <page 182>

The Mercy Seat <page 182>

Immemorial Discussion <page 22>

Inscription <page 134>

Insignia of Office <page 116>

Inspection and Review <page 47>

Installation of Eminent Commander <page 88>

Of Deputy Grand Commander <page 104>

Of Grand Captain General <page 114>

Of Grand Commander <page 102>

Of Grand Encampment <page 110>

Of Grand Generalissimo <page 114>

Of Grand Recorder <page 114>

Of Grand Treasurer <page 114>

Of Grand Wardens <page 114>

Of Most Eminent Grand Master <page 111>

Of Officers below Deputy Grand Commander <page 104>

Of Officers below Eminent Commander <page 92>

Of Officers below Most Eminent Grand Master <page 113>

Of Officers of a Commandery <page 87>

Of Officers of Grand Commandery <page 101>

Of Standard Bearer <page 114>

Of Sword Bearer <page 114>

Of Very Eminent Deputy Grand Master <page 113>

Of Warder <page 114>

[p. 211]

In the Presence of the King <page 21>

"It is Finished" <page 75>

Journey. Red Cross <page 21>

Knight Hospitaler <page 133>

Knight of St. Paul <page 132>

Knight Templar Grand Jurisdictions of the United States <page 142>

Liturgy <page 173>

Masonic Calendars <page 139>

Means of Recognition, K. T. <page 65>

Means of Recognition, R. C. <page 25>

Moon's Rising and Setting <page 139>

Mount Bethany <page 59>

Name of God in Twenty-two Languages <page 143>

Names of the Months <page 140>

Officers and Special Members, Red Cross Council <page 13>

Officers of a Commandery <page 43>

Opening a Commandery <page 45>

Opening Council of the Red Cross <page 15>

Order of Malta <page 131>

Order of the Red Cross <page 7>

Order of the Temple <page 33>

Paraphernalia <page 43>

Paul at Melita <page 132>

Paul's Exhortation <page 132>

Perpetual Almanac <page 138>a

Pilgrimage <page 50>

Plea for Remembrance <page 24>

Pledges of Fidelity <page 20>

Preface to Monitor <page 5>

Preface to Fifth Edition <page 6>

Reception of Eminent Commander <page 45>

Of Grand Commander <page 169>

Of Grand Master <page 167>

Of Grand Visitors <page 167>

Of Sovereign Master <page 15>

Recognition <page 134>

Recorder's Minutes <page 201>

Records of our Fathers <page 18>

Rehearsal of Duties <page 17>, <page 48>

Religion of the Ancient Persians <page 28>

[p. 212]

Ritualistic Commentary <page 71>

Ritual of a Commandery of Sorrow <page 184>

Rules of Order <page 172>

Salute and Present <page 32>

Second House of the Templars <page 52>

Sentinel Informed <page 48>

Short Form <page 49>

Shoulder Straps <page 116>

Signs <page 16>

Some Words not fully understood <page 144>

Spur <page 65>

Sword <page 20>, <page 25>, <page 65>

Sword Cuts--Passes <page 31>

Templar Forms <page 151>

Templar Trials <page 157>

Templar Uniform <page 116>

Ten Commandments <page 177>

Third Appendix <page 165>

Third House of the Templars <page 53>

Thomas, Doubting <page 133>

Through Both Lines Simultaneously <page 47>

Through the Lines <page 46>

Thrust <page 32>

To a Skull, a poem <page 150>

Toast and Response, Christmas Observance <page 199>

To Open a Priory <page 131>.

To the Memory of <page 54>

Vow <page 25>, <page 52>, <page 133>

Welcome <page 26>

"Where the Lord Lay" <page 58>

Work, Red Cross <page 17>

Work, K. T <page 49>

Year, solar and lunar <page 141>

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: sie.txt =====


     
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 2]

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 3]

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 4]

  

Introduction

Piping down the valleys wild
 Piping songs of pleasant glee
 On a cloud I saw a child.
 And he laughing said to me.

Pipe a song about a Lamb:
 So I piped with merry chear,
 Piper pipe that song again--
 So I piped, he wept to hear.

Drop thy pipe thy happy pipe
 Sing thy songs of happy chear,
 So I sung the same again
 While he wept with joy to hear.

Piper sit thee down and write
 In a book that all may read--
 So he vanish'd from my sight,
 And I pluck'd a hollow reed.

And I made a rural pen,
 And I stain'd the water clear,
 And I wrote my happy songs,
 Every child may joy to hear

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 5]

  

The Shepherd.

How sweet is the Shepherds sweet lot,
 From the morn to the evening he strays:
 He shall follow his sheep all the day
 And his tongue shall be filled with praise.

For he hears the lambs innocent call.
 And he hears the ewes tender reply.
 He is watchful while they are in peace,
 For they know when their Shepherd is nigh.

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 6]

  

The Ecchoing Green

The Sun does arise,
 And make happy the skies.
 The merry bells ring,
 To welcome the Spring.
 The sky-lark and thrush,
 The birds of the bush,
 Sing louder around,
 To the bells chearful sound,
 While our sports shall be seen
 On the Ecchoing Green.

Old John with white hair
 Does laugh away care,
 Sitting under the oak,
 Among the old folk.

They

[p. 7]

They laugh at our play,
 And soon they all say,
 Such such were the joys,
 When we all girls & boys,
 In our youth time were seen,
 On the Ecchoing Green.

Till the little ones weary
 No more can be merry
 The sun does descend,
 And our sports have an end:
 Round the laps of their mothers,
 Many sisters and brothers,
 Like birds in their nest,
 Are ready for rest:
 And sport no more seen,
 On the darkening Green.

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 8]

  

The Lamb

  Little Lamb who made thee
   Dost thou know who made thee
 Gave thee life & bid thee feed,
 By the stream & o'er the mead;
 Gave thee clothing of delight,
 Softest clothing wooly bright;
 Gave thee such a tender voice,
 Making all the vales rejoice:
   Little Lamb who made thee
   Dost thou know who made thee

  Little Lamb I'll tell thee,
   Little Lamb Ill tell thee;
 He is called by thy name,
 For he calls himself a Lamb:
 He is meek & he is mild,
 He became a little child:
 I a child & thou a lamb,
 We are called by his name.
   Little Lamb God bless thee,
   Little Lamb God bless thee.

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 9]

  

The Little Black Boy.

My mother bore me in the southern wild,
 And I am black, but O! my soul is white,
 White as an angel is the English child:
 But I am black as if bereav'd of light.

My mother taught me underneath a tree
 And sitting down before the heat of day,
 She took me on her lap and kissed me,
 And pointing to the east began to say.

Look on the rising sun: there God does live
 And gives his light, and gives his heat away.
 And flowers and trees and beasts and men recieve
 Comfort in morning joy in the noon day.

And we are put on earth a little space,
 That we may learn to bear the beams of love.
 And these black bodies and this sun-burnt face
 Is but a cloud, and like a shady grove.

For

[p. 10]

For when our souls have learn'd the heat to bear
 The cloud will vanish we shall hear his voice,
 Saying: come out from the grove my love & care,
 And round my golden tent like lambs rejoice.

Thus did my mother say and kissed me.
 And thus I say to little English boy.
 When I from black and he from white cloud free,
 And round the tent of God like lambs we joy:

Ill shade him from the heat till he can bear,
 To lean in joy upon our fathers knee.
 And then I'll stand and stroke his silver hair,
 And be like him and he will then love me.

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 11]

  

The Blossom.

Merry Merry Sparrow
 Under leaves so green
 A happy Blossom
 Sees you swift as arrow
 Seek your cradle narrow
 Near my Bosom.

Pretty Pretty Robin
 Under leaves so green
 A happy Blossom
 Hears you sobbing sobbing
 Pretty Pretty Robin
 Near my Bosom.

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 12]

  

The Chimney Sweeper

When my mother died I was very young,
 And my father sold me while yet my tongue,
 Could scarcely cry weep weep weep weep.

So your chimneys I sweep & in soot I sleep.
 Theres little Tom Dacre, who cried when his head
 That curl'd like a lambs back, was shav'd, so I said,
 Hush Tom never mind it, for when your head's bare,
 You know that the soot cannot spoil your white hair.

And so he was quiet, & that very night,
 As Tom was a sleeping he had such a sight,
 That thousands of sweepers Dick, Joe, Ned & Jack
 Were all of them lock'd up in coffins of black,

And by came an Angel who had a bright key,
 And he open'd the coffins & set them all free.
 Then down a green plain leaping laughing they run
 And wash in a river and shine in the Sun.

Then naked & white, all their bags left behind,
 They rise upon clouds, and sport in the wind.
 And the Angel told Tom, if he'd be a good boy,
 He'd have God for his father & never want joy.

And so Tom awoke and we rose in the dark
 And got with our bags & our brushes to work.
 Tho' the morning was cold, Tom was happy & warm.
 So if all do their duty, they need not fear harm.

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 13]

  

The Little Boy lost

Father, father, where are you going
 O do not walk so fast.
 Speak father, speak to your little boy
 Or else I shall be lost,

The night was dark no father was there
 The child was wet with dew.
 The mire was deep, & the child did weep
 And away the vapour flew.

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 14]

  

The Little Boy found

The little boy lost in the lonely fen,
 Led by the wand'ring light,
 Began to cry, but God ever nigh,
 Appeard like his father in white.

He kissed the child & by the hand led
 And to his mother brought,
 Who in sorrow pale, thro' the lonely dale
 Her little boy weeping sought.

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 15]

  

Laughing Song,

When the green woods laugh with the voice of joy
 And the dimpling stream runs laughing by,
 When the air does laugh with our merry wit,
 And the green hill laughs with the noise of it.

When the meadows laugh with lively green
 And the grasshopper laughs in the merry scene,
 When Mary and Susan and Emily,
 With their sweet round mouths sing Ha, Ha, He.

When the painted birds laugh in the shade
 Where our table with cherries and nuts is spread
 Come live & be merry and join with me,
 To sing the sweet chorus of Ha, Ha, He.

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 16]

  

A CRADLE SONG

Sweet dreams form a shade,
 O'er my lovely infants head.
 Sweet dreams of pleasant streams,
 By happy silent moony beams

Sweet sleep with soft down,
 Weave thy brows an infant crown.
 Sweet sleep Angel mild,
 Hover o'er my happy child.

Sweet smiles in the night,
 Hover over my delight.
 Sweet smiles Mothers smiles
 All the livelong night beguiles.

Sweet moans, dovelike sighs,
 Chase not slumber from thy eyes,
 Sweet moans, sweeter smiles,
 All the dovelike moans beguiles.

Sleep sleep happy child.
 All creation slept and smil'd.
 Sleep sleep, happy sleep,
 While o'er thee thy mother weep

Sweet babe in thy face,
 Holy image I can trace.
 Sweet babe once like thee,
 Thy maker lay and wept for me

Wept

[p. 17]

Wept for me for thee for all,
 When he was an infant small.
 Thou his image ever see.
 Heavenly face that smiles on thee.

Smiles on thee on me on all,
 Who became an infant small,
 Infant smiles are his own smiles,
 Heaven & earth to peace beguiles.

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 18]

  

The Divine Image.

To Mercy Pity Peace and Love,
 All pray in their distress:
 And to these virtues of delight
 Return their thankfulness.

For Mercy Pity Peace and Love,
 Is God our father dear:
 And Mercy Pity Peace and Love,
 Is Man his child and care.

For Mercy has a human heart
 Pity, a human face:
 And Love, the human form divine,
 And Peace, the human dress.

Then every man of every clime,
 That prays in his distress,
 Prays to the human form divine
 Love Mercy Pity Peace.

And all must love the human form,
 In heathen, turk or jew.
 Where Mercy, Love & Pity dwell,
 There God is dwelling too.

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 19]

  

HOLY THURSDAY

Twas on a Holy Thursday their innocent faces clean
 The children walking two & two in red & blue & green
 Grey headed beadles walkd before with wands as white as snow
 Till into the high dome of Pauls they like Thames waters flow

O what a multitude they seemd these flowers of London town
 Seated in companies they sit with radiance all their own
 The hum of multitudes was there but multitudes of lambs
 Thousands of little boys & girls raising their innocent hands

Now like a mighty wind they raise to heaven the voice of song
 Or like harmonious thunderings the seats of heaven among
 Beneath them sit the aged men wise guardians of the poor
 Then cherish pity; lest you drive an angel from your door

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 20]

  

Night

The sun descending in the west,
 The evening star does shine,
 The birds are silent in their nest,
 And I must seek for mine,
 The moon like a flower,
 In heavens high bower;
 With silent delight,
 Sits and smiles on the night.

Farewell green fields and happy groves,
 Where flocks have took delight;
 Where lambs have nibbled, silent moves
 The feet of angels bright;
 Unseen they pour blessing,
 And joy without ceasing,
 On each bud and blossom,
 And each sleeping bosom.

They look in every thoughtless nest,
 Where birds are coverd warm;
 They visit caves of every beast,
 To keep them all from harm:
 If they see any weeping,
 That should have been sleeping
 They pour sleep on their head
 And sit down by their bed.

When

[p. 21]

When wolves and tygers howl for prey
 They pitying stand and weep;
 Seeking to drive their thirst away,
 And keep them from the sheep,
 But if they rush dreadful;
 The angels most heedful,
 Recieve each mild spirit,
 New worlds to inherit.

And there the lions ruddy eyes,
 Shall flow with tears of gold:
 And pitying the tender cries,
 And walking round the fold:
 Saying: wrath by his meekness
 And by his health, sickness,
 Is driven away,
 From our immortal day.

And now beside thee bleating lamb,
 I can lie down and sleep;
 Or think on him who bore thy name,
 Grase after thee and weep.
 For wash'd in lifes river,
 My bright mane for ever,
 Shall shine like the gold,

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 22]

  

Spring

Sound the Flute!
 Now it's mute.
 Birds delight
 Day and Night.
 Nightingale
 In the dale
 Lark in Sky
 Merrily
 Merrily Merrily to welcome in the Year

Little Boy
 Full of joy.

Little

[p. 23]

Little Girl
 Sweet and small.
 Cock does crow
 So do you.
 Merry voice
 Infant noise
 Merrily Merrily to welcome in the Year

Little Lamb
 Here I am,
 Come and lick
 My white neck.
 Let me pull
 Your soft Wool.
 Let me kiss
 Your soft face.
 Merrily Merrily we welcome in the Year

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 24]

  

Nurse's Song

When the voices of children are heard on the green
 And laughing is heard on the hill,
 My heart is at rest within my breast
 And everything else is still

Then come home my children, the sun is gone down
 And the dews of night arise
 Come come leave off play, and let us away
 Till the morning appears in the skies

No no let us play, for it is yet day
 And we cannot go to sleep
 Besides in the sky, the little birds fly
 And the hills are all coverd with sheep

Well well go & play till the light fades away
 And then go home to bed
 The little ones leaped & shouted & laugh'd
 And all the hills ecchoed

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 25]

  

Infant Joy

I have no name
 I am but two days old.--
 What shall I call thee?
 I happy am
 Joy is my name,
 Sweet joy befall thee!

Pretty joy!
 Sweet joy but two days old.
 Sweet joy I call thee:
 Thou dost smile.
 I sing the while
 Sweet joy befall thee.

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 26]

  

A Dream

Once a dream did weave a shade,
 O'er my Angel-guarded bed,
 That an Emmet lost it's way
 Where on grass methought I lay.

Troubled wilderd and folorn
 Dark benighted travel-worn,
 Over many a tangled spray,
 All heart-broke I heard her say.

O my children! do they cry,
 Do they hear their father sigh.
 Now they look abroad to see,
 Now return and weep for me.

Pitying I drop'd a tear:
 But I saw a glow-worm near:
 Who replied, What wailing wight
 Calls the watchman of the night.

I am set to light the ground,
 While the beetle goes his round:
 Follow now the beetles hum,
 Little wanderer hie thee home.

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 27]

  

On Anothers Sorrow

Can I see anothers woe,
 And not be in sorrow too.
 Can I see anothers grief,
 And not seek for kind relief.

Can I see a falling tear,
 And not feel my sorrows share,
 Can a father see his child,
 Weep, nor be with sorrow fill'd.

Can a mother sit and hear,
 An infant groan an infant fear--
 No no never can it be.
 Never never can it be.

And can he who smiles on all
 Hear the wren with sorrows small,
 Hear the small birds grief & care
 Hear the woes that infants bear--

And not sit beside the nest
 Pouring pity in their breast.
 And not sit the cradle near
 Weeping tear on infants tear.

And not sit both night & day,
 Wiping all our tears away.
 O! no never can it be.
 Never never can it be.

He doth give his joy to all.
 He becomes an infant small.
 He becomes a man of woe
 He doth feel the sorrow too.

Think not, thou canst sigh a sigh,
 And thy maker is not by.
 Think not, thou canst weep a tear,
 And thy maker is not near.

O! he gives to us his joy,
 That our grief he may destroy
 Till our grief is fled & gone
 He doth sit by us and moan

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 28]

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 29]

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 30]

  

Introduction.

Hear the voice of the Bard!
 Who Present, Past, & Future sees
 Whose ears have heard,
 The Holy Word,
 That walk'd among the ancient trees.

Calling the lapsed Soul
 And weeping in the evening dew:
 That might controll
 The starry pole:
 And fallen fallen light renew!

O Earth O Earth return!
 Arise from out the dewy grass;
 Night is worn,
 And the morn
 Rises from the slumberous mass.

Turn away no more:
 Why wilt thou turn away
 The starry floor
 The watry shore
 Is giv'n thee till the break of day.

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 31]

  

EARTH'S Answer.

Earth rais'd up her head,
 From the darkness dread & drear,
 Her light fled:
 Stony dread!
 And her locks cover'd with grey despair.

Prison'd on watry shore
 Starry Jealousy does keep my den
 Cold and hoar
 Weeping o'er
 I hear the Father of the ancient men

Selfish father of men
 Cruel jealous selfish fear
 Can delight
 Chain'd in night
 The virgins of youth and morning bear.

Does spring hide its joy
 When buds and blossoms grow?
 Does the sower?
 Sow by night?
 Or the plowman in darkness plow?

Break this heavy chain,
 That does freeze my bones around
 Selfish! vain!
 Eternal bane!
 That free Love with bondage bound.

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 32]

  

The CLOD & the PEBBLE

Love seeketh not Itself to please,
 Nor for itself hath any care;
 But for another gives its ease,
 And builds a Heaven in Hells despair.

So sang a little Clod of Clay,
 Trodden with the cattles feet;
 But a Pebble of the brook,
 Warbled out these metres meet.

Love seeketh only Self to please,
 To bind another to Its delight:
 Joys in anothers loss of ease,
 And builds a Hell in Heavens despite.

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 33]

  

HOLY THURSDAY

Is this a holy thing to see,
 In a rich and fruitful land,
 Babes reducd to misery,
 Fed with cold and usurous hand?

Is that trembling cry a song?
 Can it be a song of joy?
 And so many children poor?
 It is a land of poverty!

And their sun does never shine.
 And their fields are bleak & bare.
 And their ways are fill'd with thorns
 It is eternal winter there.

For where-e'er the sun does shine,
 And where-e'er the rain does fall:
 Babe can never hunger there,
 Nor poverty the mind appall.

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 34]

  

The Little Girl Lost

In futurity
 I prophetic see,
 That the earth from sleep,
 (Grave the sentence deep)

Shall arise and seek
 For her maker meek:
 And the desart wild
 Become a garden mild.

In the southern clime,
 Where the summers prime,
 Never fades away;
 Lovely Lyca lay.

Seven summers old
 Lovely Lyca told,
 She had wanderd long,
 Hearing wild birds song.

Sweet sleep come to me
 Underneath this tree;
 Do father, mother weep,--
 "Where can Lyca sleep".

Lost in desart wild
 Is your little child.
 How can Lyca sleep,
 If her mother weep.

If her heart does ake,
 Then let Lyca wake;
 If my mother sleep,
 Lyca shall not weep.

Frowning frowning night,
 O'er this desart bright,
 Let thy moon arise,
 While I close my eyes.

Sleeping Lyca lay;
 While the beasts of prey,
 Come from caverns deep,
 View'd the maid asleep

The kingly lion stood
 And the virgin view'd,
 Then he gambold round
 O'er the hallowd ground:

Leopards

[p. 35]

Leopards, tygers play,
 Round her as she lay;
 While the lion old,
 Bow'd his mane of gold,

And her bosom lick,
 And upon her neck,

From his eyes of flame,
 Ruby tears there came;

While the lioness
 Loos'd her slender dress,
 And naked they convey'd
 To caves the sleeping maid.

  

The Little Girl Found

All the night in woe,
 Lyca's parents go:
 Over vallies deep,
 While the desarts weep.

Tired and woe-begone,
 Hoarse with making moan:
 Arm in arm seven days,
 They trac'd the desart ways.

Seven nights they sleep,
 Among shadows deep:
 And dream they see their child
 Starv'd in desart wild.

Pale thro' pathless ways
 The fancied image strays,

Famish'd

[p. 36]

Famish'd, weeping, weak
 With hollow piteous shriek

Rising from unrest,
 The trembling woman prest,
 With feet of weary woe;
 She could no further go.

In his arms he bore,
 Her arm'd with sorrow sore:
 Till before their way,
 A couching lion lay.

Turning back was vain,
 Soon his heavy mane,
 Bore them to the ground;
 Then he stalk'd around.

Smelling to his prey,
 But their fears allay,
 When he licks their hands:
 And silent by them stands.

They look upon his eyes
 Fill'd with deep surprise:
 And wondering behold,
 A spirit arm'd in gold.

On his head a crown
 On his shoulders down,
 Flow'd his golden hair.
 Gone was all their care.

Follow me he said,
 Weep not for the maid:
 In my palace deep,
 Lyca lies asleep.

Then they followed,
 Where the vision led:
 And saw their sleeping child,
 Among tygers wild.

To this day they dwell
 In a lonely dell
 Nor fear the wolvish howl,
 Nor the lions growl.

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 37]

  

The Chimney Sweeper

A little black thing among the snow:
 Crying weep, weep, in notes of woe!
 Where are thy father & mother? say?
 They are both gone up to the church to pray.

Because I was happy upon the heath,
 And smil'd among the winters snow:
 They clothed me in the clothes of death,
 And taught me to sing the notes of woe.

And because I am happy, & dance & sing,
 They think they have done me no injury:
 And are gone to praise God & his Priest & King
 Who make up a heaven of our misery.

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 38]

  

NURSES Song

When the voices of children, are heard on the green
 And whisprings are in the dale:
 The days of my youth rise fresh in my mind,
 My face turns green and pale.

Then come home my children, the sun is gone down
 And the dews of night arise
 Your spring & your day, are wasted in play
 And your winter and night in disguise.

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 39]

  

The SICK ROSE

O Rose thou art sick.
 The invisible worm,
 That flies in the night
 In the howling storm:

Has found out thy bed
 Of crimson joy:
 And his dark secret love
 Does thy life destroy.

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 40]

  

THE FLY.

Little Fly
 Thy summers play,
 My thoughtless hand
 Has brush'd away.

Am not I
 A fly like thee?
 Or art not thou
 A man like me?

For I dance
 And drink & sing:
 Till some blind hand
 Shall brush my wing.

If thought is life
 And strength & breath
 And the want
 Of thought is death;

Then am I
 A happy fly,
 If I live,
 Or if I die.

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 41]

  

The Angel

I Dreamt a Dream! what can it mean?
 And that I was a maiden Queen:
 Guarded by an Angel mild:
 Witless woe, was neer beguil'd!

And I wept both night and day
 And he wip'd my tears away
 And I wept both day and night
 And hid from him my hearts delight

So he took his wings and fled:
 Then the morn blush'd rosy red:
 I dried my tears & armd my fears,
 With ten thousand shields and spears.

Soon my Angel came again:
 I was arm'd, he came in vain:
 For the time of youth was fled
 And grey hairs were on my head

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 42]

  

The Tyger

Tyger Tyger, burning bright,
 In the forests of the night;
 What immortal hand or eye,
 Could frame thy fearful symmetry?

In what distant deeps or skies,
 Burnt the fire of thine eyes?
 On what wings dare he aspire?
 What the hand, dare sieze the fire?

And what shoulder, & what art,
 Could twist the sinews of thy heart?
 And when thy heart began to beat,
 What dread hand? & what dread feet?

What the hammer? what the chain,
 In what furnace was thy brain?
 What the anvil? what dread grasp,
 Dare its deadly terrors clasp?

When the stars threw down their spears
 And water'd heaven with their tears:
 Did he smile his work to see?
 Did he who made the Lamb make thee?

Tyger Tyger burning bright,
 In the forests of the night:
 What immortal hand or eye,
 Dare frame thy fearful symmetry?

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 43]

  

My Pretty ROSE TREE

A flower was offerd to me:
 Such a flower as May never bore.
 But I said I've a Pretty Rose-tree,
 And I passed the sweet flower o'er.

Then I went to my Pretty Rose-tree:
 To tend her by day and by night.
 But my Rose turnd away with jealousy:
 And her thorns were my only delight.

  

AH! SUN-FLOWER

Ah Sun-flower! weary of time,
 Who countest the steps of the Sun:
 Seeking after that sweet golden clime,
 Where the travellers journey is done.

Where the Youth pined away with desire,
 And the pale Virgin shrouded in snow:
 Arise from their graves and aspire,
 Where my Sun-flower wishes to go.

  

THE LILLY

The modest Rose puts forth a thorn:
 The humble Sheep, a threatning horn:
 While the Lilly white, shall in Love delight,
 Nor a thorn nor a threat stain her beauty bright.

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 44]

  

The GARDEN of LOVE

I went to the Garden of Love.
 And saw what I never had seen:
 A Chapel was built in the midst,
 Where I used to play on the green.

And the gates of this Chapel were shut,
 And Thou shalt not, writ over the door;
 So I turn'd to the Garden of Love,
 That so many sweet flowers bore,

And I saw it was filled with graves,
 And tomb-stones where flowers should be:
 And Priests in black gowns, were walking their rounds,
 And binding with briars, my joys & desires.

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 45]

  

The Little Vagabond

Dear Mother, dear Mother, the Church is cold.
 But the Ale-house is healthy & pleasant & warm:
 Besides I can tell where I am use'd well.
 Such usage in heaven will never do well.

But if at the Church they would give us some Ale,
 And a pleasant fire, our souls to regale:
 We'd sing and we'd pray all the live-long day:
 Nor ever once wish from the Church to stray.

Then the Parson might preach & drink & sing,
 And we'd be as happy as birds in the spring:
 And modest dame Lurch, who is always at Church,
 Would not have bandy children nor fasting nor birch.

And God like a father rejoicing to see,
 His children as pleasant and happy as he:
 Would have no more quarrel with the Devil or the Barrel
 But kiss him & give him both drink and apparel.

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 46]

  

LONDON

I wander thro' each charter'd street,
 Near where the charter'd Thames does flow
 And mark in every face I meet
 Marks of weakness, marks of woe.

In every cry of every Man,
 In every Infants cry of fear,
 In every voice; in every ban,
 The mind-forg'd manacles I hear

How the Chimney-sweepers cry
 Every blackning Church appalls,
 And the hapless Soldiers sigh
 Runs in blood down Palace walls

But most thro' midnight streets I hear
 How the youthful Harlots curse
 Blasts the new-born Infants tear
 And blights with plagues the Marriage hearse

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 47]

  

The Human Abstract.

Pity would be no more,
 If we did not make somebody Poor:
 And Mercy no more could be,
 If all were as happy as we:

And mutual fear brings peace:
 Till the selfish loves increase.
 Then Cruelty knits a snare,
 And spreads his baits with care.

He sits down with holy fears,
 And waters the ground with tears:
 Then Humility takes its root
 Underneath his foot.

Soon spreads the dismal shade
 Of Mystery over his head;
 And the Catterpiller and Fly,
 Feed on the Mystery.

And it bears the fruit of Deceit,
 Ruddy and sweet to eat:
 And the Raven his nest has made
 In its thickest shade.

The Gods of the earth and sea,
 Sought thro' Nature to find this Tree
 But their search was all in vain;
 There grows one in the Human Brain

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 48]

  

INFANT SORROW

My mother groand! my father wept.
 Into the dangerous world I leapt:
 Helpless, naked, piping loud:
 Like a fiend hid in a cloud.

Struggling in my fathers hands:
 Striving against my swadling bands:
 Bound and weary I thought best
 To sulk upon my mothers breast.

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 49]

  

A POISON TREE.

I was angry with my friend:
 I told my wrath, my wrath did end.
 I was angry with my foe:
 I told it not, my wrath did grow.

And I waterd it in fears,
 Night & morning with my tears:
 And I sunned it with smiles,
 And with soft deceitful wiles.

And it grew both day and night,
 Till it bore an apple bright.
 And my foe beheld it shine,
 And he knew that it was mine.

And into my garden stole,
 When the night had veild the pole;
 In the morning glad I see,
 My foe outstretchd beneath the tree.

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 50]

  

A Little BOY Lost

Nought loves another as itself
 Nor venerates another so,
 Nor is it possible to Thought
 A greater than itself to know:

And Father, how can I love you,
 Or any of my brothers more?
 I love you like the little bird
 That picks up crumbs around the door.

The Priest sat by and heard the child,
 In trembling zeal he siez'd his hair:
 He led him by his little coat:
 And all admir'd the Priestly care.

And standing on the altar high,
 Lo what a fiend is here! said he:
 One who sets reason up for judge
 Of our most holy Mystery.

The weeping child could not be heard,
 The weeping parents wept in vain:
 They strip'd him to his little shirt,
 And bound him in an iron chain.

And burn'd him in a holy place,
 Where many had been burn'd before:
 The weeping parents wept in vain.
 Are such things done on Albions shore.

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 51]

  

A Little GIRL Lost

Children of the future Age,
 Reading this indignant page;
 Know that in a former time,
 Love! sweet Love! was thought a crime.

In the Age of Gold,
 Free from winters cold:
 Youth and maiden bright,
 To the holy light,
 Naked in the sunny beams delight.

Once a youthful pair
 Fill'd with softest care:
 Met in garden bright,
 Where the holy light,
 Had just removd the curtains of the night.

There in rising day,
 On the grass they play:
 Parents were afar:
 Strangers came not near:
 And the maiden soon forgot her fear.

Tired with kisses sweet
 They agree to meet,
 When the silent sleep
 Waves o'er heavens deep;
 And the weary tired wanderers weep.

To her father white
 Came the maiden bright:
 But his loving look,
 Like the holy book,
 All her tender limbs with terror shook.

Ona! pale and weak!
 To thy father speak:
 O the trembling fear!
 O the dismal care!
 That shakes the blossoms of my hoary hair

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 52]

  

To Tirzah

Whate'er is Born of Mortal Birth,
 Must be consumed with the Earth
 To rise from Generation free:
 Then what have I to do with thee?

The Sexes sprung from Shame & Pride
 Blowd in the morn; in evening died
 But Mercy changd Death into Sleep;
 The Sexes rose to work & weep.

Thou Mother of my Mortal part,
 With cruelty didst mould my Heart.
 And with false self-decieving tears,
 Didst bind my Nostrils Eyes & Ears.

Didst close my Tongue in senseless clay
 And me to Mortal Life betray:
 The Death of Jesus set me free.
 Then what have I to do with thee?

It is Raised
     a Spiritual Body.

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 53]

  

The School-Boy

I love to rise in a summer morn,
 When the birds sing on every tree;
 The distant huntsman winds his horn,
 And the sky-lark sings with me.
 O! what sweet company.

But to go to school in a summer morn,
 O! it drives all joy away;
 Under a cruel eye outworn,
 The little ones spend the day,
 In sighing and dismay.

Ah! then at times I drooping sit,
 And spend many an anxious hour,
 Nor in my book can I take delight,
 Nor sit in learnings bower,
 Worn thro' with the dreary shower.

How can the bird that is born for joy,
 Sit in a cage and sing.
 How can a child when fears annoy,
 But droop his tender wing,
 And forget his youthful spring.

0! father & mother, if buds are nip'd,
 And blossoms blown away,
 And if the tender plants are strip'd
 Of their joy in the springing day,
 By sorrow and cares dismay,

How shall the summer arise in joy
 Or the summer fruits appear.
 Or how shall we gather what griefs destroy
 Or bless the mellowing year,
 When the blasts of winter appear.

      
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 54]

  

The Voice of the Ancient Bard.

Youth of delight come hither,
 And see the opening morn,
 Image of truth new born.
 Doubt is fled & clouds of reason,
 Dark disputes & artful teazing.
 Folly is an endless maze.
 Tangled roots perplex her ways,
 How many have fallen there!
 They stumble all night over bones of the dead:
 And feel they know not what but care:
 And wish to lead others when they should be led

     
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, by William Blake, [1789-1794], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 55]

  

A DIVINE IMAGE

Cruelty has a Human Heart
 And Jealousy a Human Face
 Terror, the Human Form Divine
 And Secrecy, the Human Dress

The Human Dress, is forged Iron
 The Human Form, a fiery Forge.
 The Human Face, a Furnace seal'd
 The Human Heart, its hungry Gorge.

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: sis.txt =====


    
Shamanism in Siberia, by M.A. Czaplicka, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

 

Shamanism in Siberia

 

[Excerpts from]

 

ABORIGINAL SIBERIA

 

A STUDY IN

 

SOCIAL ANTHROPOLOGY

 

BY

 

M. A. CZAPLICKA

 

SOMERVILLE COLLEGE, OXFORD

 

WITH A PREFACE BY

 

R. R. MARETT

 

READER IN SOCIAL ANTHROPOLOGY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD

 

PRESIDENT OF THE FOLK-LORE SOCIETY

 

OXFORD

 

AT THE CLARENDON PRESS

 

1914

 

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, April 2000, by J.B. Hare. Reformated August 2003, July 2009. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

Click to enlarge
Map of Aboriginal Siberia

     
Shamanism in Siberia, by M.A. Czaplicka, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

 

PART III. RELIGION

 

CHAPTER VII

 

SHAMANISM [1]

SHAMANISM is understood by some people to be a primitive form of religion or religio-magic practised by the aborigines of northern Asia as well as by all other aborigines in other parts of the world. This opinion is held by Mikhailowski, Kharuzin, and some other Russian scientists. Others hold that Shamanism was only one form of expression of the religious cult of northern Asia, practised in order to avert the evil spirits. This opinion is found in the writings of Jochelson and Bogoras. There is still another view put forward, which it is well for us to consider. This view we find expressed very clearly in the following extract from Klementz:

'One must not lose sight of the fact that in the various beliefs of the Siberian tribes a very close connexion is noticeable, and, likewise, there can be observed an uninterrupted identity in the foundations of their mythology, and in their rites, even extending as far as the nomenclature-all of which gives one the right to suppose that these beliefs are the result of the joint work of the intellectual activity of the whole north of Asia.'[2]

In the writings of the Buryat scientist Banzaroff we find a very similar statement: 'The old national religion of the Mongols and the neighbouring nations is known in Europe as "Shamanism", whereas among those who are not its followers it has no special name.

'After the introduction of Buddhism among the Mongolic nations, they called their old religion "The Black Faith" (Khara Shadjin), in contradistinction to Buddhism, which they called "Yellow Faith" (Shira Shadjin). According to Father Jakiuv, the Chinese call Shamanism Tao-Shen (gambolling before the spirits).

[1. For certain suggestions as to the construction of this chapter I all, indebted to my friend, Miss Byrne, of Somerville College.

2. Enc. Rel. and Eth., 'The Buriats,' p. 26.]

Those names, however, do not give any idea of the true character of shamanism. Some are of opinion that it originated alongside with Brahminism and Buddhism, while others find in it some elements in common with the teachings of the Chinese philosopher Lao-Tze. . . . Finally some hold that Shamanism is nothing but Nature-worship, likening it to the faith of the followers of Zoroaster. Careful study of the subject shows that the Shamanistic religion ... did not arise out of Buddhism or any other religion, but originated among the Mongolic nations, and consists not only in superstitious and shamanistic ceremonies . . ., but in a certain primitive way of observing the outer world-Nature-and the inner world-the soul.'[1]

Of course, Banzaroff speaks especially of the Shamanism of the Mongols. We cannot agree with him that Shamanism is limited to these people. We find it all over northern and part of central Asia.

As we see them now the Palaeo-Siberians may be considered as possessing the simplest, and the Neo-Siberians the most complex, form of Shamanism. Thus among the former we see more 'Family' than 'Professional' Shamanism; that is, the ceremonials, beliefs, and shamans are practically limited to the family. Professional Shamanism, that is, ceremonies of a communal kind performed by a specialized or professional shaman, is here only in its infancy, and, being weaker, has been more affected by Christianity.

Among the Neo-Siberians, where professional Shamanism is strongly developed (for example, the Yakut), family Shamanism has been more affected by European influences. We cannot, however, argue from this that the Palaeo-Siberian form is the more primitive. Professional Shamanism may be a development of family Shamanism, or it may be a degenerate form, where environment is such that communal life is no longer possible.

That the dissimilarity between the Shamanism of the Palaeo and Neo-Siberians is no doubt due to the differences in the geographical conditions of northern and southern Siberia seems to be proved by the result of a careful study of certain Neo-Siberian tribes (Yakut) who migrated to the north, and of certain Palaeo-Siberians (Gilyak) who migrated to the south. The ease with which they absorbed the customs and beliefs appertaining to

[1. Banzaroff, The Black Faith, pp. 4-5.]

their new surroundings shows that there was no fundamental difference between their shamanistic practices. The differences, being due to environment, disappear in migration. It cannot be said that the change is due to contact, since this, in many cases, is very slight. Indeed, Shamanism seems to be such a natural product of the Continental climate with its extremes of cold and heat, of the violent burgas and burans, [1] of the hunger and fear which attend the long winters, that not only the Palaeo-Siberians and the more highly cultivated Neo-Siberians, but even Europeans, have sometimes fallen under the influence of certain shamanistic superstitions. Such is the case with the Russian peasants and officials who settle in Siberia, and with the Russian Creoles.[2].

According to the official census, only a small part of the aborigines are 'true Shamanists', but, as a matter of fact, we see that though they are registered as Orthodox Catholics and Buddhists, they are in reality nearly all faithful to the practice of their old religion.

In psychological terminology, Shamanism consists of animistic and preanimistic conceptions; although most of the people at present engaged in research work on Siberia have been so much influenced by the Tylor theory of Animism that they misuse the word 'soul', and the phenomena that they describe as animistic are very often in a different category altogether.

The reader must decide for himself whether Shamanism appeals to him as a cult peculiar to this region, or whether it is part of a very general primitive magico-religion. It appears to the author personally to be as difficult to speak in general terms of primitive religions as it would be to speak of Christian religious. This might be the task of a separate work-to determine whether Shamanism in its conception of the deities, nature, man, and in its rites, forms a special 'sect ' in the Animistic Religion.

[1. See chapter on Geography (not included in this excerpt -ed.)

2. See Bogoras, The Chukchee, p. 417.]

     
Shamanism in Siberia, by M.A. Czaplicka, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER VIII

 

THE SHAMAN

As among all primitive religions, the role of the priest, as the repository of religious beliefs and traditions, is of the greatest importance; therefore we shall first proceed to the study of the shaman himself.

The organization of the shamanhood varies slightly in different tribes. In some cases this office is hereditary, but everywhere the supernatural gift is a necessary qualification for becoming a shaman. As we should expect from the generally higher culture of the Neo-Siberians, their shamanhood is more highly organized than that of the Palaeo-Siberians. The family shamans predominate among the Palaeo-Siberians, and the professional shamans among the Neo-Siberians, though Bogoras says: 'In modern times the importance of family shamanism is losing ground among all the tribes named, with the exception of the Chukchee, and there is a tendency to its being replaced on all occasions by individual shamanism.' These individual or professional shamans are called among the Chukchee 'those with spirit' (enenilit), from enen, 'shamanistic spirit'.[1]

Although hysteria (called by some writers 'Arctic hysteria') lies at the bottom of the shaman's vocation, yet at the same time the shaman differs from an ordinary patient suffering from this illness in possessing an extremely great power of mastering himself in the periods between the actual fits, which occur during the ceremonies. 'A good shaman ought to possess many unusual qualities,[2] but the chief is the power, acquired by tact and knowledge,

[1. Bogoras, op. cit., p. 414.

2. In the district of Kolyma, Sieroszewski used to meet a young but very skilful shaman, who could do most of the difficult shamanist tricks: he swallowed a stick, ate red-hot coals and pieces of glass, spat coins out of his mouth, was able to be in different places at the same time-and in spite of all this he was not considered a first-class shaman; whereas an inspired old woman-shaman, who could not perform all these tricks, was held in great esteem and fame. (Op. cit., p. 631.)]

to influence the people round him.'[1] His reserved attitude has undoubtedly a great influence on the people among whom he lives. He must know how and when to have his fit of inspiration, which sometimes rises to frenzy, and also how to preserve his high 'tabooed' attitude in his daily life.'

In speaking of the shaman's vocation, we do not include the family shaman of the Koryak, Asiatic Eskimo, Chukchee, and Yukaghir, whose position and capacity are rather vague, as we see from the following description of his duties: 'Each family has one or more drums of its own, on which its members are bound to perform at specific periods: that is, to accompany the beating of the drum with the singing of various melodies. Almost always on these occasions one member at least of the family tries to communicate with "spirits" after the manner of shamans.'[3] Sometimes he even tries to foretell the future, but he receives no attention from his audience. This is done in the outer room and in daylight, whereas the 'shaman's', or professional shaman's, actions are performed in the inner room and at night.

'Besides this, every adult Chukchee will occasionally take his drum, especially in the winter, and beat it for awhile in the warm shelter of the sleeping-room, with the light or without it, singing his melodies to the rhythm of the beats.'[4]

We see from the above that one member of the family has the duty of beating the drum during certain ceremonials, and amuses himself sometimes by shamanizing just as he amuses himself by beating the drum at any time, apart from ceremonials. Of course, we cannot call this member of the family a shaman, but a master of the ceremonies, &c., who imitates the shaman; we can call shamans only those individuals having special skill and vocation, whether or not they are shamans by heredity.

However, the same Koryak, Asiatic Eskimo, Chukchee, Yukaghir, &c.-practically all the Palaeo-Siberians-possess the professional shaman, sometimes in decadence,[5] but still there is no

[1. Sieroszewski, 12 Lat w Kruju Yakutow, 1902, p. 630.

2. He must also have good manners, as we see from the following:

'The shaman Yetilin had an incessant nervous twitching in his face, [and] the Chukchee said laughingly, that he was probably "with an owl kele" (spirit), comparing his affliction to the jerking motion of the owl's head when it devours its prey.' (Bogoras, The Chukchee, p. 428.)

3. Bogoras, op. cit.,p. 413.

4 Ibid.

5. During the stay of Jochelson among the Koryak (1900-1) he had the opportunity of seeing only two shamans. Both were young men, and neither enjoyed special respect on the part of his relations. (Joebelson, The Koryak, p. 49.)]

doubt of his existence. Krasheninnikoff[1] who travelled through the land of the Kamchadal in the middle of the eighteenth century, says that 'among the Kamchadal there is only one great annual ceremony, in November, and the chief roles at this ceremony belonged to old men'.

The same author says: 'Among the Kamchadal there are no special shamans, as among other nations, but every old woman and koekchuch (probably women in men's clothes) is a witch, and explains dreams.' [2]

From this meagre information we can scarcely decide whether among the Kamchadal of the time of Krasheninnikoff there was or not a family shaman, because as the old men played the role not at ceremonials in separate families, but at communal ceremonies, we must rather call them communal shamans. But there was some form of professional shamanism, though not specialized, since every old woman could shamanize. On the other hand, the following quotation shows that there were certain qualifications necessary for the shaman:

'The female sex is nicer [3] and probably cleverer, therefore there are more women and koekchuch among the shamans than there are men.'[4]

Thus Krasheninnikoff. Jochelson says: 'Both Steller and Krasheninnikoff assert that the Kamchadal had no professional shamans, but that every one could exercise that art, especially women and Koekehuch; that there was no special shaman garb; that they used no drum, but simply pronounced incantations and practised divination (Krasheninnikoff, iii. p. 114; Steller, p. 277), which description appears more like the family shamanism of the present day. It is impossible that the Kamchadal should form an exception among the rest of the Asiatic and American tribes in having had no professional shamans.'

In support of Jochelson's opinion just quoted, it may be said that, in spite of Krasheninnikoff's statement to the contrary, professional shamanism does seem to have existed, at least in germ, among the Kamchadal, alongside of the communal shamanism

[1. Krasheninnikoff, Description of the Country of Kamchatka, ed. 1775, p.85.

2. Op. cit., p. 81.

3. This epithet is somewhat vague, but for this I am not responsible, as original has a similar vague expression.

4. Krasheninnikoff, p. 15, quot. Troshchanski.

5. Jochelson, The Koryak, p. 48.]

which was in the hands of the old men. This appears clear from Krasheninnikoff's own words quoted above. That those who could shamanize most effectually were women, 'nice and clever', points to the fact that some sort of standard was already set up for those who aspired to be special practitioners of this extra-communal shamanism, and that women most nearly approached this ideal.

     
Shamanism in Siberia, by M.A. Czaplicka, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

 

A. THE SHAMAN'S VOCATION.

Whether his calling be hereditary or not, a shaman must be a capable-nay, an inspired person. Of course, this is practically the same thing as saying that he is nervous and excitable, often to the verge of insanity. So long as he practises his vocation, however, the shaman never passes this verge. It often happens that before entering the calling persons have had serious nervous affections.[1] Thus a Chukchee female shaman, Telpina, according to her own statement, had been violently insane for three years, during which time her household had taken precautions that she should do no harm to the people or to herself.[2]

'I was told that people about to become shamans have fits of wild paroxysms alternating with a condition of complete exhaustion. They will lie motionless for two or three days without partaking of food or drink. Finally they retire to the wilderness, where they spend their time enduring hunger and cold in order to prepare themselves for their calling.'[3]

To be called to become a shaman is generally equivalent to being afflicted with hysteria; then the accepting of the call means recovery. 'There are cases of young persons who, having suffered for years from lingering illness (usually of a nervous character), at last feel a call to take up shamanistic practice and by this means overcome the disease.'[4]

To the believer the acceptance of the call means accepting several spirits, or at least one, as protectors or servants, by which means the shaman enters into communication with the whole spirit world. The shamanistic call sometimes manifests itself through some animal, plant, or other natural object, which the

[1. Bogoras met several shamans who were always ready to quarrel, and to use their knives on such occasions; e.g. the shaman Kelewgi wauted to kill a Cossack who refused to buy furs from him. (Bogoras, op. cit., p. 426.)

2. Op. cit., p. 428.

3. Jochelson, The Koryak, p. 47.

4. Bogoras, The Chukchee, p. 421.]

person comes upon at the 'right time', i.e. when very young, often in the critical period between childhood and maturity (or else when a person more advanced in age is afflicted with mental or physical troubles). 'Sometimes it is an inner voice, which bids the person enter into intercourse with the "spirits". If the person is dilatory in obeying, the calling spirit soon appears in some outward visible shape, and communicates the call in a more explicit way.' Ainanwat after an illness saw several 'spirits', but did not pay much attention to them; then one 'spirit' came, whom Ainanwat liked and invited to stay. But the 'spirit' said he would stay only on the condition that Ainanwat should become a shaman. Ainanwat refused, and the 'spirit' vanished.'

Here is an account by a Yakut-Tungus shaman, Tiuspiut ('fallen-from-the-sky'), of how he became a shaman: [2]

'When I was twenty years old, I became very ill and began "to see with my eyes, to hear with my ears" that which others did not see or hear; nine years I struggled with myself, and I did not tell any one what was happening to me, as I was afraid that people would not believe me and would make fun of me. At last I became so seriously ill that I was on the verge of death; but when I started to shamanize I grew better; and even now when I do not shamanize for a long time I am liable to be ill.'

Sieroszewski tells us that Tiuspiut was sixty years of age; he hid his shamanistic gift nine years, and had been shamanizing thirty-one years when Sieroszewski met him. He was a man of medium size, thin, but muscular, with signs of former beauty. In spite of his age he could shamanize and dance the whole night. He was an experienced man, and travelled a great deal both in the south and in the north. During the shamanistic ceremonies his eyes had a strange expression of madness, and a pertinacious stare, which provoked to anger and excitement those on whom his look rested.

'This is the second shaman with such strange eyes whom I have met in the district of Yakut. Generally in the features of a shaman there is something peculiar which enabled me, after a short experience, to distinguish them from the other folk present.'[3]

A similar statement is made about the Chukchee shamans by Bogoras: 'The eyes of a shaman have a look different from that

[1 Bogoras, op. cit.

2 Sieroszewski, 12 Lat w Kraju Yakutow, p. 396. Ibid.]

of other people, and they explain it by the assertion that the eyes of the shaman are very bright (nikeraqen), which, by the way, gives them the ability to see "spirits" even in the dark. It is certainly a fact that the expression of a shaman is peculiar-a combination of cunning and shyness; and it is often possible to pick him out from among many others.'[1]

'The Chukchee are well aware of the extreme nervousness of their shamans, and express it by the word ninirkilqin, "he is bashful". By this word they mean to convey the idea that the shaman is highly sensitive, even to the slightest change of the psychic atmosphere surrounding him during his exercises.'

'The Chukchee shaman is diffident in acting before strangers, especially shortly after his initiation. A shaman of great power will refuse to show his skill when among strangers, and will yield only after much solicitation: even then, as a rule, he will not show all of his power.' [2] 'Once when I induced a shaman to practise at my house his "spirits" (of a ventriloquistic kind) for a long time refused to come. When at last they did come, they were heard walking round the house outside and knocking on its walls, as if still undecided whether to enter. When they entered, they kept near to the comers, carefully avoiding too close proximity to those present.'

The shamanistic call comes sometimes to people more advanced in years:

'To people of more mature age the shamanistic call may come during some great misfortune, dangerous and protracted illness, sudden loss of family or property,' &c. 'It is generally considered that in such cases a favourable issue is possible only with the aid of the "spirits", therefore a man who has undergone some extraordinary trial in his life is considered as having within himself. the possibilities of a shaman, and he often feels bound to enter into closer relations with the "spirits", lest he incur their displeasure at his negligence and lack of gratitude."

Katek, from the village of Unisak at Indian Point, entered into relations with the 'spirits' when he was of mature age, during a terrible adventure he had while hunting seal.

He was carried away on the piece of ice on which he was standing, and only after a long time of drifting came upon an iceberg, on to which he climbed. But before he encountered

[1. Bogoras, op. cit., p. 116.

2 Ibid. 

3. Op. cit., p. 421.]

the iceberg, he had tried to kill himself with his belt-knife, when a large walrus-head suddenly appeared out of the water quite close to him and sang: 'O Katek, do not kill yourself! You shall again see the mountains of Unisak and the little Kuwakak, your elder son.' When Katek came back home he made a sacrifice to the walrus-head, and from that time on he was a shaman, much respected and very famous among his neighbours.[1]

However, very old people are not supposed to hear the shamanistic call. In a Koryak tale,[2] when Quikinnaqu (who had already a grown-up daughter) unexpectedly makes for himself a drum out of a small louse, and becomes a shaman, his neighbours say sceptically: 'Has the old Quikinnaqu really become a shaman? From his youth up he had no spirits within his call.'

But young people when they get into trouble also call for the help of 'spirits'; when the latter come to them, such youths also frequently become shamans.

'A man, Yetilin by name, who belonged by birth to an Arctic maritime village, but afterwards married into a reindeer-breeding family on the Dry Anui River, and joined its camp, told me that in his early childhood his family perished from a contagious disease (probably influenza), and he was left alone with his small sister. Then he called to the "spirits". They came and brought food and said to him: "Yetilin, take to beating the drum! We will assist you in that also."'[3]

The Chukchee tales contain accounts of poor and despised orphans, who were protected by 'spirits', and turned into shamans.

The vocation of the shaman is attended with considerable danger: 'The slightest lack of harmony between the acts of the shamans and the mysterious call of their "spirits" brings their life to an end. This is expressed by the Chukchee, when they say that "spirits" are very bad-tempered, and punish with immediate death the slightest disobedience of the shaman, and that this is particularly so when the shaman is slow to carry out those orders which are intended to single him out from other people.' [4]

We have similar statements from the more advanced tribes. 'The duties undertaken by the shaman are not easy; the struggle which he has to carry on is dangerous. There exist traditions

[1. Op. cit., p. 421.

2. Jochelson, The Koryak, p. 291.

Bogoras, op. cit., p. 424. 

4. Op. cit., p. 417.]

about shamans who were carried away still living from the earth to the sky, about others killed by "spirits", or struck down at their first meeting with the powers whom they dared to call upon. The wizard who decides to carry on this struggle has not only material gain in view, but also the alleviation of the griefs of his fellow men; the wizard who has the vocation, the faith, and the conviction, who undertakes his duty with ecstasy and negligence of personal danger, inspired by the high ideal of sacrifice, such a wizard always exerts an enormous influence upon his audience. After having once or twice seen such a real shaman, I understood the distinction that the natives draw between the "Great", "Middling", and "Mocking" or deceitful shamans.'[1] Although exposed to danger from supernatural powers, the shaman is supposed to be safer from human anger than any other person.

One Chukchee tale says: 'She [the murderer] came to her neighbour, a woman who was busy with her fireboard, trying to make a fire. She stabbed her from behind. But the girl continued to work on the fire, because she was a shaman-girl, a woman able to stab herself [in a shamanistic performance]. Therefore she could not kill her, but only severed the tendons of her arms and legs.' [2]

A man who can pierce himself through with a knife, so that its end shows at his back,[3] or cut his head off, put it on a stick, and dance round the yurta,[4] is surely strengthened sufficiently against an enemy's attacks. Yet the shaman, Scratching-Woman, when he refused to drink the alcohol offered to him by Bogoras, and which he had previously demanded, explained as follows: 'I will be frank with you. Drink really makes my temper too bad for anything. Usually my wife watches over me, and puts all knives out of my reach. But when we are apart, I am afraid.".[5]

On the whole, the shamans are very much attached to their vocation, in spite of the persecutions which they have to suffer from the Government. Tiuspiut was many times punished by the Russian officials and his shamanistic dress and drum were burned; but he returned to his duties after each of these incidents. 'we have to do it, we cannot leave off shamanizing,' he said to Sieroszewski, 'and there is no harm in our doing it.'

Another shaman, who was old and blind, affirmed that he had

[1. Sieroszewski, op. cit., p. 639.

2. Bogoras, Chukchee Materials, p. 32.

3. Sieroszewski, op. cit., p. 398.

4 Ibid.

5 Bogoras, The Chukchee, p. 428.]

been a shaman some time before, but after he became convinced that it was a sin he stopped shamanizing, and 'although another very powerful shaman took from him the "sign", amagyat, still the spirits made him blind'.[1]

In the village Baigantai Sieroszewski met with another instance of a shaman who, however many times he vowed to abstain from shamanism, still returned to it when the occasion arose. He was a rich man, who did not care for gain, and he was so wonderful that 'his eyes used to jump out on his forehead' during shamanistic performances.

Tiuspiut was poor and cared for money, but he was proudly regardful of his reputation, and when some of his neighbours called in another shaman, one who lived farther away than Tiuspiut, he became quite offended.

Bogoras never met shamans among the Palaeo- Siberians who could be said 'to live solely on the profits of their art. It was only a source of additional income to them., [2]

Among the Tungus and Yakut the shaman is recompensed only when his arts are successful; and now, since Russian money has come into use, he receives from one to twenty-five roubles for a performance, and always gets plenty to eat besides.

The shamanistic call among the Tungus of Trans-Baikalia shows itself in the following manner: A dead shaman appears in a dream and summons the dreamer to become his successor. One who is to become a shaman appears shy, distrait, and is in a highly nervous condition.[3]

Similar instances are to be found in the records of all Siberian tribes.

As to the shamanistic office being hereditary, this is the case wherever a descendant of a shaman shows a disposition for the calling.

Among the Ostyak, the father himself chooses his successor, not necessarily according to age, but according to capacity; and to the chosen one he gives his own knowledge. If he has no children, he may pass on the office to a friend, or to an adopted child.[4]

The Ostyak shaman occasionally sells his familiar spirit to another shaman. After receiving payment, he divides his hair

[1 Sieroszewski, op. cit., p. 394.

2. Bogoras, the Chukchee, p. 425.

3 Anonymous article in Siberian News, 1822, pp. 39-40.

4 Bielayewski, A Journey to the Glacial Sea, pp. 113-14.]

into tresses, and fixes the time when the spirit is to pass to his new master. The spirit, having changed owners, makes his new possessor suffer; if the new shaman does not feel these effects, it is a sign that he is not becoming proficient in his office.[1]

Among both the Yakut and the Buryat, although the office is not necessarily hereditary, it is usually so in part; for it will generally happen that the shamanistic spirit passes from one to another of the same family.[2]

The Altaians believe that no one becomes a shaman of his own free will; rather it comes to him volens volens, like a hereditary disease. They say that sometimes when a young man feels premonitory symptoms of the call, he avoids shamans and shamanistic ceremonies, and by an effort of will occasionally cures himself. The period when the shamanistic call comes to the descendant of a shamanistic family is known as tes bazin-yat, 'the ancestor (spirit) leaps upon, strangles him'.[3]

     
Shamanism in Siberia, by M.A. Czaplicka, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

 

B. THE SHAMAN'S PREPARATORY PERIOD.

 

I. Palaeo-Siberians.

 The Chukchee. The Chukchee call the preparatory period of a shaman by a term signifying 'he gathers shamanistic power'. For the weaker shamans and for female shamans the preparatory period is less painful, and the inspiration comes mainly through dreams.

But for a strong man this stage is very painful and long; in some cases it lasts for one, two, or more years. Some young people are afraid to take a drum and call on the 'spirits', or to pick up stones or other objects which might prove to be amulets, for fear lest the 'spirit' should call them to be shamans. Some youths prefer death to obedience to the call of spirits.[4] Parents possessing only one child fear his entering this calling on account of the danger attached to it; but when the family is large, they like to have one of its members a shaman. During the time of preparation the shaman has to pass through both a mental and a physical training. He is, as a rule, segregated, and goes either to the forests and hills under the pretext of hunting or watching the herds, 'often without taking along any

[1 Tretyakoff, The Country of Turukhansk, 1871, p. 223.

2 Sieroszewski, op. cit., p. 395; Potanin, Troshchanski.

3. Wierbicki, The Natives of the Altai, p. 44.

4. Bogoras, The Chukchee, p. 450.]

arms or the lasso of the herdsman'[1]; or else he remains in the inner room the whole time. 'The young novice, the "newly inspired" (turene nitvillin), loses all interest in the ordinary affairs of life. He ceases to work, eats but little and without relishing his food, ceases to talk to people, and does not even answer their questions. The greater part of his time he spends in sleep.' This is why 'a wanderer . . . must be closely watched, otherwise he might lie down on the open tundra and sleep for three or four days, incurring the danger in winter of being buried in drifting snow. When coming to himself after such a long sleep, he imagines that he has been out for only a few hours, and generally is not conscious of having slept in the wilderness at all., [2]

However exaggerated this account of a long sleep may be, we learn from Bogoras that the Chukchee, when ill, sometimes 'fall into a heavy and protracted slumber, which may last many days, with only the necessary interruptions for physical needs'.[3]

 The Koryak. The mental part of the training consists in coming into contact with the right spirits, i.e. with the spirits who are to be the shaman's protectors in his shamanistic practice. 'Every [Koryak] shaman', says Jochelson, 'has his own guardian spirits, who help him in his struggle with disease-inflicting kalau in his rivalry with other shamans, and also in attacks upon his enemies. The shaman spirits usually appear in the form of animals or birds. The most common guardian spirits are the wolf, the bear, the raven, the sea-gull, and the eagle.'[4] One of the two shamans whom Jochelson met among the Koryak related to him how the spirits of the wolf, raven, bear, sea-gull, and plover appeared to him (the shaman) in the desert-now in the form of men, now in that of animals-and commanded him to become a shaman, or to die. Thus we see that, while they are in solitude, 'the spirits appear to them in visible form, endow them with power, and instruct them.' But Bogoras describes the mental training of a new shaman differently. 'The process of gathering inspiration is so painful to young shamans, because of their mental struggle against the call, that they are sometimes said to sweat blood on the forehead and the temples. Afterwards every preparation of a shaman for a performance is considered a sort of repetition of the initiative process: hence it is said that the Chukchee shamans during that time are easily susceptible to haemorrhage, and even to bloody sweat.'[5]

[1. Op. cit., p. 420.

2. Op. cit., p. 421.

3 Ibid.

4. Jochelson, The Koryak, p. 47.

4. Bogoras, op. cit., p. 420.]

Bogoras himself saw two cases of nose-bleeding and one of bloody sweat among the shamans; but in the last instance he suspected the shaman of smearing his temples with the blood from his nose.[1]

As to the physical training of a novice, he must learn singing, dancing, various tricks, including ventriloquism, and how to beat the drum.

'The beating of the drum, notwithstanding its seeming simplicity, requires some skill, and the novice must spend considerable time before he can, acquire the desired degree of perfection. This has reference especially to the performer's power of endurance. The same may be said of the singing. The manifestations continue for several weeks, during which time the shaman exercises the most violent activity with scarcely a pause. After the performance he must not show any signs of fatigue, because he is supposed to be sustained by the "spirits", and, moreover, the greater part of the exercise is asserted to be the work of the spirits themselves, either after entering the shaman's body or while outside his body. The amount of endurance required for all this, and the ability to pass quickly from the highest excitement to a state of normal quietude, can, of course, be acquired only by long practice. Indeed, all the shamans I conversed with said that they had to spend a year, or even two years, before sufficient strength of hand and freedom of voice were given to them by the spirits. Some asserted that, during all this preparatory time, they kept closely to the inner room, taking up the drum several times a day, and beating it as long as their strength would allow.'[2]

Of course a certain diet must be adhered to during the time of the training and before each individual ceremonial.

Have the novices any teachers? One would suppose that they must have, if only to learn the difficult magical tricks, but it is hard to get any detailed information on this point, because the natives ascribe all the cleverness of the shaman to the 'spirits'.

'There are many liars in our calling', the shaman Scratching Woman said to Bogoras.[3] 'One will lift up the skins of the sleeping-room with his right toe and then assure you that it was done by "spirits"; another will talk into the bosom of his shirt or through his sleeve, making the voice issue from a quite unusual place.' Of course he himself was ready to swear that he never did such tricks.

[1. Ibid.

2. Op. cit., p. 424.

3. Bogoras, The Chukchee, p. 426.]

Sometimes the old men teach the young shamans. 'The man who gives a part of his power to another man loses correspondingly, and can hardly recover the loss afterwards. To transfer his power, the older shaman must blow on the eyes or into the mouth of the recipient, or he may stab himself with a knife, with the blade of which, still reeking with his "source of life" (telkeyun), he will immediately pierce the body of the recipient.'

Bogoras did not hear of any transferring of shamanistic power while he was among the Chukchee. He found it, however, among Eskimo women, who were taught by their husbands, and whose children were taught by their parents. In one family on St. Lawrence Island the shamanistic power has been retained through a succession of generations, evidently having been transferred from father to son.[1]

 The Gilyak. Sternberg [2] says that although shamans do not play so important a role among the Gilyak as among some neighbouring tribes, still their power among this folk is almost unlimited. Sternberg was told by a Gilyak shaman that before he had entered on his vocation he had been very ill for two months, during which time he was unconscious, lying quite motionless. Sometimes, he said, he almost regained consciousness, but sank again into a swoon before recovering his senses. 'I should have died', he explained, 'if I had not become a shaman.' During these months of trial he became 'as dry', he said, 'as a dry stick.' In the night he heard himself singing shaman's songs. Once there appeared to him a bird-spirit, and, standing at some distance from it, a man, who spoke to him in these words: 'Make yourself a drum and all that pertains to a shaman. Beat the drum and sing songs. If you are an ordinary man, nothing will come of it; but if you are to be a shaman, you will be no ordinary one.' When he came to himself he found that he was being held by head and feet close to the fire by his friends, who told him that they had thought him already dead, carried off by the evil spirits (kekhn). Forthwith he demanded a drum, and began to beat it and sing. He felt half dead, half intoxicated. Then for the first time he saw his spirit-protectors, kekhn and kenchkh. The former told him, 'If you see any one ill, cure him. Do not trust kenchkh. He has a man's face, but his body is a bird's. Trust us only.'

Sternberg himself was once witness of a first manifestation of shamanistic power.

[1. Op. cit., p. 420.

2. Sternberg, The Gilyak, p. 72.]

Koinit was a little guest of Sternberg's, a boy of twelve. In spite of his youth he had two souls, being the son of a great shaman, Chanikh, who had as many as four souls (one from the mountains, another from the sea, a third from the sky, and a fourth from the underworld). Once on being suddenly awakened from sleep, Koinit began to throw himself about, and to shout aloud in different pitches or intonations of the voice, as shamans are accustomed to do. When this was over, the boy's face looked worn and tired, like that of an old man. He said afterwards that, during the sleep which had preceded his outbreak, two kekhns had appeared to him. He knew them for his father's kekhns; and they said to him: 'We used to play with your father-let us play with you also."

 

II. Neo-Siberians.

Passing from the Palaeo- to the Neo-Siberians, we notice that the shaman's protectors among the latter are highly developed beings.

Three kinds of 'spirits' are associated with a Yakut shaman, namely, anagyat, yekyua, and kaliany (Sieroszewski). Anagyat is the indispensable attribute of every shaman.

But anagyat is also the name of the iron breast-circle, the sign of the shaman's dignity.

Even the weakest shamans possess anagyat [2] and yekyua-the latter is 'sent from above, animal picture, bewitching spirit, devilish devourer' (Yekyua oiun abassyuah, simah abassyuah, ussuttan ongorudh).

The yekyua is carefully hidden from the people. 'My yekyua will not be found by any one; it lies hidden far away, there, in. the rocky mountains of Edjigan.'[3]

Once a year, when the snow melts and the earth is black, the yekyua arise from their hiding-places and begin to wander. They hold orgies of fights and noises, and the shamans with whom they are associated feel very ill. Especially harmful are the yekyua of female shamans.

[1. Op. cit., pp. 73-4.

2. Sieroszewski, in speaking about the division of the shamans into three kinds, says that the last or third kind are not real shamans, as they have not anagyat, but are sorcerers and other people in some way peculiar (12 Lat w Kraju Yakutow, p. 628).

3. Sieroszewski, op. cit., p. 626.]

The weakest and most cowardly are the yekyua of dogs; the most powerful are those of enormous bulls, stallions, elks, and black boars. 'Those shamans who have as their animal incarnation a wolf, bear, or dog, are the must unfortunate; these animals are insatiable; they are never satisfied, however much the shaman may provide for them.' The dog especially gives no peace to his two-footed fellow; he 'gnaws with his teeth the shaman's heart, tears into pieces his body'.[1] Then the shaman feels sick and suffers pain. The crow is also a bad yekyua; the eagle and hairy bull are called 'devilish fighters and warriors' (abassy keiktah). This title is the most flattering one for a shaman.[2] When a new shaman appears, the other shamans recognize him at once by the presence of a new yekyua, whom they have not seen before. Only wizards can see yekyua; to ordinary people they are invisible.

Troshchanski [3] says of the yekyua: 'Among the protectors of the shaman, the most important role is played by the yekyua (literally, "mother-animal"). It is said that the shamans incarnate their kut[4] in certain animals, e.g. in stallions, wolves, dogs, and that these animals are thus the yekyua of shamans.

'If one of these animals kills another of its species, then the corresponding shaman will die.' Troshshanski thinks that the shaman incarnates his kut only during the time that he is actually shamanizing.

Whereas this 'black' animal-protector seems to be of a totemic and personal nature, to a certain extent 'of one blood and flesh' with his protege, on the other hand amagyat strikes us as being a more impersonal power.

Sieroszewski [5] explains that it is in most cases 'the spirit of a deceased shaman', or, in some rare cases, one of the secondary heavenly beings. But it seems that the term 'spirit' is used here quite vaguely; e. g., we read further on: 'The human body cannot contain the power of great gods, and so the spirit-protector remains always near the beloved man (outside of him) and willingly comes at his call; in difficult moments it helps him, defends him, and gives him advice.'[6] 'The shaman sees and hears only through his amagyat', says the shaman Tiuspiut.

 Amagyat comes to a shaman through an accident, or as a

[1. Ibid.

2. Ibid.

3. Troshchanski, The Evolution of the Black Faith, p. 138.

4 The part of the soul which, according to the Yakut, is common to animals and men.

5. Sieroszewski, op. cit., p. 626.

6. Ibid.]

heavenly destiny. 'When I was travelling in the north,' says Tiuspiut, 'I came upon a heap of wood (saiba) in the mountains, and as I just wanted to cook some dinner, I set this on fire. Now under this heap was buried a well-known Tungus shaman (Tiuspiut was a Yakut), and so his amagyat leapt into me." If the great shamans at death take their (amagyat to heaven, they are transformed into heavenly beings; but if the amagyat is not removed to heaven, then it will appear on the earth sooner or later.[2]

Besides the two so-called spirits mentioned above, there comes to the Yakut shaman, during shamanistic performances, still another kind of spirit, a rather mischievous one, which forces the shaman to talk and to imitate various, often indecent, gestures. These spirits are called kaliany, and their representatives may be a Russian devil, a devil's daughter with a devilish groom, who, being blind, is in the habit of groping about in the dark, &c.

Thus Sieroszewski, on the mental training of the novice. Further light is thrown on the question by Troshchanski.[1] Following out his main idea of treating black and white shamans separately, he says: 'Not every one can become a shaman, either white or black; only a person whose sur has obtained a suitable education.

'The sur of a white shaman is educated under the care of one of the aiy, and the sur of a black shaman studies with an abassy. How the sur of a white shaman is educated among the Yakut is not known to us. The sur of a black shaman lives with his tutor on the ninth floor (underground-in their ideal division of the universe). If the sur is educated on the ninth floor, then a most powerful shaman will arise from it; if on the eighth floor, then the shaman will be of medium power; if on the third floor, then the shaman will be only a sorcerer.'

The education consists in the sur's learning 'the habits, character, and behaviour of abassylar and shamans.'

As to the education of a shaman himself, and his initiation, the Yakut shaman is taught by an older shaman, who consecrates him by 'placing on him the amagyat'.[4] This sign is taken away by the shaman from a person who does not wish to be a shaman any longer. There is in the Yakut language a word usui, which

[1. Op. cit., p. 627.

2. lbid.

3. Troshchanski, op. cit., p. 146.

4. Troshchanski, op. cit., p. 147.]

means to teach the art of shamanizing and to consecrate a shaman.

Pripuzoff [1] describes the consecration of a shaman among the Yakut as follows: 'The old shaman leads his pupil up a high mountain or into a clearing in the forest. Here he dresses him in a shaman's garment, gives him a rattle, and places on one side of him nine chaste youths, and on the other nine chaste maidens. Then the shaman puts on his own garment, and directs the youth to repeat after him certain words.' He demands of the novice that he shall give up all that is most dear to him in the world, and consecrate his life to the service of the spirits who shall come -it his call. He tells his pupil where certain 'black' spirits dwell, what diseases they cause, and how they may be propitiated. Finally the young shaman must kill a sacrificial animal, and sprinkle himself with its blood. The flesh is eaten by those who have been present at the ceremony.

A child chosen to be a shaman is recognized among the Buryat by the following signs[2]: 'He is often absorbed in meditation, likes to be alone, has mysterious dreams, and sometimes has fits during which he is unconscious.' According to the Buryat beliefs, the soul of a child is then in process of being trained, among the 'West Tengeris' if he is to be a 'white' shaman, among the 'East Tengeris' if he is to become a 'black' one. Living in the dwelling of the gods, his soul, under the tutelage of deceased shamans, learns the various secrets of the shaman's vocation; the soul must remember the names of the gods, the places where they live, the means by which they may be propitiated, and the names of the spirits which are subordinate to the high gods. After a period of trial the soul of the child returns to the body, which for a time resumes its normal life. But on his reaching adolescence, peculiar symptoms show themselves in the person who has undergone these experiences. He becomes moody, is easily excited into a state of ecstasy, leads an irregular life, wandering from ulus to ulus to watch the shamanistic ceremonies. He gives himself up with great earnestness to exercises in the shamanistic arts, for which purpose he segregates himself, going to some high mountain or into the forest, where, before a great fire, he calls on the spirits,

[1. Pripuzoff, Materials for the Study of Shamanism among the Yakut, pp. 64-5.

2. Agapitoff and Khangaloff, Materials for the Study of Shamanism in Siberia, pp. 42-53.]

and afterwards falls into a swoon. In the meanwhile, to prevent him from doing himself an injury, his friends keep watch over him unobtrusively.

While the novice is preparing himself for his new life, his relations call in a good shaman, who makes a sacrifice to propitiate the spirits and induce them to help the young shaman-to-be. If the future shaman belongs to a poor family, the whole community helps to procure the sacrificial animals and other things which are indispensable for the ceremonies.

The preparatory period lasts for several years, its length depending largely on the capacity of the young man. He cannot, however, become a shaman until he reaches the age of twenty. Finally he undergoes a purification ceremony. One such ceremony does not confer all the rights and powers of a shaman; there are, in fact, nine. But very few shamans go through all these purifications; most only undergo two or three; some, none at all, for they dread the responsibilities which devolve upon consecrated shamans. To a fully consecrated shaman the gods are very severe, and punish his faults or mistakes with death.

The first consecration ceremony is preceded by a purification of water. For this an experienced old shaman, called the 'father-shaman', is chosen, together with nine young men to be his assistants. These are spoken of as his 'sons'. The water for the ablution must be drawn from a spring-sometimes from three springs. They go in the morning of the day of consecration to fetch the water, taking with them tarasun [1], with which they make a libation to the master- and mistress-spirits of the spring. As they return, they pluck up from the earth birch-seedlings, of which they make a broom, and take it to the house of the novice. Next the water is heated over a fire, and into it are thrown certain herbs and pieces of bark. Then from the ears of a he-goat prepared beforehand they cut pieces of hair, and some shavings from its horns and hoofs, and throw these also into the pot. The he-goat is then killed in such a manner that its blood drips into the pot. Then only is the water ready for the consecration ceremony. The flesh of the goat is given to the women present, who cook and eat it.

Now the father-shaman foretells the future from a sheep's shoulder-blade. He summons the shamanist ancestors of the

[1. A native Buryat drink, composed of milk and wine, called also wine of milk'.]

novice, and offers libations of wine and tarasun. Then he dips the birch-broom into the water and beats the candidate on the naked back, as do also the nine 'sons' of the 'father-shaman', saying at the same time: 'When thou art called to a poor man, ask little in return for your trouble, and take what is given. Take care of the poor always, help them, and pray to the gods to defend them against the power of evil spirits. If thou art called by a rich man, go to him riding on a bullock, and do not ask much for your trouble. If thou art called at the same time by a poor and by a rich man, go first to the poor.' The candidate repeats these precepts after the shaman, and promises to observe them.

Then follows a libation of tarasun to the guardian spirits; this closes the ceremony.
 The purification of a shaman by water is performed at least once a year, but sometimes once a month, at the new moon; or else at any other time when he considers himself to have been defiled, e. g. by touching some unclean object. If the defilement is especially gross, then purification is performed with blood. The shaman also purifies himself after a death has occurred in the ulus.[1]

This ceremony is followed after some time by the first consecration, called kherege-khulkhe, the expenses of which are shared by the community. Again a 'father-shaman' and nine 'sons' are chosen, and they, accompanied by the novice, ride on horseback from yurta to yurta, collecting offerings. Before each yurta they stop and announce their coming with a shout. They are hospitably entertained, and offerings of different kinds-votive handkerchiefs, which are tied to 'a birch staff carried by the novice, and sometimes money-are brought to them. They buy wooden cups, little bells tied to horse-staves, wine, &c. The day before the ceremony a certain number of stout birches are cut from the groves by the 'sons' under the direction of the 'father-shaman '; from the straightest of these they make horse-staves. The grove from which these are taken is one in which the dead of the ulas are buried, and for the propitiation of the spirits there they make offerings of mutton and tarasan. At the same time they prepare the shaman's accessories, and meanwhile other shamans of similar standing with the 'father-shaman ' summon the spirits.

[1. ibid.]

In the morning of the day of the consecration the birch-trees cut the day before are planted. The stoutest birch, which has its roots still attached to it, they plant in the south-west corner of the yurta, where the ground is left bare for the fire; the top of the tree projects through the smoke-bole above. This birch represents symbolically the porter-god who allows the shaman ingress into heaven. It points the way by which the shaman can reach the sky, and remains permanently in the yurta as a sign that the dwelling is that of a shaman. The other birches are planted in front of the yurta in the place where sacrifices are usually offered, in the following order, from west to east:

(i) A birch under which, on a carpet of felt, is placed some tarasun. To the branches of this ribbons of black and yellow are tied if the shaman is to be 'black', of white and blue if he is to be a 'white' shaman, and of all four colours if he is to serve both kinds of spirits.

(ii) A birch to which are tied a big bell and the sacrificial horse.

(iii) A fairly stout birch which the novice has to climb.-These three trees are planted with their roots, and are called serge (posts).

(iv) Nine saplings, in groups of three, the saplings in each group being bound together with a rope made of white horsehair. To these are tied ribbons of different colours in the following order-white, blue, red, yellow, and so on again. On the saplings are hung skins of animals.

(v) Nine posts to which sacrificial animals are tied.

(vi) Some stout birches to which the bones of the sacrificial animals are tied after being bound up in straw. These birches form a row.

From the principal birch in the yurta to all those which stand outside are led two ribbons, red and blue. This is a symbolical representation of the path of the shaman to the spirit-world. To the north of the row of birches are placed nine pots for cooking the sacrificial meat.

When everything is ready, the novice and the others who take part in the ceremony don their ceremonial dress. Then the shaman's accessories are blessed, after which the horse-staves are said to turn into real horses. All the morning the assembled shamans have been summoning the spirits and sprinkling tarasun. The 'father-shaman' now calls upon the guardian gods, and the novice repeats after him the words of his invocation. The candidate climbs the birch inside the yurta, gets on to the roof, and from there summons the spirits in a loud voice. When the moment comes for leaving the yurta, four shamans take hold of a certain felt carpet, each by a corner.[1] Just outside the entrance to the yurta a fire is made, and various herbs are thrown into it: everybody and everything which passes over the fire is purified by it.

The people leave the yurta in the following order: first the 'father-shaman', then the candidate, then the nine 'sons', and finally the relatives and guests.

The ceremony ends with feasts and sacrifices.[2]

Among the Samoyed and Ostyak of the Turukhan country the future shaman spends his youth in exercises which stimulate his nerves and excite his imagination.[3] At the consecration of a novice, according to Tretyakoff[4] he must stand with his face towards the west, while the officiating shaman asks the Dark Spirit to help the candidate and to give him a spirit to serve him. At the end of the ceremony the shaman sings a hymn in praise of the Dark Spirit, and the novice repeats it after him. The beginner is tested by the spirits, who require of him certain sacrifices, as of his wife or son, and he has to promise them various other sacrifices.

Both Castren [5] and Islavin [6] speak of the special training of the novice by an old shaman. One of the Samoyed shamans told Castren of how he was entrusted to the care of an old shaman for training, when he was fifteen, as he (the candidate) came of an

[1. According to Potanin, the felt carpet alluded to by Agapitoff and Khangaloff provides the means of performing what is considered the most essential part of the ceremony. The novice is carried on it, by the four shamans mentioned, out of the yurta to the row of nine birches. Of the moment of his elevation on the carpet, they say bo begde, 'the shaman ascends'. On reaching the birches, the shaman must leap from the carpet on to one of them, which he climbs. From the top of this birch he must jump to that of the one next to it, and so on to the end of the row, whence he must return in the same manner to his starting-point, and is then again placed on the carpet. After this ceremony the new shaman begins to shamanize, to foretell the future, and to heal the sick-but all this without the use of the drum. This accessory he is not permitted to acquire until after the third year from his consecration. (Potanin, Sketches of Northern Mongolia, vol.iv,pp.58-9.) According to Appitoff and Khangalolf (op. cit., p. 141), the custom thus described by Potanin is peculiar to the Buryat of Balgansk.

2. Ibid.

3 Bielayewski, op. cit., p. 113.

4. Tretyakoff, The Country of Turukhansk, pp. 210-12.

5. Castren, Nordische Reisen und Forschungen, p. 191.

6. Islavin, The Samoyed, their Home and Social Life, p. 109.]

old shamanist family. The means of education was as follows: Two tadibey (shamans) blindfolded him with a handkerchief, and then beat him, one on the back of the head and the other on the shoulders, till his eyes were dazzled as with too much light, and he saw demons dancing on his arms and feet. It must be remembered, of course, that he had been taught beforehand about the Samoyed world of spirits.' In former times Lapland was a school of shamanism, and all neighbouring tribes sent youths thither to be trained as shamans.[2] At present only among Russian Lapps are noyda (shamans) to be found, and they are but degenerate copies of their predecessors.

[1. Castren, op. cit., p. 191.

2. Schefferus, Lapponia, p. 120. N. Kharuzin, The Noyda among the Ancient and the Modern Lapps.]

     
Shamanism in Siberia, by M.A. Czaplicka, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER IX

 

TYPES OF SHAMANS

 

Palaeo-Siberians

IN this chapter, which deals with the different types of shamans, the duties of a shaman will be enumerated. In nearly all the more advanced tribes we shall see that certain shamans specialize in one sort of duty or another, while among the more primitive peoples each performs many different kinds of duties-a state of things made possible by the less complex nature of those duties. The high conception of a shaman's duties among certain tribes may be seen from Banzaroffs ideal picture of a Buryat shaman. He is (a) priest, (b) medicine-man, and (c) prophet.

(a) 'As a priest, he knows the will of the gods, and so declares to man what sacrifices and ceremonies shall be held; he is an expert in ceremonials and prayers. Besides the communal ceremonies at which he officiates, he conducts also various private cerenionials.'[1]

(b) As medicine-man, the shaman performs certain ceremonies to expel the evil spirit from the patient.

(c) As a prophet, he foretells the future either by means of the shoulder-blade of a sheep or by the flight of arrows.

This ideal type of shaman was probably rare even in Banzaroff's time, for he himself says that the shaman was not present at all communal sacrifices.[2] It is the same with some family sacrifices: the ongons are fed by the master of the house; and certain other sacrifices, as, for instance, those offered at child-birth, are made without the assistance of the shaman.[3]

The fact that a communal or family ceremony is sometimes presided over by the head of the commune or family, or that a private individual occasionally performs divination, does not alter the fact that the original type of Buryat shaman had the performance of all these rites in his hands.[4] They had among the

[1 Banzaroff, Black Faith, 1893, pp. 107-15.

2 ibid.

3. Klenientz, E.R.E., 'The Buriats', p. 13 ).

4. Ibid.]

Mongols in the time of Djingis Khan, when the shamans were at the height of their power.[1] We cannot therefore agree with Mr. Mikhailowski, who says, 'Of all the actions of the shaman, the most characteristic of his calling is what is known as kamlanie,' i.e. invocations of spirits.[2] Although it may be that in the decadence of his office a shaman is sometimes nowadays no more than a medicine-man, even now in certain places shamans are present, not only at communal, but also at family rites, and even when not so present we find in the rites traces of their original participation,

 The Koryak. Among the Koryak, as among the Palaeo-Siberians and most Neo-Siberian tribes, we may distinguish [3] (1) family shamans, and (2) professional shamans.

Family shamanism is connected with the domestic hearth, whose welfare is under its care. The family shaman has charge of the celebration of family festivals, rites, and sacrificial ceremonies, and also of the use of the family charms and amulets, and of their incantations.

Professional shamans are those who are not definitely attached to a certain group of people. The more powerful they are, the wider is the circle in which they can practise their art.

'There is no doubt that professional shamanism has developed from the ceremonials of family shamanism', says Joebelson. [4] It seems, however, necessary to add another category of (3) communal shamans, forming a transitional class between family and professional shamans. These shamans have to deal with a group of families taking part in important ceremonials. The admission of this third category must not be taken to mean that we agree unconditionally with the idea that the professional shaman is a development from the family, or the communal, shaman, though many practices, and the opinions of such serious investigators as Jochelson and Bogoras, lend some weight to this notion.

It was among the Koryak that professional shamans were first affected by Christianity.

 The Chukchee. Among the Chukchee, the above division into family and professional shamans needs to be supplemented, since we find [5] that there exist three categories of professional shamans:

[1. Mikhailowski, Shamanism, p. .58.

2 Op. cit., p. 55.

3. Jochelson, The Koryak, p. 47.

4 Ibid.

Bogoras, The Chukchee, pp. 430-1.]

(A) Ecstatic shamans, (B) Shaman-prophets, (C) Incantation shamans.

Of course, the duties of the shamans of all these categories merge into each other; still, a certain specialization is to be observed.

A. The ecstatic shaman communicates with 'spirits' and is called kalatkourgin.

This includes all kinds of intercourse with "spirits" which become apparent to the listeners; that is, the voices of "spirits " talking through the medium of the shaman, ventriloquistic performances, and other tricks-generally speaking, the whole spectacular part of shamanism, which forms ' the main content of the shamanistic seances.' As observed above, 'all this is often considered merely as a kind of jugglery. For performances of this sort, young people are said to be better adapted than older ones. With increasing years some of the shamans discontinue most of these tricks.'[1]

B. The shaman-prophet, i. e. one who is 'looking into', hetolatirgin.

'This branch of Chukchee shamanism is held in the highest veneration, because the shaman possessing it has the faculty of seeing the danger lying in wait for the people, or the good in store for them, and accordingly he is able to advise them bow to avoid the first and to secure the second. Most of the instructions given are of a ritualistic kind, and refer to certain details of such and such a ceremonial, which must be arranged after a certain manner in order to secure the desired result., [2]

There are shamans who, though they have kelet at their disposal, cannot give any advice; while others, on the other hand, cannot communicate with 'spirits', but 'give magical advice as a kind of internal subjective inspiration, after self-communion for a few moments. These, notwithstanding the simplicity of their proceedings, usually enjoy the highest consideration of their neighhours.'[3]

For instance, the shaman Galmuurgin was said by the Chukchee to be '(with) only his (own) body' (em-wikilin), because no other beings helped him with their inspiration.

'When giving a seance, he began by beating a drum and singing, but in a few minutes he would leave off the exercise,

[1. Bogoras, The Chukchee, p. 430.

2 Op. cit., p. 431.

3 Ibid.]

and drawing a few long, almost hysterical breaths, would immediately proceed to foretell the future. He talked to many people present, one by one. When he was through with one case, he would stop for a while, as if recollecting himself, and then, after several deep-drawn sighs, would pass on to the next applicant.'[1]

C. Incantation shamans (ewganva-tirgin, 'producing of incantations'), who carry on the more complicated practices of shamanism.

Incantations, together with spells, form the greater part of Chukchee magic. The incantations may be of a benevolent or malevolent character. Hence there are two types of shamans in this class:

1. 'Well-minded' (ten-cimnulin), who ply their art in order to help sufferers.
 2. 'Mischievous' (kurg-enenilit, or kunich-enenilit, literally 'mocking shamans'), who are bent on doing harm to people.

Good shamans have a red shamanistic coat and bad shamans a black one. The same colours are used by the Yukaghir shamans.

The majority of shamans, however, combine in themselves the gifts of all these categories and in the name of 'spirits' perform various tricks, foretell the future, and pronounce incantations.

 

The Neo-Siberians.

 The Yakut. Troshchanski[2] suggests that the division of shamans into black and white is the most essential division among all Siberian tribes, though many travellers speak of shamans in a general way as if there were only one kind. It would seem, however, that Troshchanski overlooks the distinction between the religious conceptions of the Palaeo-Siberians and those of the Neo-Siberians. They live under different environmental conditions; and, besides, the Neo-Siberians have undoubtedly been to some extent influenced by contact with the higher Asiatic religions.

It is among the Neo-Siberians that magico-religious dualism appears more distinctly. Again, within the class of Neo-Siberians themselves differences are found. Among the Yakut [3] the black shamans predominate, the white hardly existing; while among

[1. Op. cit., p. 431.

2 Troshchanski, The Evolution of the Black Faith, 1902, p. iii.

3. Op. cit., P. 110.]

the Votyak the white are almost the only shamans now to be found, as the cult of the bright god has almost entirely displaced that of the black.

The Yakut white shamans are called aiy-oiuna. They take part in the spring festivals, marriage ceremonies, fertilization rites, and the curing of diseases, in cases where kut has not yet been taken away from the patient.[1]

We read in a certain tale that at one wedding there were present nine aiy-oiuna (white men-shamans) and eight aiy-udangana (white women- shamans). [2] White shamans also ask, in cases of the sterility of women, the maghan sylgglakh to descend to earth and make the woman fertile. At the autumn fishing, in former times, they lighted torches made of wood cut from a tree struck by lightning, purged the waters of all uncleanness, and asked the ichchi (spirit-owner) of the lake for a benefit. This, he considers, was certainly done by white. shamans, if only for the reason that the ceremony was held in the daytime.[3] But, on page 105 of the same work, Troshchanski writes: 'Only the spring festivals were called aiy-ysyakh; the autumn festivals were known is abassy-ysyakh.' Hence the ceremony of fertilization of the lake must have been performed by black shamans, abassy-oiuna, in spite of the fact that this ceremony was held in the daytime.

As to the characters of the two kinds of shamans, Gorokboff says that he knew personally several aiy-oiuna, who were very good people indeed, quiet, delicate, and really honest, while the abassy-oiuna were good for nothing.[4] But Troshchanski says that the 'black shaman' among the Yakut is only professionally 'black', that his attitude has no specially evil character, and that he helps men no less than the white shaman does. He is not necessarily bad, though he deals with evil powers, and he occupies among the Yakut a higher position than among other Neo-Siberians.

Black shamans offer sacrifices to abassylar and shamanize to maintain their prestige. They foretell the future, call up spirits, wander into spirit-land, and give accounts of their journeys thither.[3]

At the present day there are among the Yakut special storytellers and also special sorcerers (aptah-kisi).

[1. Op. cit., 1). 149.

2. Khudiakoff, Verkhoyansk Anthology, p. 88.

3. Troshchanski, ibid.

4. Gorokhoff . Yurung-Uolan, E.S.S.I.R.G.S., 1887, p. 56.

Troshchanski, op. cit., p. 152.]

According to the degree of esteem, in which they are held by the people, Sieroszewski' classifies Yakut shamans as follows:

The Great Shaman-ulahan-oiun.

(2) The Middling Shaman-orto-oiun.

(3) The Little Shaman-kenniki-oiun.

A 'great shaman' has the amagyat from Ulu-Toien himself.

A shaman of middling power also possesses amagyat, but not of so high a quality or to so great an extent as the former.

A 'little shaman' does not possess amagyat. He is not, in fact, really a shaman, but a person in some way abnormal, neurotic, or original, who can cure trifling illnesses, interpret dreams, and frighten away small devils only.

With regard to the classification of shamans into 'white' and 'black', Troshchanski puts forward the hypothesis that these two classes of shamans originated and developed independently:

'One might imagine that the class of white shamans came into existence first, and that it derived from the class of heads of families and clans. The custom of the choice of one leader (shaman) for common ceremonies or sacrifices may have helped in this evolution of the white shaman from the heads of families. The wisest and most respected member of the community would probably have the best chance of being chosen, as he could please not only the people but also the spirits.' [2]

The same persons might then have been chosen repeatedly, and presently a class of white shamans might arise for the communal cults and sacrifices. In the meantime the head of the family could still keep his priestly power in his own home, until the professional shaman took his place, as we see at the present day among certain tribes, e.g. the Yakut. [3]

Why should we regard the head of the family as the prototype of the white shaman? We shall find in Troshchanski's book no more satisfactory reply to this question than is contained in the following short passage:

'I think we are right in saying that the heads of the family, or the chosen priests, in their practice and prayers do not address themselves to the evil spirits, which in Yakut are called abassylar; hence it is here that we find the origin of white shamans.' [4]

If we follow Troshchanski, we must draw the conclusion that

[1. Sieroszewski, op. cit., p. 628.

2. Troshchauski, op. cit., p. 120.

3. Op. cit., p. 124.

4. Op. cit., p. 113.]

among the Neo-Siberians, e. g. the Buryat and the Yakut, the white shamans form a quite distinct class, although we see that on certain occasions the head of the family may take the place of the white shaman:

 'Tailgan is a communal sacrifice in which the whole family or clan takes part. This ceremony is designed to show humility: the Buryat call it the "asking ceremony". The performer of tailgan may be the shaman, or the whole group of family heads without the assistance of a shaman.'[1]

Among the Palaeo-Siberians there is no class of white shamans, and the family cult is in the hands of the father, assisted by the mother, the participation of professional shamans being often prohibited. Among the Gilyak the assistance of shamans at sacrificial feasts, e.g. the bear-ceremonial, is even forbidden. Is this because there is no white shaman among these people? Or is it an indication that, after all, family and professional shamanism have developed separately?

Among the Yakut, from. the observation of whom Troshchanski formed his hypothesis, the white shaman may be a woman, in cases where the woman stands as family head.[2]

Now as to the black shamans, they were originally women, says Troshchanski, and he draws attention to the following linguistic and sociological particulars which are made to act as evidence in support of his hypothesis.

What is the essential meaning of the word shaman? In Sanskrit sram=to be tired, to become weary; sramana=work, religious mendicant. In the Pali language the word samana has the same meaning. These two latter words have been adopted by the Buddhists as names for their priests.[3] But, according to Banzaroff, the word shaman originated in northern Asia: saman is a Manchu word, meaning 'one who is excited, moved, raised'; samman (pronounced shaman) and hamman in Tungus, have the

[1. Agapitoff and Khangitloff, Materials for the Study of Shamanism in Siberia, E.S.S.I.R.G.S., p. 36.

'How this may occur, in the patriarchal Yakut family, Troshchanski explains as follows: 'Each wife of a polygynous Yakut lived separately with her children and relations and cattle; during the frequent absences of her husband she was actually the head of the family, and performed family ceremonials. Several such ye-usa (matriarchal families) formed one aga-usa (patriarchal family)' (p. 116).

3. I am indebted for this information to Mr. M. de Z. Wickremasinghe, Lecturer in Tamil and Telugu in the University of Oxford.]

same meaning. Samdambi is Manchu: 'I shamanize', i.e. 'I call the spirits dancing before the charm'[1]

From the above we see that the essential characteristic of a shaman is a liability to nervous ecstasy and trances. Women are more prone to emotional excitement than men: among the Yakut most of the women suffer from menerik (a nervous disease, one type of the so-called 'Arctic hysteria '). [2]

Thus Troshchanski. But the only conclusion-if any-that he could draw from this would be that women are by nature more disposed to shamanizing than men. And why should this make her the original black shaman? Only one piece of evidence is adduced to connect women with 'black' shamanizing, and that is taken from Kamchadal life,. not from that of the Yakut, upon which chiefly he grounds his hypothesis. Among the most primitive Kamchadal, where there were only women (or koek-chuch) shamans, these practised only black shamanism, summoning evil spirits.[3]

As to the linguistic evidence:

Among the Mongols, Buryat, Yakut, Altaians, Torgout, Kidan, Kirgis, there is one general term for a woman-shaman, which has a slightly different form in each tribe: utagan, udagan, udaghan, ubakhan, utygan, utiugun, iduan (duana); whereas the word for man-shaman is different in each of these tribes.

In Yakut he is called oiun; in Mongol, buge; Buryat, buge and bo; Tungus, samman and hamman; Tartar, kam; Altaian, kam and gam; Kirgis, baksa (basky); Samoyed, tadibey.
 From the above Troshchanski concludes that during the migration of the Neo-Siberians they had only women-shamans, called by a similar general name; and that the men-shamans appeared later, when these people scattered, settling in lands distant from one mother, so that the term for man-shaman originated independently in each tribe.[4]

Of course, this linguistic evidence concerns only the Neo- and not the Palaeo-Siberians.
 Troshchanski gives us further the following religio-social evidence, drawn exclusively from the Yakut, in support of his

[1. Zakharoff, Complete Manchu-Russian Dictionary, 1875, p. 568.

2. Troshchanski, op. cit., p. 119.

3. Krasheninnikoff, Description of the Conoitry of Kamchatka, pp. 81-2.

4. Troshchanski, op. cit., p. 118.]

hypothesis of the evolution of the 'black' man-shaman from the 'black' woman-shaman:

(a) On the Yakut shaman's apron there are sewn two iron circles, representing breasts.[1]

(b) The man-shaman dresses his hair like a woman, on the two sides of the head, and braids it; during a performance he lets the hair fall down.[2]

(c) Both women and shamans are forbidden to lie on the right side of a horse-skin in the yurta.[3]

(d) The man-shaman wears the shaman's costume only on very important occasions; in ordinary circumstances he wears a girl's dress made of the skin of a foal.[4]

(e) During the first three days after a confinement, when Ayisit, the deity of fecundity, is supposed to be near the woman who is lying-in, access to the house where she is confined is forbidden to men, but not to shamans.[5]

How the female black shaman was displaced by the male black shaman Troshchanski explains as follows, again using exclusively Yakut evidence:

The smith who made the ornaments for the female shaman's garment acquired some shamanistic power. He was in contact with iron, which was of magical importance, and power came to him through this contact. (The smiths were, like the shamans, 'black' and 'white', but among the Yakut one hears more of 'black' smiths than of 'white'.) Thus the similarity between the vocation of a shaman and that of a smith becomes close, especially when the calling of smith descends through many generations in the same family. Smiths come to be considered as the elder brothers of shamans, and then the differences between them finally disappear, the smith becoming a shaman.

The woman, then, since she could not be a smith, had eventually to give up her place to the man.

In modern times, as there are no longer any 'inagical smiths', new shamanistic garments cannot be made.'[6]

[1. Krasheninnikoff, op. cit., pp. 81-2.

2 Ibid.

3. Troshchanski, op. cit., p. 123.

4. Ibid

5. Ibid.

Troshchanski, op. cit.. p. 125. It will be interesting to quote here what Sieroszewski says about the vocation of the smith: "Those who approach most nearly to the shamans in their office, and are partially related to them, are the smiths. "The smith and the shaman are of one nest,", says a proverb of the Kolyma district. The smiths also can cure, advise, and foretell the future, but their knowledge does not possess a magical character; they are simply clever people, who know much, and who possess "peculiar fingers". The profession of smith is generally hereditary, especially in the north. It is in the ninth generation that a [hereditary] smith first acquires certain supernatural qualities, and the more ancient his ancestry, the more marked are these qualities. The spirits are generally afraid of iron hoops and of the noise made by the blowing of the smith's bellows. In the Kolyma district the shaman would not shamanize until I [Sieroszewski] removed my case of instruments; and even then his bad luck in shamanizing wits explained by him as due to the fact that, as he said, "the spirits are afraid of smiths [in this case Sieroszewski], and that is why they do not appear at my call." Only a smith of the ninth generation can, without harm to himself, hammer out the iron embellishment of the shamanistic dress, the iron for the drum, or make amagyat. If the smith who makes a shamanistic ornament has not a sufficient number of ancestors, if the noise of hammering and the glare of the fire does not surround him on all sides, then birds with crooked claws and beaks will tear his heart in pieces. Respectable hereditary smiths have tools possessed of "spirits" (ichchilah) which can give out sounds by themselves.' (Sieroszewski, op. cit., p. 632.)]

This hypothesis of women being the first black shamans is, however, not borne out by the evidence. Even if we allow that the above quotations, especially that containing the linguistic evidence, tend to show that women were shamans before men, it does not follow that they were the first black shamans. There is not enough evidence in Troshchanski's book to support his hypothesis of two separate origins and developments for black and white shamans.

On the other hand, the evolution which Troshchanski ascribes to black shamans might be ascribed to professional shamanism, if we reject Jochelson's and Bogoras's view that professional developed out of family shamanism.

 The Altaians. Wierbicki [1] says that among the Altaians, besides the shaman, called kam, there are also (i) rynchi, 'who, during attacks accompanied by pain, can foretell the future'; (ii) telgochi, or 'guessers'; (iii) yarinchi, or those who can divine by means of the blade-bone; (iv) koll-kurechi, who divine from the hand; (v) yadachi, who control the weather by means of a stone, yada-tash, which is found in narrow mountain defiles, where winds blow continually. To obtain these stones a yadachi must swear away all his possessions. Hence he is poor, lonely, and usually a widower.

 The Buryat. Among the Buryat, according to Shashkoff,[2] shamans are divided into (a) hereditary shamans and (b) shamans of the first generation. Another division is into (a) real, (b) false

[1. The Natives of the Altai, pp. 44-6.

2. Shashkoff, Shamanism in Siberia, W.S.S.I.R.G.S., p. 82.]

shamans. Again there are (a) white (sagan-bo) and (b) black (haranin-bo).

The white and black shamans, the Buryat say, fight with each other, hurling axes at one another from distances of hundreds of miles. The white shaman serves the West tengeri and West khats, and has charge of the ceremonies held at birth, marriage, &c. He wears a white coat and rides a white horse. A famous white shaman was Barlak of the Balagansk district, at whose grave his descendants still go to worship.

The black shaman serves the tengeri and khats of the East. These shamans are said to have power to bring illness and death upon men. They are not liked, but much feared, by the people, who sometimes kill black shamans, to such a point does this dislike develop.[1] The grave of a black shaman is usually shaded by aspens, and the body is fastened to the earth by a stake taken from this tree.

According to Agapitoff and Kangaloff, there are also a few shamans who serve both good and bad spirits at the same time.

 The Samoyed. Lepekhin [2] Says that the Samoyed shamans are not divided into distinct classes, black and white, as among the Buryat, but serve both for good and bad ends, as occasion arises. The Lapps likewise make no strict distinction between good shamans and bad. Some of the Lapp noyda (shamans) are known as 'Big', and others as 'Little', noyda.

 The Votyak. The whole Votyak hierarchy arose from the white shamans. The chief of the shamans is the tuno. At the present day the tuno [3] is the chief upholder of the old religion.

As the soul of a tuno is 'educated' by the Creator, he is without doubt a white shaman. Besides the tuno, there are priests, chosen either by himself or by the people under his advice. 'In most cases the profession and knowledge of a tuno descend from father to son, although any person who has the opportunity of acquiring the knowledge necessary to a tuno can become one.' [4]

Among the Votyak there is a classification of shamans into (a) permanent and (b) temporary. The latter are chosen to Perform some particular sacrifice. Besides these there are

[1. Agapitoff and Khanaaloff, op. cit., pp. 85-6.

2. Lepekhin, Diary of a Journey, p. 262.

3. Bogayewski, A Sketch of the Mode of Life of the Votyak of Sarapul, p. 123.

4. Op. cit., p. 126.]

secondary priests appointed by the tuno and called tore and parchis.

In former times black shamans also were to be found among the Votyak, but they have given way to the white, just as among the Yakut the white shaman has been largely displaced by the black.

The Votyak black shaman of former times has been converted into an ordinary sorcerer. He is called pellaskis, and 'he can aid the sick, and find lost cattle through his incantations; but all this without any connexion with the deities'.[1] Another kind of sorcerer is called vedin. He is feared and hated by all. [2]
 When the tuno has finished his education under Kylchin-Inmar (the Creator), the latter takes his pupil to a place where the candidates for the position of sorcerer reside. He examines them, and to those who answer satisfactorily he gives permission to enchant and destroy men.

[1. Bogayewski, op. cit., p. 12).

2. Op. cit., p. 126.]

     
Shamanism in Siberia, by M.A. Czaplicka, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER X

 

THE ACCESSORIES OF THE SHAMAN

IN everyday life the shaman is not distinguishable from other people except by an occasionally haughty manner, but when he is engaged in communicating with spirits he has to make use of a special dress and special instruments. Of these the most important and the one in most general use is the shaman's drum. It may be said that all over Siberia, where there is a shaman there is also a drum. The drum has the power of transporting the shaman to the superworld and of evoking spirits by its sounds.

Authors of the eighteenth century, like Pallas and Krasheninnikoff, pay great attention to the shaman's accessories. Though they have probably only been attracted by their picturesque side, yet their descriptions are very valuable in view of the modern attempt to reach the primitive mind through its symbolical forms of expression.

Shashkoff [1] enumerates the following items as indispensable to the shaman's dress all over Siberia-the coat, the mask, the cap, and the copper or iron plate on the breast. The Samoyed tadibey substitute for the mask a handkerchief tied over the eyes, so that they can penetrate into the spirit-world by their inner sight. This use of a handkerchief is also mentioned by Wierbicki, who says that the shamans of northern Altai wear one round the forehead to keep the hair out of the eyes.

These four accessories-the coat, the mask, the cap, and the iron plate-are used by the Neo-Siberians only, since among Palaeo-Siberians the dress is much less complicated.

Each tribe has, moreover, some particular object which plays the chief part in the shamanistic ceremony.

Gmelin,[2] describing the Tungus shaman's costume, says that over the usual shamanistic garment an apron, adorned with iron, is also worn; his stockings, likewise remarkable, are made of skin

[1. Shamanism in Siberia, p. 86.

2. Reise durch Sibirien, ii, 193.]

ornamented with iron. Among the Gilyak and the Olchi it is the shaman's girdle which is of the greatest significance;[1] among the Buryat,[2] the horse-staves, &c. Iron and copper objects seem also to be especially associated with the Neo-Siberians.

The whole costume with its appurtenances used during shamanistic performances throughout Siberia has, according to Mikhailowski,[3] a threefold significance:

1. The shaman wishes to make a profound impression on the eyes of the people by the eccentricity of his costume.

2. The ringing of the bells and the noise of the drum impress their sense of hearing.

3. Finally, a symbolic meaning is attached to these accessories and adornments, a meaning known only to believers, especially to the shamans, and closely connected with the religious conceptions of shamanism.

Thus Mikhailowski. But this interpretation does not bring out the whole importance of the relation of these objects to the spiritual world. They are of great importance, for the spirits will not bear the voice of the shaman unless the right dress and implements are used, and the drum beaten; they are sacred because of their contact with a supernatural and often dangerous power.

Being sacred, these accessories must not be used by any one but a shaman, otherwise they are impotent to produce any result. It is only a good shaman, a real one, who can possess the full shaman's dress.

Among the Palaeo-Siberians it is usually the shaman himself who makes all accessories, and that only when the spirits give their permission. Among the natives of Altai it is not all shamans who have the right to wear manyak (the coat) and the owl-skin cap.[4]

Among the Yakut even the blacksmith who undertakes the ornamentation of the costume, must have inherited the right, 'If the blacksmith who makes a shamanistic ornament has not a sufficient number of ancestors, if he is not surrounded on all sides by the noise of hammering and the glow of fire, then birds with crooked claws and beaks will tear his heart in pieces.'[5] For this

[1. Schrenck. The Natives of the Amur Country, iii, 124-6.

2. Agapitoff and Khangaloff, Materials for the Study of Shamanism in Siberia, p. 43.

3. Shamanism, p. 72.

4. Potanin, Sketches of North-Western Mongolia, iv, 53.

5. Sieroszewski, The Yakut, p. 632.]

reason the blacksmith's vocation comes next in importance to the shaman's. In modern times it is practically impossible among the Yakut for the shaman's coat to be made, since there is now no class of hereditary blacksmiths. In his description of the Tungus shaman's garment, Gmelin relates how the shaman whom he saw bad no cap because the old one was burnt and the spirits would not grant him a new one.[1] Of the Buryat shamans he observes that many of them do not possess drums, since the spirits with. bold permission to make them, and two long sticks which are struck crosswise against each other are therefore substituted at the performance.[2] Mikhailowski quotes the above statement in explanation of the fact that Khangaloff had seen only one drum among the Buryat shamans.

'With the degeneration of shamanism', says Mikhailowski, 'the number of people who know bow to prepare the sacred instrument with due regard to magical custom is decreasing.' [3] This, however, is not the true explanation of the disappearance of the drum among the Buryat, for the importance of the other chief Buryat accessory, the horse-staves, which demand equal care in the making, must also be taken into account. Without them the shaman cannot perform any of the principal rites. They are usually made of birch-wood, no one but a shaman who has passed his fifth consecration being allowed to use iron horse-staves.[4] The Lapps take great care of their drum and keep it covered up with furs. No woman may touch it.

 

A. Palaeo-Siberians.

 The Chukchee. Among Palaeo-Siberians there are no strict regulations as to the shape and quality of the shaman's dress. Originality of costume is what is most sought after, and Bogoras tells us that the Chukchee shamans sometimes adopt some old coat brought froin the American shore. 'The Chukchee have nothing similar to the well-known type of coat covered with fringes and images, which is in general use among the Yakut and Tungus, and which probably was borrowed from the latter by the Yukaghir and perhaps also by the Kamchadal.'[5]

The absence of a peculiar shaman's dress among the Chukchee

[1. Op. cit., P. 193.

2. These are Probably what are called by later writers 'horse-staves'.

3 Op. cit., p. 68. 

4. Klenientz, E. R. E., p. 16.

5. The Chukchee, pp. 457-8.]

may be accounted for by the fact that the shamans perform their ceremonies in the darkness of the inner room of the house, in an atmosphere so hot and stifling that they are obliged to take off their coats and to shamanize with the upper part of the body quite naked.

The only shamanistic garments that Bogoras speaks of are a coat and a cap. 'As far as I know,' he says, 'among the other neighbouring tribes also female shamans have no outward distinguishing mark, nor do they use the special shamanistic garb which is assigned only to the male shamans.'[1]

After this statement the custom among certain tribes of the adoption by the male shaman of the clothes and manner of a woman appears still more strange. The shamanistic coat is characterized by a fringe round the sleeves a little above the opening, or round the neck a little below the collar. This coat may be adopted by the shaman or by the patient. Besides the fringe there are slits ornamented with cured leather. 'These slits and fringes are usually said to represent the curves and zigzags of the Milky Way.' [2]

But if we remember the many other ways in which the Chukchee shaman imitates the Tungus shaman, we may conclude that both slits and fringes in the shamanistic coat are but another instance of the same imitation. The garment represented in Bogoras's book has in front of it an image of tetkeyun, that is, 'vital force', which resides in the heart and assumes its form. It is made like a leather ball and filled with reindeer-hair. The other figure, likewise of leather, represents a rekken, or 'assisting' spirit of the shaman.[3]

The shamanistic cap is also supplied with fringes, with a tassel on the top and a long double tassel on the left side. The tassels are of the type adopted for magic purposes, that is, they are formed of alternating pieces of white and black fur. 'Another cap with the opening on top, and likewise fringed and tasselled, was used by the shaman as a remedy against headache.' [4]

In addition to these garments, the Chukchee shaman uses in his performances many small instruments, such as the knife, the handle, of which is embellished with magical objects, and a small flat piece of ivory, which is said to be usually employed when cutting open a body. The ivory of the shaman, 'Scratching-Woman', had three

[1. Op. cit., p. 458.

2 Op. cit., p. 459.

3. Ibid.

4. Op. cit., p. 460.]

leather images fastened to it. 'One was said to represent a kele from the "direction" of the darkness, with the arms longer than the legs. The middle image with only one arm and one leg, and with the two eyes one above the other, represented the kele lumetun. The third image represented a crawling "spell" sent by an enemy of the shaman, who interecpted it on the way and thoroughly subdued it so that it began to do his bidding.'[1] These different amulets, the form of pendants and tassels, are made of skin and beads by the shaman himself, and are fastened to various parts of the body or dress. Such are also the 'round patches of skin, often with a tassel in the centre',[2] which are considered highly effective amulets among the Chukchee, the Koryak, and the Asiatic Eskimo. They are sewn to the coat, on the breast or on the shoulders, or against the affected part of the body. An image of the 'guardian' is placed in the middle, and is often replaced by an ornamental figure of a woman, of a dancing man, or of a warrior. These objects, as well as those already mentioned, serve both a magical and an ornamental purpose.

The most important object in shamanistic performances all over Siberia is the drum. Thus the Chukchee use the drum which is common to both Asiatic and American Eskimo.

The drum used by the Reindeer and Maritime Chukchee is different from that adopted in north-western Asia by the Yakut, Tungus, Koryak, Kamchadal, and Yukaghir, which is rather of a southern type.

The southern drum is large and somewhat oval in shape, and is held by four loose bands, which are fastened to the hoop of the drum on the inner side. The other ends of these bands meet in the middle, where they are tied to a small wheel or a cross, which is without any other support. When these are grasped by the hand the drum hangs loosely, and may be shaken and its position changed at will. The drum-stick is made of wood and covered with skin or with cured leather.

The Chukchee drum has a wooden handle[3] which is lashed with sinews to the wooden hoop. The diameter of the hoop, which is nearly circular in shape, is from 40 to 50 centimetres. The head is made of very thin skin, usually the dried skin of a walrus's stomach. In order to stretch the skin it is moistened with water or wine, and the edge is then tied with sinew cord. The ends of

[1. Op. cit., p. 466.

2. Op. cit., p. 468.

3. According to Mr. Henry Balfour this shows Eskimo influence.]

this cord are fastened to the handle. The drum is very light weighing from half a pound to a pound and a half. The drumstick varies according to its purpose. It is either a narrow, light strip of whalebone from 30 to 40 centimetres long, or a piece of wood from 60 to 70 centimetres long, which is sometimes adorned with fur tassels. The former is used during the magical performances held in the inner room at night, the latter during ceremonials performed in the outer tent during the day.[1]

When the family is moving from place to place, the cover of the drum is removed, folded, and fastened to the hoop to be replaced when needed. In the winter house the drum remains in front of the sleeping-place, and in the summer tent it hangs near the sacred fire-board.

 The Koryak. The shaman accessories of the Koryak, another Palaeo-Siberian tribe, are described by Jochelson as follows: 'The Koryak shamans have no drums of their own; they use the drums belonging to the family in whose house the shamanistic performance takes place. It seems that they wear no special dress; at least the shamans whom I had occasion to observe wore ordinary clothing.'[2]

One embroidered jacket. which was sold to Jochelson as an Alutor shaman's dress, is very much like the ordinary man's dancing-jacket used during the whale ceremony, but more elaborate. The Koryak drum belongs not to the shaman but to the family. It is used both as a musical instrument and as a sacred object in the household. Everybody who pleases can beat the drum, but there is usually one competent person who knows bow to shamanize with it.

The Koryak drum, yyai, is oval in shape and covered with reindeer-hide on one side only, its diameter being 73 centimetres. The drum-stick is made of thick whalebone, wider at the end with which the drum is struck, and this end is covered with the skin of a wolf's tail.

Inside the drum at four points in the rim a double cord of nettle fibre is fastened and joined below to form the handle. These cords run towards one side of the drum. On the top of the inside rim is attached an iron rattle. Jochelson says that this custom of attaching the rattle has been borrowed from the Tungus and that not all Koryak drums possess it.[3]

[1. Bogoras, The Chukchee, pp. 356-7.

2. The Koryak, pp. 54-5.

3. Op. cit. P. 56]

 The Kamchadal (Itelmen). Among the Kamchadal there is apparently no shamanistic garment or drum. Two early travellers to their country, Steller and Krasheninnikoff, say that everybody, especially women, could shamanize, and hence this occupation was not professional enough to demand a special dress.

 The Yukaghir. The Yukaghir drum is a rough oval. It is covered with hide on one side only. Inside the drum there is an iron cross near the centre, which serves as a handle. The ends of the cross are fastened with straps to the rim, to which four iron rattles are attached.[1] There is a great similarity between the Yukaghir and the Yakut drum, not only in the iron rattles, iron cross, and general shape, but also in the small protuberances on the outer surface of the rim, which according to the Yakut represent the horns of the shaman's spirits. The stick is covered with the skin of a reindeer's leg. In Yukaghir traditions the drum without metallic additions is still traceable, the iron pieces having been borrowed from the Yakut.

The Yukaghir word for drum is yalgil, which means 'lake', that is, the lake into which the shaman dives in order to descend into the shadow-world.[2]

 The Eskimo. This is very much like the conception of the Eskimo, the souls of whose shamans descend into the lower world of the goddess Sedna. The Eskimo drums are not large; the largest are to be found at Hudson Bay. They are either symmetrically oval or round, and a wooden handle is fastened to the rim. J. Murdoch[3], says that such drums are used by the Eskimo from Greenland to Siberia. The Eskimo as well as the Chukchee beat the lower part of the drum with the stick. The Koryak drum also is struck from below, and is held in a slanting position. Other Asiatic drums are mostly beaten in the centre. Among the Indians living south of the Eskimo we find broad-rimmed drums used for purposes of shamanism, as well as in dancing-houses.[4]

 The Gilyak. The most important accessories of the Gilyak shaman are the drum, kas, and the shaman's girdle, yangpa. Schrenck gives us the following description of them: 'One night when I was sitting in a tent in the village of Yrri, they brought in two shamans' drums and other accessories, and at my request

[1. Ibid.

2. Op. cit., P. 59.

3. A Point Barrow Eskimo, 1887-8, p. 385.

4. Jochelson, The, Koryak, p. 58.]

they allowed me to be present at the preparation for the ceremony, First of all the drum was heated by the fire, to make the hide taut, so that the sound might be more sonorous.[1] The drum was made of the skin of a goat or reindeer, and whilst it was being prepared the shaman made ready. He took off his outer garment, put on the so-called koska, a short apron, and tied round his head a band of grass, the end of which hung over his shoulders like a tress of hair. Then he took the shaman's leather girdle, with many iron plates,[2] copper hoops, and other metal pendants, which produce a loud clanking noise during the shamanistic dances.' This girdle is called in Olcha dialect yangpa. Its chief pendant is a large copper disk with a small handle ornamented in relief, showing Manchu influence; this circle, called tole, makes the most important sound. There are also many iron links called tasso, and many irregular pieces of iron called kyire, which make a very loud noise; a few rolled iron plates called kongoro, and, finally, some small copper bells without tongues, called kongokto. When the girdle is put on all these objects hang together at the back. This shamanistic girdle is of considerable weight.[3]

Although the Gilyak belong to the Palaeo- Siberians, the metal accessories seem to be of Tungus origin, as are some other features of their culture. We read in Gmelin's [4] description of the costume of a Tungus shaman that he wears over the ordinary dress an apron ornamented with iron. This suggests that this apron-form of the shaman's coat was borrowed either by the Gilyak from the Tungus, or vice versa.

 

B. The Neo-Siberians.

Among the Neo-Siberians all their philosophy of life is represented symbolically in the drum, and great significance is also attached to various parts of their dress.

 The Yakut. Among the Yakut even those who, like the blacksmith, help in the adornment of the shaman's garment, occupy a half-magical position, being credited with 'peculiar fingers '. [5] The hereditary blacksmiths have tools with ' souls', ichchylakh, which can give out sounds of their own accord. The blacksmiths

[1. Exactly the same preparations are mentioned by Jochelson, The Koryak, p. 56.

2. Compare the leather apron hung with jingling iron pieces worn by Manchu shamans. [Suggestion of Mr. Henry Balfour.]

3. Schrenck, op. cit., iii. 126.

4. Op. cit., p. 193.

Sieroszewski, The Yakut, p. 632.]

are those who approach most nearly to the shaman in their office, and are, in a way, related to them. 'The blacksmith and the shaman are of one nest', says a proverb of the Kolyma district, cited by Sieroszewski. 'The smith is the elder brother of the shaman' is another saying quoted by Troshchanski. Blacksmiths can sometimes cure, give advice, and foretell the future, but their knowledge is simply a matter of cleverness and does not possess magical value. The profession of blacksmith is mostly hereditary, especially in the north; in the ninth generation the blacksmith first acquires certain supernatural qualities, and the longer his line of descent, the greater his qualities. The spirits are generally afraid of the iron hoops and of the noise made by the smith's bellows. In the district of Kolyma the shaman would not shamanize until Sieroszewski had removed his case of metal instruments, and even then attributed his bad luck to them: 'The spirits are afraid of the blacksmith (Sieroszewski), and that is why they do not appear at my call.'[1]

The shaman's dress, according to Sieroszewski, consists chiefly of a coat. It is of cowhide, so short in front that it does not reach the knees, but touching the ground at the back. The edges and the surface of this coat are ornamented at the back with different objects, each having its own name, place, and meaning. The shaman's coat, which is not an indispensable part of the ritual costume arnong Palaeo-Siberians, is most elaborate among the Neo-Siberians.

Linguistically also there is a curious point connected with the terms for coat and drum. While the drum has a common name (with dialectic differences) among most Neo-Siberians, tunur, tungur, &c., the term for the shaman's coat varies: kumu, ereni, manyak.[2] This seems to show that the ceremonial coat is a comparatively newer invention than the ceremonial drum.[3]

Sieroszewski [4] gives us an account of the meaning of the coat ornamentation, which he heard from in old Yakut. It is as follows:

1. Kungeta (the sun), a round, smooth, shining disk, the size of a small saucer, hanging between. the shoulders, on a short strap of leather which passes through the hole in the middle of the disk. [5]

[1. lbid.

2. Wierbicki, Altaian Dictionary, p. 487.

3. Troshchanski, op. cit., P. 131.

4. Sieroszewski, op. cit., p. 632.

5. Troshchanski (p. 143) says that according to Piekarski there is no such word is kungeta; it is, be says, kunasa, or kusana, but the meaning of kunasa is uncertain. However, Troshchanski thinks that the Yakut word kun-sun'--is not etymologically connected with kunasa. Khudyakoff translates the Yakut word kusana as'bell'. According to Katanoff, kusana means (1) 'oracular time' (?), or (2) 'iron circle' fastened to the shaman's coat and representing the sun.]

2. Oibon-Kunga (hole-in-the-ice sun), a disk of the same shape and size as the first, but with a larger hole in the middle. it hangs above or below the first plate on a long leather strap.[1]

3. Kondei kyhan, rolls of tin about the size of a thumb, but longer, banging at the back on the metal rings or loops.

4. Chilliryt kyhan, flat plates as long as fingers, banging in great numbers at the back, above the waist.

5. .Hobo, copper bells without tongues, suspended below the collar; like a crow's egg in size and shape and having on the tipper part a drawing of a fish's head. They are tied to the leather straps or to the metal loops.

6. Biirgune, two round flat disks, similar to those which adorn the woman's cap, tuskata, but without any design on them; they are tied like an epaulet on the shaman's shoulders.

7. Oiogos timiria, two plates about the breadth of four fingers and a little shorter, fastened on both sides of the body.

8. Tabytaua, two long plates two fingers broad, which are fastened to both sleeves.

9. Amagyat, abagyta amatiat (in many places called emchet), a copper plate as long as the first finger and half as wide as the palm of the hand. It is covered either with a drawing of a man, 'with feet, bands, head, nose, mouth, eyes, and ears',[2] or with an engraving in relief on a copper medallion, having a man's figure in the middle.

'Only a blacksmith who has nine generations behind him can,

[1. Troshchanski (p. 144) converts this term into oibon-kunasata (hole-in-the-ice circle). Kunasata is the genitive of kunasa; the genitive form is used to show that these objects belong to the shaman's coal. Priklonski (Three Years in the Yakutsk Territory, 1891, p. 54) calls it kular-kusanat (happy, joyous sun), which, according to Troshchanski (p. 144), is also wrong. He says it ought to be kular kusana (laughing circle). Potanin (op. cit., iv. 51) states that among the Mongols Of north-western Asia, there are sewn on the back of the shaman's coat two round copper disks, called by the Altaians kusungy, or kuler-kusungy, and sometimes two others on the breasts. Tretyakoff (op. cit., p. 214) informs us that the shamans of Dolgan have a disk hanging on the breast, which represents the chief evil spirit called kuganna, Troshchanski (op. cit., p. 145), however, suggests that kuganna is simply the Yakut kusana, and is not a term for an evil spirit, but for the disk.

2. Sieroszewski quotes a native description of it, op. cit., p. 634.]

without danger to himself from the spirits, make an amagyat, a copper plate such as has been described, which the shaman, when he begins to shamanize, hangs on his breast.'[1] What exactly amagyat means, whether it is a personal or an impersonal power, it is difficult to determine. We shall go on to review the various references to this subject, since the word amagyat is used in the double sense of (1) an invisible power and (2) of a visible symbol. In this chapter we shall confine ourselves to the latter. The absence of amagyat differentiates the less important shamans, called kenniki oyuun, from those who possess it and who are known as orto oyaun. The power of those in partial possession of amagyat varies according to 'the strength of their amagyat'[2] The great shamans are those whose 'spirit-protector was sent them by Ulu-Toyen himself' (amagyatitiah ulytoer ulutoenton ongorulah).[3]

Describing the shaman in action, Sieroszewski4 says that the shaman implores the assistance of his amagyat and of other protecting spirits'; and it is only when the amagyat descends upon the shaman that he begins his frenzied dances.
 Whenever a family numbers a shaman among its members, it continues to do so, for after his death the amagyat seeks to re-embody itself in some one belonging to the same clan (aya-usa).[5]

'Amagyat ', says Sieroszewski in another place,[6] is a being quite apart; in most cases it is the soul of a departed shaman; sometimes it is one of the secondary supreme beings.'

The human body cannot endure the continuous presence of a power equal to that of the great gods; hence this spirit-protector (if amagyat can be so called) resides not within, but close beside the shaman, and comes to his assistance at critical moments, or whenever he needs him.[7]

The shaman can see and hear only with the help of his amagyat said the shaman Tiuspiut to Sieroszewski.

Possession of the amagyat does not in any way depend upon the shaman; it comes either by an accident or by a decree from above. Tiuspiut obtained his amagyat (of Tungus origin) quite accidentally.

The great shamans at death take their amagyat with them, and thus change into heavenly beings, most of whom are ex-shamans;

[1. Op. cit., p. 632.

2. Op. cit., p. 628.

3 Ibid.

4. Op. cit., pp. 642-3.

5. Op. cit., p. 625.

6. Op. cit., p. 626.

7 Op. cit., p. 627.

8. Ibid.]

if the amagyat does not depart in this way, then sooner or later it will show itself on the earth.
 Troshchanski says that the most important ornament of the Yakut shaman's coat is amagyat, which represents a man. On one of the coats that he reproduces there is an amagyat on the left side made of molten copper. On another coat amagyat were op. both sides of the breast and made of tin.[1]

 Amagyat is the sign of the shaman's vocation, which is always given by the old shaman to the new. It is quite possible, thinks Troshchanski, that it represents the shaman's ancestor and protector.[2]

Speaking of the preparatory stage of the shaman, Troshchanski says that the Yakut shaman is taught by an older shaman, who initiates him by suspending round his neck the amagyat. This symbol is taken away from the shaman who no longer wishes to shamanize. An old blind Yakut, however, told Sieroszewski (p. 625) how he gave up his shaman's vocation, thinking it a sin, and although a powerful shaman removed the amagyat sign from him, nevertheless the spirits made him blind.

In the Mongolian language amagaldzi signifies the figure of the protective genius of the house, family, and goods, and is made of tin. According to Katanoff, this word is derived from amagan, grandmother.

10. Balyk-timir (the fish), a plate a metre long, two fingers wide, made in the form of a fish with head, fins, tail, and scales. It bangs on a long leather strap. In some places, like the district of Kolyma, it drags on the ground to entice the secondary spirits, which run after it and try to catch it.[4]

11. Choran, small hollow copper balls, fastened to the ends of long leather straps reaching to the heels and banging like a fringe from the lower edge of the coat. This fringe is called bytyrys (the weed).

The coat is plain in front, and fastens on the breast with leather straps, and under the chin with a buckle in the form of a colt's tongue (kulun tyl kurduk). On the front of the coat are sewn figures of animals, birds, fishes; various disks; images of the sun, moon, and stars; and also some iron representations of the human skeleton and bowels.

In the north, in case of the absence of this costume, the shaman

[1. Troshchanpki, op. cit., p. 140.

2. Ibid.

3. Op. cit., p. 147.

4. Sieroszewski, p. 634.]

wears the woman's sangyniah, a coat of calf's skin, with the hair outside, on the feet of which are occasionally hung some of the most important iron accessories, like the two 'suns' (or sun and moon), the fish and the burgune; sometimes two round circles, which represent the breasts, are hung in the front.

A good shaman's dress requires about 35 to 40 pounds of iron.

In the north the shaman wears a woman's travelling cap with ear-flaps, but this is not to be seen in more southern regions, where the shaman is in most cases bareheaded.

According to general belief, the iron and the jingling pendants of the shaman's coat have the power to resist rust, and possess a soul-ichchite.[1]

The shaman wears his magical coat next his skin, and receives it from the hand of a kuluruksuta (page, assistant), i. e. the man whose duty it is to shout during the performance: seb! kirdik! choo! o o! ('well! true! choo! o o!'), and who helps the shaman in other ways, such as preparing the drum.

The Yakut drum is called, according to Sieroszewski, tungur,[2] and according to Troshchanski,[3] tunur or dunur.

The drum is always egg-shaped, and is covered with the bide of a young bull. Its longest diameter is 53 cm., the width of the rim 11 cm., and the length of the stick 32 cm. The wider part of the stick is covered with cowhide. According to Jochelson, there are twelve raised representations of horns on the drum.[4] Sieroszewski [5] says that they are always found in odd numbers, 7, 9, or 11. The cross inside is attached to the rim by means of straps. Little bells, jingling trinkets, and other rattles of iron and bone are attached inside round the rim, especially in the places where the straps are fastened.

The term tungur- seems to be a universal name for the drum among most of the Neo-Siberian tribes; sometimes t changes to d, giving the form dungur.

In Manchu the drum is called tunkun; in Mongol dungur; in Altaian tungur; in Uriankhai donkur; in Soiot and Karagass tungur.

Among the Yakut, as has been said, there are two names, tunur and donkur. Maak[5] records that the Yakut of Viluy

[1. Sieroszewski, op. cit., p. 635.

2. Op. cit., p. 635.

3. Op. cit., p. 128.

4. The Koryak, pp. 56-7.

5. Sieroszewski, p. 635.

6. The Viluysk District of the Yakusk Territory, iii. 118.]

explained to him that 'the shamans in addition to the tunur (drum) have also a stringed instrument, dunur.

The word tunur among the Yakut means also kinship through marriage: tunuratar, 'match-making'.

Troshchanski[1] thinks that this double meaning is not accidental, and that as the shaman was originally the head of a family, the drum might be regarded as the bond of unity between the shaman and the community, as well as between the shaman and the spirits.

Besides the drum, the shaman uses two other musical instruments, one of which is a stringed instrument like the Russian balalaika (a kind of banjo), the other an instrument like that known as a jews' harp, a small frame with a long wooden or metal tongue, which is moved by the finger; the narrow end of the instrument is held between the teeth, so that the mouth acts as a sounding-board.

Among the Yakut the jews' harp, called homus (hamys), is apparently not a shaman's instrument, though the shamans of other Neo-Siberians have been known to use it.

Among the Buryat from Irkutsk, this instrument is called khur, and is used only by the shamans.[2] This is also true of the Uriankhai. The Soiot call it komus, but the Altaians (using the term in the narrowest sense), who also have the word komus, use it to designate the stringed instrument resembling the Russian balalaika, which only shamans play.[3] The Kirgis call the shaman's drum kobuz.[4] According to Wierbicki, the Altaians use the two-stringed kabys or komus as an accompaniment to the recital of heroic tales.[5]

There are sometimes minor shamanistic performances without the drum and without the special garments. The shaman sits in his everyday dress on a small chair in the middle of the room and holds in his bands a branch ornamented with bunches of white horsehair, of which there may be three, five, or seven, but never an even number. The fire is not put out for these performances, and some of the horsehair is thrown on to it. The shaman does not dance, but sings and whirls about.[6]

[1. Op. cit., p. 129.

2. Katanoff, A Journey to Karagass in 1890, I.R.G.S., 1891, p. 201.

3. Wierbicki, A Dictionary of the Turkic Language, p. 141.

4. Troshchanski, p. 130.

5. The Natives of the, Altai, p. 139.

5. Sieroszewski, op. cit., p. 635.]

Troshchanski [1] thinks that, among the Yakut, white and black shamans have different coats. The coat of the white shaman has no animal pictures on it, because their spirit-protectors belong to the aiy (good spirits), which are not symbolized by animal pictures. The coat of the black shaman should not (according to Troshchanski) have representations of the sun, for these are peculiar to white shamans. The drums of the two shamans also differ. When Troshchanski showed an old Yakut woman, who knew a great deal about the shaman dress, a certain drum (op. cit., fig. II, b), she at once recognized it as a white shaman drum, since horsehair was fastened round the iron rim inside it.]

Tribal and clan differences exist in the shaman's coat, and it would be difficult to say whether a sharp line can be drawn between black and white shamanistic garments. Troshchanski is much influenced by this conception of dualism, but from the materials in our possession, a few very imperfect photographs, it would be unwise to come to a decision. It should be remarked, however, that neither of the writers on the Palaeo-Siberians in describing shaman instruments makes this division, and but few of the writers on the Neo-Siberians.

Potanin [2] describes how, on a shaman's coat of the Uriankhai tribe, among other properties, there was a small doll with a minute drum in its left hand. On the same string to which the doll was tied there was another small figure of an animal resembling the sacrificial animal of the real shaman. The significance of this is, of course, obvious. The shaman's ancestor resides in a symbolic form in the shaman's coat. Thus the small doll of the Uriankhai shaman's coat takes the place of the amagyat the Yakut, if we are to take amagyat as the symbol of the shaman's ancestor.

The skeleton figuring on the shaman's coat in Troshchanski's book must probably also be ascribed to the shaman's ancestor, for quite near it are sewed hawks' wings, and none but a shaman can fly or be represented by wings.

One might suppose from what has been said above that we have here to deal with three ways of representing the shaman ancestor: by the doll, the amagyat, and the skeleton. It would be interesting to know, however, whether or not the amagyat is to be found side by side with either of the other symbols. If so, it

[1. Op. cit., p. 133.

2. Op. cit., iv. 100.]

is possible that amagyat is not a symbol of the ancestor spirit, but has a meaning of its own. On the Yakut coat the skeleton exists independent of amagyat. On the Altaian coats described by Potanin, the doll is found side by side with the amagyat. Both Troshchanski and Sieroszewski describe amagyat as an indispensable ornament of every shaman's coat.

The coat possesses an impersonal power of itself. It is said to bear the names of ongor (Mongol) and tanara (Yakut) in addition to the classified names for the coat.

By assuming this coat the shaman receives supernatural power, which allows him to go to the upper- and under-worlds to meet spirits and deal with them. It is called 'shaman's horse' among the Yakut.

The coat as a whole is a tanara of the shaman, and each symbolic picture on the coat is also his tanara, i.e. protector.[1]

Another interpretation of the coat is given by Pripuzoff.[2] The picture of a perforated sun and a half-moon, he says, represents the dusk which reigns in the kingdom of the spirits. The strange animals, fishes, and birds which hang on the coat point to the monsters that are said to inhabit the spirit-land.

The iron chain hanging on the back signifies, according to some, the strength of the shaman's power, and according to others, the rudder which he uses in his journeys through the spirit country. The iron disks are there to defend the shaman from the blows of the hostile spirits.

Potanin[3], gives us an interesting description of the shaman's garment among the natives of Altai and north-western Siberia. According to him, it is in comparatively good preservation among the natives of Altai.

 Natives of Altai. The shaman's coat is made of goat or reindeer hide. All the outer side is covered with pendants of varying length in serpent form, and has pieces of many-coloured stuff stitched on to it. The pendants, which terminate in serpents' heads, hang freely. Bundles of reindeer leather straps are also attached here and there. The term manyak, is applied by the natives of Altai to the small pendants as well as to the coat as a whole.

There can further be found on the coat various symbolic figures and jingling pendants, such is iron triangles, a small bow and

[1. Troshchanski, p. 135.

2. p. 95.

3. Op. cit., iv. 49-54.]

arrow to frighten hostile spirits, &c. On the back and sometimes on the front of the coat there are sewed two copper disks. One kam (shaman) had four empty tobacco-bags hanging on his coat with imaginary tobacco inside, which he offers to the spirits whilst he is wandering in their country.

The collar is trimmed with owl's feathers. One kam had, according to Potanin, seven little dolls on his collar, which, Potanin was told, were heavenly maidens.

A few bells are sewed on here and there; the more prosperous shamans have -is many as nine. The ringing of the bells, a kam told Potanin, is the voice of the seven maidens whose symbols are sewed to the collar calling to the spirits to descend to them.

The cap [1] of the Altaian shaman is formed of a square piece of the hide of a reindeer calf. On one side there are two buttons and on the other two loops. On the top, bunches of feathers are sewed, and from the lower edge bangs a fringe made of string and shell-fish. This is placed on the head with the two sides buttoned to the back, thus forming a cylindrical cap on the shaman's head. If the hide is bard, the top of the cap with its feathers sticks up like a coronet.

Among some shamans of the Teleut, the cap is made of brown owl skin; the feathers remain as ornaments, and sometimes also the bird's head.

It is not all shamans who can wear the manyak and the owlskin cap. The spirits generally announce to the chosen man when he may wear them.

Among the Tartars of Chern the shaman wears a mask (kocho), with squirrels' tails for eyebrows and moustaches. Among the same people Yadrintzeff noticed the use of two crutches; one of them was a crook, the other was supposed to be a horse, similar to the horse-staves of the Buryat.

All the drums which Potanin saw among the natives of Altai and north-western Mongolia were round in shape.[2] Yadrintzeff says that the Tartars of Chern have oval drums resembling the egg-shaped drum of the east Siberians.

The Altai drum has a hoop as large as the palm of one's hand, covered on one side with bide. Inside the drum there is vertical wooden stick and a horizontal iron chord with rattles

[1. Op. cit., p. 52.

2. Op. cit., iv. 44, 679.]

attached. The drum is held by the wooden stick, and not at the intersection of the stick and the iron crossbar.

The wooden vertical stick is called bar by the natives of Altai. Among other north-western tribes it has various names. The bar has a man's head and feet at the two ends. The upper part is often carved, the eyes, the nose, the mouth, and the chin being cut with great exactness. The horizontal iron stay is called by the Altaians krish, and from it hang various iron rattles called kungru. The number of kungru varies according to the ability of the shaman. It is a guide to the quantity of chayu (Potanin translates this word 'spirits', but it seems rather to mean 'spiritual power) possessed by the shaman, since the more chayu the shaman possesses, the more kungru are found in his drum.

Under the chin of the figure on the wooden bar are fastened long strips of gaudy material called yauasua. Radloff[1] calls this yalama.

On the hide of the drum, sometimes on both sides, sometimes on the inner side only, circles and crosses and other lines are drawn with red dye.[2]

Some Altai drums have drawings of animals on them, lilce those on the drums of the North-American Indians.[3]

The drums of the Chern and Kumandinsk Tartars differ from those of the Altaians; instead of bar, krish, and jingling plates there are here representations of the two worlds, above and underground, separated by a horizontal line, which divides the drum into two parts, an upper and a lower.[4]

On the outer side of the drum of the Chern Tartars, pictures of animals and plants are found. On the upper and larger part an arch is drawn, with indications of sky, inside of which are two trees with a bird on each. To the left of the tree are two circles-the sun and the moon-light and darkness. Below the horizontal line are pictures of frogs, lizards, and snakes.[5] These drawings have a particular importance, since the symbols described show more than any others the shamanistic view of the natural and the supernatural.

There is unfortunately very little material of a reliable character, the studies of Potanin and Klementz being the most valuable. On the whole, it is safe to say that the drums of the natives of

[1. Aus Sibirien, ii. 18.

2 Potanin, iv. 40-9.

3. Jochelson The Koryak, i. 58-9.

4. Potanin, op. cit., iv. 680.

5. Op. cit., iv. 44-5.]

north-west Asia, especially in the southern parts, are adorned with representations of the upper and lower worlds divided by a horizontal line.[1]

The following interpretation of this same ornamentation is given by Klementz in his study of the drums peculiar to the neighbourhood of Minussinsk.[2] His information was given him by a kam of high standing.

Although by no means all drums are ornamented in the same way, yet in this account we may perceive certain traditional rules embodying the Altaian and Mongolian conception of the meaning of the drum and its decoration.

A. The lower part of the drum:

1. Bai-Kazyn (painted in white), 'a rich birch' -alluding to the birches round which annual sacrificial ceremonies are held.

2. Ulug-bai-kazyn (in white)-two trees growing in Ulukhan's country.

3 and 4. Ak-baga ('white frog') and Kara-baga ('black frog'), the servants of Ulu-khan.

5. Chshity-us, spirits associated with seven nests and seven feathers.

6. Chshity-kyz ('seven maids'); these bring seven diseases on man.

7. Ulugere, to whom prayers are offered for the curing of toothache and of earache.

8. Ot-imeze ('Mother of the fire').

B. The upper part of the drum:

1. Souban-ir. The kam translated this 'aurora' (whether with the meaning of dawn or the aurora borealis is impossible to decide from Potanin's description).

2. Ike-karagus, two black birds, flying as messengers from the shaman to the shaytans.

4. Aba-tyus (the bear's tooth).

5. Sugyznym-karagat. According to the kam, this means 'the horses of Ulu-khan'.

6. Kyzyl-kikh-kahn. to whom one prays when beginning any undertaking.

The other figures drawn in white paint are animals, which Kyzvl-kikh-khan is hunting.

[1. Mikhailowski, p. 68.

2. Types of Drums of the Minitssinsk Natives, E. S. S. I. R. G. S., p. 26.]

Many other authors also coniniont on this method of dividing the pictures on the Neo-Siberian drum. Wierbicki,[1] describing the tungur of the natives of Altai, says: 'On the outer side the hide is painted with red ochre; on the upper part are represented the sky, a rainbow, sun, moon, stars, horses, geese, the kam on a horse, and, on the lower part, the earth.'

According to Dr. Finsch's description [2] the drums of the Samoyed and of the Ob-Ostyak are, like the Altai drums, round in shape, broad-rimined, covered on one side only, and have a diameter of from 30 cm. to 50 cm.

The Ostyak drums described by Potanin [3] have the same division of the drum into lower and upper parts representing lower and tipper worlds, as among the Tartars of Chern.

 The Buryat. The Buryat shaman's costume was first described by Pallas.[4] It belonged to a female shaman, who was accompanied by her husband and two other Buryat, each of them holding a magical drum.[5] She herself held in her hand two sticks, ornamented at the top end with a carving of a horse's head surrounded by small bells. [This implement is called by recent travellers 'horse-staves'.] From the back of the shoulders reaching to the ground hung about thirty snakes, made of white and black skin, in such a way that the snakes seem to be composed of white and black rings. One of the snakes was divided into three at the end, and was accounted indispensable to each Buryat female shaman. The cap was covered with an iron casque having horns with three branches, projecting on both sides like those of a deer.

Gmelin[5], saw a costume of another old and revered female

[1. The Natives of the Altai, p. 45.

2. Finsch, Reise nach West-Sibirien, p. 550 (Berlin, 1879), quoted hy Jochelson, The Koryak. p. 59.

3. Op. cit., iv. 680.
 4. Reise durch verschiedene Provinzen des russichen Reiches, 1777, pp.102-3.

5. The more recent accounts deny the existence of the drum among the Buryat. Khangaloff saw it only once, and this was in the case of a young and inexperienced shaman. Klementz states that the drum is very seldom in use among the Buryat. Nevertheless he says: 'At great shaman ceremonies, in which a shaman and his nine sons take part (some of which the writer witnessed on the estuary of the river Selenga, among the Kuda, Buryat), one of the assistants holds in his hands a small tambourine, but neither the meaning of the tambourine nor the role of the assistant is quite clear.' Curiously enough, Pallas, writing in the eighteenth century, agrees with the contemporary witness in describing the assistants' use of the drum.

6. ii. 11-13.]

shaman near Selenginsk. Her costume was hanging in her yurta, but, according to her account, was not complete. Among other things he mentions a box, full of strips of cloth, small stones, thunderbolts, &c., which she used for magical purposes.[1] There was also a felt bag full of various felt idols.

In the exhaustive work of Agapitoff and Khangaloff there is a description of the old shaman costume among the Buryat-a costume of a kind which, however, is very rarely to be met with at present. According to them, the coat (orgoy), the cap, and the horse-staves (morini-khorbo are the chief appurtenances of a shaman.

1. The orgoy is of white material for the white shaman, and of blue for the black shaman. Its shape does not differ from that of the ordinary coat.'

Klementz[2]says that the old-fashioned orgoy was shorter than that of the present day.
 The front of the coat is covered with metal figures of horses, fishes, birds, &c. The back is covered with twisted iron representing snakes, -with rattles hanging from them (shamshorgo),[4] together with a whole row of little bells and tambourine bells.

On the chest above the thin plates used to hang little shining copper disks, and on the sleeves were also hung thin iron plates, in imitation of the bones of the shoulder and forearm. This gave Gmelin the ground for his assertion that two shamans who came to him from Nijine-Udinsk resembled chained devils.[5]

2. The cap, which is peaked, is made of lynx skin, with a bunch of ribbons on the top. After the fifth consecration the shaman can wear the iron cap; it is composed of a crown-like iron hoop with two half-hoops crossing each other, above which is an iron plate with two born-like projections.

In the place where the intersecting hoops are tied to the hoop round the head there are three groups of khoubokho,[6] or kholbogo, conical weights of iron. From the back of the hoop hangs an iron

[1. Agapitoff and Khangaloff (pp. 42-4) call an identical box shire.

2. Agapitoff and Khangaloff, p. 42.

3. E. R. E., p. 16.

4. Klementz uses the same native word shamshoryo for (i) the rattles attached to the snakes on the shaman's coat, and (ii) for the conical iron weights fixed to the upper part of the horse-staves, but he does not intimate whether this word has two meanings or not.

5. Klementz states that the orgoy is in some places now only put on after death, for burial.

6. Klementz calls them shamshorgo, E. R E., p. 16.]

chain composed of four links and ending in small objects resembling a spoon and an awl.[1]

Klementz [2] calls this cap the metal diadem, 'consisting of an iron ring with two convex arches, also of iron, crossing one another at right angles, and with a long jointed chain which hangs down from the nape of the neck to the heels-we know of them only from the descriptions of travellers and from specimens preserved in a few museums'.

3. The horse-staves (morini-khorbo) are to be met with among all the Buryat of Baikal, but among the Buryat of Balagan they are not used. Each Baikal shaman possesses two. They are made of wood or of iron; but the iron staff is only given to the shaman after the fifth consecration, when he also receives the iron cap. The wooden horse-staves are cut for the novice the day before his first consecration, from a birch-tree growing in the forest where the shamans are buried. The wood for the horse-staves must be cut in such a way that the tree shall not perish, otherwise it would be a bad omen for the shaman.

This implement is 80 cm. long; the upper part is bent and has a horse-head carved on it; the middle part of the stick forms the knee-joints of the horse, and the lower end is fashioned into a hoof.

Little bells, one of which is larger than the rest, are tied to the horse-staves. Likewise small conical weights of iron, khoubokho, or kholbogo, blue, white, yellow and red-coloured ribbons, and strips of ermine and squirrel fur. To make it look more realistic miniature stirrups are also attached.

The iron horse-staves are not very different from the wooden ones. They represent the horses on which the shaman rides to the upper and lower worlds.

According to Khangaloff, it is in the drum that the horse, on which the shaman makes his flight, is symbolized. Khangaloff, however, also speaks of the rarity of the drum among the Buryat. The only drum which he saw among them was of the form and size of a small sieve, and was covered with horse-hide fastened to the back with leather straps. He did not notice any pictures either on the outside or on the inside, but the outside surface, he says, was daubed with some white stuff.[3]

[1. Agapitoff and Khangaloff, op. cit., pp. 43-4.

2. E. R E., p. 16.

3. Agapitoff and Khangaloff, op. cit., pp. 42-4.]

Klenientz says that the drum, khese, is very little known among the Buryat, who substitute the horse-staves for it, and that the little bell is sometimes also called khese; nevertheless, among the Mongol Shamanists and the Mongolized Uriankhai, the drum is in use.[1]

The Buryat Buddhists use in their divine services either drums covered on both sides with hide, like those found among the North-American Indians, or those with hide on one side only. These drums are round, and have leather handles attached to the outer edge of the rim.[2]

Klementz mentions as the next accessory of the shaman the khur, a 'tuning-fork'('jews' liarp'?), with a wire tongue between the two side-pins, an implement largely in use among shamanists. It may be met with, he says, from the sources of the Amur to the Ural, and from the Arctic Ocean down to Tashkent. Here and there it is merely a musical instrurnent.[3]

On the shaman's boots there were formerly sewed iron plates, but these are no longer in use.
 The Olkhon Buryat, say Agapitoff and Khangaloff, have one other property, called shire. It is a box three and a half feet long and one foot deep, standing on four legs, each two feet high. On the box are hung ribbons, bells, strips of skin, and on one of the long sides different figures are carved or painted in red. Usually on the right side is represented the sun, and on the left, the moon. The sun is depicted as a wheel, and in the middle of the moon there is a human figure holding a tree in one hand. In the middle of the long side there are three images of secondary gods, one woman and two men, in whose honour wine is sprinkled several times a year. There are also war implements-bow and quiver and sword, and under each human figure there is a horse. The shire is used to bold horse-staves, drums, and other ritual implements. The shaman acquires the right of carrying the shire after the fifth consecration .[4] It is asserted, says Klementz,[5] that with every new consecration up to the ninth, the height and other dimensions of the shire increase.

Nil[6] mentions two things more: abagaldey, a monstrous mask of skin, wood, and metal, painted, and ornamented with a great

[1. E. R. E., iii. p. 16.

2. Jochellson, The Koryak, p. 59.

3. E. R. E., ibid.

4. Agavitoff and Khangaloff, pp. 43-4.

5. E. R. E., ibid.

5. Archbishop of Yaroslav (Buddhism in Siberia, 1858),]

beard; and toli, a metal looking-glass with representations of twelve animals on it; this is hung round the neck and worn on the breast; sometimes it is sewed on the shaman's coat.

Occasionally the Buryat shaman has also a whip with bells, but generally all these implements tend to disappear in modern times.

Two other ethical and linguistic groups, which, although they live only partly in Siberia, yet belong to the Neo-Siberians, are the Samoyed and the Finnic tribes, and a survey of their shaman accessories is of special interest in connexion with those of the Mongolic, Turkic, and Tungusic shamans.

The most important belonging of a tadibey (Samoyed shaman) is his penzer (drum), which he prepares according to a special set of rules. He must kill a male reindeer-calf with his own hands, and prepare the skin in such a way that no veins are left on it. In these preparations inka (i. e. a woman), being considered unclean, cannot assist.[1]

The drums, which are ornamented with metal disks and plates, and covered with transparent reindeer hide, are round in shape and of various sizes. The largest drum seen by Castren was nearly two feet in diameter and two and a half inches in height.[2]

According to Dr. Finsch's description, the drums of the Samoyed and of the Ob-Ostyak are like the Altai drums, round, broadrimmed, covered on one side only, and with a diameter of from 30 cm. to 50 cm.

The shaman's costume consists of a chamois-leather coat called samburzia, ornamented with red cloth. Eyes and face are covered with a piece of cloth, since the tadibey is supposed to penetrate into the spirit-world with his inner sight. Instead of a cap there are two bands round his head to keep the cloth over the face in position. An iron disk hangs on his breast.[3]

In certain places the tadibey uses a cap with a visor, and over the leather coat jingling trinkets and little bells and strips of cloth of various shades are hung. In this ornamentation the number seven plays an important role.[4]

Among the Lapps, the drum, kannus or kvobdas, which is now but an antiquarian curiosity, played a most important part.[5] It

[1. V. Islavin, The Samoyed, 1847, pp. 112-13.

2. Castren, Reiseerinnerugen aus den Jahren 1838-1844 (Petersburg, 1853), p. 192.

3. Op. cit., pp. 192-3.

4. Islavin, op. cit., p. 113.

5. Schefferus, Lappland (Konigsberg, 1675), p. 137, &c.]

was made of birch or pine wood, grown if possible in a sunny spot, since such a tree would be acceptable to the sun and the good spirits. There are two kinds of drum. One is composed of a wooden hoop, with two cross-pieces of wood inside covered with hide; the other is an egg-shaped flat box, hollowed out of the trunk of a tree, and also covered with bide. The most significant ornaments are the drawings in red. They represent good and bad spirits, the sun, the stars, various animals, lakes, forests, and men. The division between this world and the upper is clearly shown. Among many other symbolic figures there is also the image of a noyda (shaman). Each drum has its metal ring with small pendants and a drum-stick of reindeer horn.

The Lapps take great care of their drums, and when not in use they and the drum-sticks are wrapped in furs. No woman dares to touch the drum.

     
Shamanism in Siberia, by M.A. Czaplicka, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XI

 

THE SHAMAN IN ACTION

SINCE the performances of shamans as professionals called in to treat diseases, to answer inquiries, for soothsaying and other similar purposes, are very much the same among the different tribes of Palaeo-Siberians, we shall confine ourselves to giving a few typical examples of these performances. The same procedure will be followed with regard to the Neo-Siberians.

 

Palaeo-Siberians.

 The Koryak. Professional shamanism among the Koryak is at a most primitive stage of development, yet at the same time, thanks to the influence of European culture, it is also decadent.

Jochelson speaks[1] of the shamanistic performances which he saw as follows: 'During the entire period of my sojourn among the Koryak I had opportunity to see only two shamans. Both were young men, and neither enjoyed special respect on the part of his relatives. Both were poor men who worked as labourers for the rich members of their tribe. One of them was a Maritime Koryak from Alutor. He used to come to the village of Kamenskoye in company with a Koryak trader. He was a bashful youth, his features, though somewhat wild, were flexible and pleasant, and his eyes were bright. I asked him to show me proof of his shamanistic art. Unlike other shamans, he consented without waiting to be coaxed. The people put out the oil-lamps in the underground house in which he stopped with his master. Only a few coals were glowing on the hearth, and it was almost dark in the house. On the large platform which is put up in the front part of the house as the seat and sleeping-place for visitors, and not far from where my wife and I were sitting, we could discern the shaman in an ordinary shaggy shirt of reindeer skin, squatting on the reindeer skins that covered the platform. His face was covered with a large oval drum.

[1. Jochelson, The Koryak p. 49.]

'Suddenly he commenced to beat the drum softly and to sing in a plaintive voice; then the beating of the drum grow stronger and stronger; and his song-in which could be heard sounds imitating the howling of the wolf, the groaning of the cargoose, and the voices of other animals, his guardian spirits-appeared to come, sometimes from the corner nearest to my seat, then from the opposite end, then again from the middle of the house, and then it seemed to proceed from the ceiling. He was a ventriloquist. Shamans versed in this art are believed to possess particular power. His drum also seemed to sound, now over my head, now at my feet, now behind, now in front of me. I could see nothing; but it seemed to me that the shaman was moving around, noiselessly stepping upon the platform with his fur shoes, then retiring to some distance, then coming nearer, lightly jumping, and then squatting down on his heels.

'All of a sudden the sound of the drum and the singing ceased. When the women had relighted their lamps, he was lying, completely exhausted, on a white reindeer skin on which he had been sitting before the shamanistic performance. The concluding words of the shaman, which he pronounced in a recitative, were uttered as though spoken by the spirit whom he had summoned lip, and who declared that the "disease" had left the village, and would not return.'

The other shamanistic ceremony was performed by a shaman at Jochelson's request for the purpose of divining whether he would reach home safely.

During this ceremony[1] the shaman suddenly asked Jochelson for his knife, saying, 'The spirits say that I should cut myself with a knife. You will not be afraid?[2]

Jochelson gave him, not without some scruples, his travelling knife, which was sharp and looked like a dagger. 'The light in the tent was put out; but the dim light of the Arctic spring night
 (it was in April), which penetrated the canvas of the tent, was sufficient to allow me to follow the movements of the shaman. He took the knife, beat the drum, and sang, telling the spirits
 that he was ready to carry out their wishes. After a little -while he put away the drum, and, emitting a rattling sound from his threat, he thrust the knife into his breast up to the hilt. I noticed, however, that after having cut his jacket, he turned the

[1. Op. cit., p. 51.

2, Ibid.]

knife downwards. He drew out the knife with the same rattling in his throat, and resumed beating the drum.'[1]

Then he said to Jochelson that he would have a good journey, and, returning the knife to him, showed through the hole in his coat the blood on his body. 'Of course, these spots had been made before', says Jochelson.[2] 'However, this cannot be looked upon as mere deception. Things visible and imaginary are confounded to such an extent in primitive consciousness that the shaman himself may have thought that there was, invisible to others, a real gash in his body, as bad been demanded by the spirits. The common Koryak, however, are sure that the shaman actually cuts himself, and that the wound heals up immediately.'

 The Chukchee. Among the Chukchee, says Bogors,[3] a typical shamanistic performance is carried on in the inner room of the house, when it is closed for the night. This room, especially among the Reindeer Chukchee, is very small. Sometimes the performance here described is preceded by another, held in the outer room, in daylight, and usually connected with a communal ceremonial.

When the drum is tightened and moistened, and the light is put out, the shaman, who is often quite naked down to the waist, begins to operate.

In modern times Chukchee shamans imitate the Tungus shamans in smoking a pipe filled with strong narcotic tobacco.

The shaman beats the drum and sings tunes; at first slowly, then more rapidly. His songs have no words, and there is no order in their succession. Though the audience take no actual part in the ceremony, they are in fact of some assistance, as forming a very primitive 'chorus'. Their frequent exclamations encourage the shaman's actions.

Without an ocitkolin ('to give answering calls,' participle) a Chukchee shaman considers himself unable to perform his office fittingly; novices, therefore, while trying to learn the shamanistic practices, usually induce a brother or a sister to respond, thus encouraging the zeal of the performer.[4]

'Among the Asiatic Eskimo, the wife and other members of the family form a kind of chorus, which from time to time catches up the tune and sings with the shaman. Among the Russianized Yukaghir of the lower Kolyma, the wife is also the assistant of

[1. Op. cit., p. 52.

2. Ibid.

3. The Chukchee, p. 433.

4. Op. cit., p. 434.]

her shaman husband, and during the performance she gives him encouraging answers, and he addresses her as his "supporting staff".'[1]

When the kelet come to the shaman, he acts in a different way, according to whether he has or has not a ventriloquistic gift.

If the shaman is only 'single-bodied', the kelet will sing and beat the drum through his body, the sound only of the shaman's voice being changed. When he is a ventriloquist, the kelet appear
 as separate voices'.

Bogoras says that shamans could, with credit to themselves, carry on a contest with the best practitioners of similar arts in civilized countries. The voices are successful imitations of different sounds: human, superhuman, animal, even of tempests and winds, or of an echo, and come from all sides of the room; from without, from above, and from underground. The whole of Nature may sometimes be represented in the small inner room of the Chukchee.

Then the spirit either begins to talk or departs with a sound like the buzzing of a fly. While it stays, it beats the drum violently, speaking in its own language, if it happens to be any animal except the wolf, fox, and raven, which can speak in the language of men; but there is a peculiar timbre in their voices.

Usually it is not only one spirit which appears, and this part of the performance might be called a dialogue. Sometimes the shaman does not himself understand the language he is using, and an interpreter is necessary. There are cases when spirit-language, comprising a mixture of Koryak, Yakut, and Yukaghir, has to be translated into Russian for the Russianized shamans and natives, especially those of the Kolyma district.

Jochelson tells of a Tungus shaman nicknamed Mashka, whose 'spirits', being of Koryak origin, spoke through him in that language: 'I asked him several times to dictate to me what his spirits were saying, and he would invaribly reply that he did not remember, that he forgot everything after the seance was over, and that, besides, he did not understand the language of his spirits. At first I thought that be was deceiving me; but I had several opportunities of convincing myself that he really did not understand any Koryak. Evidently he had learned by heart Koryak incantations which he could pronounce only in a state of excitement., [2]

[1. Op. cit., p. 435.

2. Jochelson, The Koryak, p. 52.]

There is no regular shamanist language among the Chukchee, merely a few special expressions.
 'Among the north-western branch of the Koryak, the " spirits are said to use a special mode of pronunciation, similar to that used by the south-eastern Koryak and the Chukchee. A few words are also said to be peculiar to them. Among the Asiatic Eskimo the " spirits " are said to have a special language. Many words of it were given me by the shamans, and most of them are analogous to the "spirit" language known to various Eskimo tribes of America, both in Alaska and on the Atlantic side.'[1]

Sometimes the spirits are very mischievous. In the movable tents of the Reindeer people an invisible hand will sometimes turn everything upside down, and throw different objects about, such as snow, pieces of ice, &c.

'I must mention', says Bogoras,[2] 'that the audience is strictly forbidden to make any attempts whatever to touch the "spirits". These latter highly resent any intrusion of this kind, and retaliate either on the shaman, whom they may kill on the spot, or on the trespassing listener, who runs the risk of having his head broken, or even a knife thrust through his ribs in the dark. I received warnings of this kind at almost every shamanistic performance.'

After the preliminary intercourse with the 'spirits', the shaman, still in the dark, gives advice and utters prophecies. For example, at one ceremony, where Bogoras was present, the shaman Galmuurgin prophesied to his host that many wild reindeer would be at his gate the following autumn. 'One buck', he said, 'will stop on the right side of the entrance, and pluck at the grass, attracted by a certain doe of dark-grey hair. This attraction must be strengthened with a special incantation. The reindeer-buck, while standing there, must be killed with the bow, and the arrow to be used must have a flat rhomboid point. This will secure the successful killing of all the other wild reindeer.' [3]

After his introductory interview with the spirits, the shaman sometimes 'sinks'; he falls to the ground unconscious, while his soul is wandering in the other worlds, talking with the 'spirits' and asking them for advice. The modern shamans actually 'sink' very seldom, but they know that it was done in the old days.

When shamanistic performances are connected with ceremonials, they are carried on in the outer room. Ventriloquism is not

[1. Bogoras, The Chukchee, p. 438.

2. Op. cit., p. 439.

3. Op. cit., p. 440.]

practised on these occasions, and the kele 'is bent on mischief, and among other things, seeks to destroy the life which is under his temporary power." Many tricks are performed by shamans even in daylight.

Upune, the wife of a dead Chukchee shaman, possessed wonderful shamanistic power; she herself declared that she had only a small part of her husband's ability. In a shamanistic performance 'she took a large round pebble of the size of a man's fist, set it upon the drum, and, blowing upon it from all sides, began to mumble and snort in the same kele-like manner. She called our attention by signs-being in the possession of the kele, she had lost the faculty of human speech-and then began to wring the pebble with both hands. Then a continuous row of very small pebbles began to fall from her hands. This lasted for fully five minutes, till quite a heap of small pebbles had collected below, on the skin. The larger pebble, however, remained smooth and intact."

At the request of Bogoras the female shaman repeated this feat with the same success, and all the upper part of the body being naked, it was easy to observe her movements. The practice of stabbing oneself through the abdomen with a knife is universal in shamanistic performances; Kamchadal and Eskimo, Chukchee and Yukaghir, even the Neo-Siberian shamans of northern Asia, are familiar with this trick.

It would be difficult to describe all the tricks performed by the shamans: some of the commonest are the swallowing of burning coals,[3] setting oneself free from a cord by which one is bound, &c.

 

Neo-Siberians.

 The Yakut. For comparison with the Palaeo-Siberian methods of shamanizing, we shall take a Yakut shaman in action, as described by Sieroszwski.[4] 'Outwardly, shamanistic ceremonies are very uniform,' says Sieroszewski. The ceremony now described 'is the part of the shamanistic ceremony which remains always and everywhere unchanged, and, sanctioned by custom, forms, so to speak, the basis of the rite.'

When the shaman who has been called to a sick person enters the yurta, he at once takes the place destined for him on the

[1.Op. cit., p. 442.

2. Op. cit., p. 444.

3. Satrytcheff, The Voyage of Capt. Sarytcheff's Fleet along the N.E. Coast of Siberia, through The Polar Sea and the Pacific, p. 30.

4. Sieroszewski, 12 Lat w Kraju Yakutow, 1902, p. 639.]

 billiryk agon. He lies on his white mare's skin and waits for the night, the time when it is possible to shamanize. Meanwhile he is entertained with food and drink.

'When the sun sets and the dusk of evening approaches, all preparations for the ceremony in the yurta are hurriedly completed: the ground is swept, the wood is cut, and food is provided in larger quantity and of better quality than usual. One by one the neighbours arrive and seat themselves along the wall, the men on the right, and the women on the left; the conversation is peculiarly serious and reserved,, the movements gentle.

'In the northern part of the Yakut district the host chooses the best latchets and forms them into a loop, which is placed round the shaman's shoulders and bold by one of those present during the dance, in order to prevent the spirits from carrying him off. At length every one has supper, and the household takes some rest. The shaman, sitting on the edge of the billiryk, slowly untwists his tresses, muttering and giving orders. He sometimes has a nervous and artificial hiccough which makes his whole body shake; his gaze does not wander, his eyes being fixed on one point, usually on the fire.

'The fire is allowed to die out. More and more deeply the dusk descends on the room; voices are hushed, and the company talks in whispers; notice is given that anybody -wishing to go out must do so at once, because soon the door will be closed, after which nobody can either go out or come in.

'The shaman slowly takes off his shirt and puts on his wizard's coat, or, failing that, he takes the woman's coat called sangyniah.[1] Then he is given a pipe, which he smokes for a long time, swallowing the smoke; his hiccough becomes louder, he shivers more violently. When he - has finished smoking, his face is pale, his head falls on his breast, his eyes are half-closed.

'At this point the white mare's skin is placed in the middle of the room. The shaman asks for cold water, and when he has drunk it he slowly holds out his hand for the drum prepared for him; he then walks to the middle of the room, and, kneeling for a time on his right knee, bows solemnly to all the four corners of the world, at the same time sprinkling the ground about him with the water from his mouth.

[1. Gmelin speaks of special embroidered stockings which the shaman, dons in the yurta. (Reise durch Sibirien, pp. 351-6.)]

'Now everything is silent. A handful of white horsehair is thrown on the fire, putting it quite out; in the faint gleam of the red coals the black motionless figure of the shaman is still to be seen for a while, with drooping bead, big drum on breast, and face turned towards the south, as is also the head of the mare's skin upon which he is sitting.

Complete darkness follows the dusk; the audience scarcely breathes, and only the unintelligible mutterings and hiccoughs of the shaman can be heard; gradually even this sinks into a profound silence. Eventually a single great yawn like the clang of iron breaks the stillness, followed by the loud piercing cry of a falcon, or the plaintive weeping of a seamew-then silence again.

'Only the gentle sound of the voice of the drum, like the humming of a gnat, announces that the shaman has begun to play.

'This music is at first soft. delicate, tender, then rough and irrepressible like the roar of an oncoming storm. It grows louder and louder and, like peals of thunder, wild shouts rend the air; the crow calls, the grebe laughs, the seamews complain, snipes whistle, eagles and hawks scream.'

'The [1] music swells and rises to the highest pitch, the beating of the drum becomes more and more vigorous, until the two sounds combine in one long-drawn crescendo. The numberless small bells ring and clang; it is not a storm-it is a whole cascade of sounds, enough to overwhelm all the listeners.... All at once it breaks off-there are one or two strong beats on the drum, which, hitherto held aloft, now falls to the shaman's knees. Suddenly the sound of the drum and the small bells ceases. Then silence for a long moment, while the gentle gnat-like murmur of the drum begins again.'

[1. Sieroszewski, op. cit., p. 641.]

This may be repeated several times, according to the degree of the shaman's inspiration; at last, when the music takes on a certain new rhythm and melody, sombrely the voice of the shaman chants the following obscure fragments:

1. 'Mighty bull of the earth . . . Horse of the steppes!'
 2. 'I, the mighty bull . . . bellow!'
 3. 'I, the horse of the steppes . . . neigh!'
 4. 'I, the man set above all other beings!'
 5. 'I, the man most gifted of all!'
 6. 'I, the man created by the master all-powerful!
 7. 'Horse of the steppes, appear! teach me!'
 8. 'Enchanted bull of the earth, appear! speak to me!'
 9. 'Powerful master, command me!'
 10. 'All of you, who will go with me, give heed with your ears! Those whom I command not. follow me not!'
 11. 'Approach not nearer than is permitted! Look intently! Give heed ! Have a care!'
 12. 'Look heedfully! Do this, all of you . all together . . . all, however many you may be!'
 13. 'Thou of the left side, O lady with thy staff, if anything be done amiss, if I take not the right way, I entreat you - correct me! Command! . . .'
 14. 'My errors and my path show to me! O mother of mine! Wing thy free flight! Pave my wide roadway!'
 15. 'Souls of the sun, mothers of the sun, living in the south, in the nine wooded hills, ye who shall be jealous . . . I adjure you all . . . let them stay . . . let your three shadows stand high!'
 16. 'In the East, on your mountain, lord, grandsire of mine. great of power and thick of neck-be thou with me!'
 17. 'And thou, grey-bearded wizard (fire), I ask thee: with all my dreams, 'with all comply! To all my desires consent . . . Heed all! Fulfil all! . . . All heed . . . All fulfil!'[1]

At this point the sounds of the drum are heard once more, once more wild shouts and meaningless words-then all is silent.

Adjurations similar to the above are used in all the Yakut districts and all ceremonies begin with them. There is, however, another formula still longer and more complicated, which Sieroszewski says he could not procure. The ritual which follows this formula consists of an improvisation appropriate to each person and occasion.

In the ensuing prayers the shaman addresses his amagyat and other protective 'spirits'; be talks with the kaliany, asks them questions, and gives answers in their names. Sometimes the shaman must pray and beat the drum a long time before the spirits come; often their appearance is so sudden and so impetuous that the shaman is overcome and falls down. It is a good sign if he falls on his face, and a bad sign if he falls on his back.

'When the amagyat comes down to a shaman, he arises and

[1. Sieroszewski, op. cit., pp. 641-2.]

begins to leap and dance, at first on the skin, and then, his movements becoming more rapid, he glides into the middle of the room. Wood is quickly piled on the fire, and the light spreads through the yurta, which is now full of noise and movement. The shaman dances, sings, and beats the drum uninterruptedly, jumps about furiously, turning his face to the south, then to the -west, then to the east. Those who hold him by the leather thongs sometimes have great difficulty in controlling his movements. In the south Yakut district, however, the shaman dances unfettered. Indeed, he often gives up his drum so as to be able to dance more unrestrainedly.

'The head of the shaman is bowed, his eyes are half-closed his hair is tumbled and in wild disorder lies on his sweating face, his mouth is twisted strangely, saliva streams down his chin, often he foamgs at the mouth.

'He moves round the room, advancing and retreating, beating the drum, which resounds no less wildly than the roaring of the shaman himself; he shakes his jingling coat, and seems to become more and more maniacal, intoxicated with the noise and movement.

'His fury ebbs and rises like a wave; sometimes it leaves him for a while, and then, holding his drum high above his head, solemnly and calmly he chants a prayer and summons the "spirit".

'At last he knows all he desires; be is acquainted with the cause of the misfortune or disease with which be has been striving; he is sure of the help of the beings whose aid he needs. Circling about in his dance, singing and playing, be approaches the patient.

'With new objurgations be drives away the cause of the illness by frightening it, or by sucking it out with his mouth from the painful place: then, returning to the middle of the room, he drives it away by spitting and blowing. Then he learns what sacrifice is to be made to the "powerful spirits", for this harsh treatment of the spirit's servant, who was sent to the patient.

'Then the shaman, shading his eyes from the light with his hands, looks attentively into each corner of the room; and if he notices anything suspicious, he again beats the drum, dances, wakes terrifying gestures, and entreats the " spirits ".

'At length all is made clean, the suspicious "cloud" is no more to be seen, which signifies that the cause of the trouble has been driven out; the sacrifice is accepted, the prayers have been heard-the ceremony is over.

'The shaman still retains for some time after this the gift of prophecy; he foretells various happenings, answers the questions of the curious, or relates what he saw on his journey away from the earth.

'Finally he is carried with his mare's skin back to his place of honour on the billiryk'.[1]

The sacrifice offered to the 'spirits' varies according to the importance of the occasion. Sometimes the disease is transferred to the cattle, and the stricken cattle are then sacrificed, i. e. ascend to the sky.[2] It is this journey to the sky, together with the spirits and the sacrificed animal, which the dance symbolizes. In the old days (according to the native accounts) there were, in fact, shamans who really did ascend into the sky while the spectators saw how 'on the clouds there floated the sacrificed animal, after it sped the drum of the shaman, and this was followed by the shaman himself in his wizard's coat'.[3]

There were also wicked and powerful shamans who, instead of a real animal, carried up into the sky a mare formed of cloud, but the evidence for the existence of these shamans is indefinite.
 During this difficult and dangerous journey every shaman has his places of rest, called ouokh (olokh); when he takes a seat during the dance, this signifies that he has come to an ouokh;[4] when he rises, he is ascending further tip into the sky; if he falls down, he is descending under the earth.

Every shaman, however far be may have proceeded on his journey, knows where he is, on which ouoloh, and also the route taken by every other shaman who is shamanizing at that moment.
 Sometimes the leading of the ' spirit' and the sacrificed cattle into the sky forms a separate ceremony performed a few months after the first, in which they had promised this sacrifice. The sacrifices are either bloody, when the shaman tears to pieces the

[1. Sieroszewski, op. cit., p. 644.

2. Troshchanski says (p. 105): 'Instead of the human kut which the abassy had captured, he receives an animal kut. Usually, between the spirit who took away the kut of the man and the representative of the latter, there takes place (through the shaman) a keen bargaining, in which the spirit gives up some of its demands.'

3. Sieroszewski, op. cit., p. 645.

4. These ouokh occur in a series of nine, in conformity with the usual arrangement of objects in nines which characterizes the whole religious and social system of the Yakut. (Sieroszewski, op. cit., p. 472.)]

body of the animal with rage and fury, or bloodless; e. g. when some grease or meat, or other material, such as hair, &c., is offered up.

 The Samoyed. The shamanistic ceremonial among the Samoyed of the Tomsk Government has been described by Castren,[1] from whose account we take the following picture.

On arriving at the yurta the shaman takes his seat on a bench, or on a chest which must contain no implement capable of inflicting a wound. Near him, but not in front, the occupants of the yurta group themselves. The shaman faces the door, and pretends to be unconscious of all sights and sounds. In his right band he holds a short staff which is inscribed on one side with mystic symbols; and in his left, two arrows with the points held upwards. To each point is affixed a small bell. His dress has nothing distinctive of a shaman; he usually wears the coat either of the inquirer or of the sick person. The performance begins with a song summoning the spirits. Then the shaman strikes the arrows with his staff, so that the bells chime in a regular rhythm, while all the spectators sit in awed silence. When the spirits appear, the shaman rises and commences to dance. The dance is followed by a series of complicated and difficult body-movements. While all this is going on the rhythmical chiming of the bells never ceases. His song consists of a sort of dialogue with the spirits, and is sung with changes of intonation denoting different degrees of excitement or enthusiasm. When his enthusiasm rises to a high pitch, those present join in the singing. After the shaman has learnt all he wishes from the spirits, the latter communicate the will of the god to the people. If he is to foretell the future, he employs his staff. He throws it on the ground, and if it falls with the side inscribed with mystical signs turned upward, this is a good omen; if the blank side shows, ill-fortune may be looked for.

To prove his trustworthiness to those present, the shaman uses the following means. He sits on a reindeer skin, and his hands and feet are bound, The room is completely darkened. Then, as if in answer to his call to the spirits, various noises are heard both Within and without the yurta: the beating of a drum, the grunting of a bear, the hissing of a serpent, the squeak of a squirrel, and mysterious scratchings on the reindeer-skin where he sits. Then

[1. Castren, Reiseberichte und Briefe, 1845-9. pp. 172-4.]

the shaman's bonds are untied, he is set free, and every one is convinced that what they heard was the work of the spirits.

 The Altaians. The kams (shamans) of the Turkic tribes of the Altai have preserved with great strictness the ancient shamanistic ceremonial forms. Potanin[1] gives a curious description of the performance of a young shaman, Enchu, who lived by the River Talda, about six versts from Anguday. Four stages, each marked by a different posture of the shaman, characterized his performance: in the first, he was sitting and facing the fire; second, standing, with his back to the fire; third, a sort of interlude, during which the shaman rested from his labour, supporting himself with his elbow on the drum, which he balanced on its rim, while he related what he had learned in his intercourse with the spirits; and fourth, a final shamanizing, with his back to the fire, and facing the place where the drum usually hangs. Enchu declared afterwards that he had no recollection of what happened while he was shamanizing with his back turned to the fire. While he was in that position he had been whirling about madly in circles on one spot, and without any considerable movement of his feet; crouching down on his haunches, and rising again to a standing posture, without interrupting the rotating movement. As he alternately bent and straightened his body from the hips, backwards and forwards and from side to side, with lively movements or jerks, the manyak (metal pendants) fastened to his coat danced and dangled furiously in ill directions, describing shining circles in the air. At the same time the shaman kept beating his drum, holding it in various positions so that it gave out different sounds. From time to time Enchu held the drum high above his head in a horizontal position and beat upon it from below. The natives of Anguday explained to Potanin that when the shaman held the drum in that way, he was collecting spirits in it. At times he would talk and laugh with some one apparently near by, but invisible to others, showing in this manner that he was in the company of spirits. At one time Enchu fell to singing more, quietly and evenly, simultaneously imitating on his drum the hoof-beats of a horse. This was to indicate that the shaman, with his accompanying spirits, was departing to the underworld of Erlik, the god of darkness.

Mr. Potanin gives a description of this voyage which he heard from a Russian missionary, Mr. Chivalkoff.

[1. Potanin, Sketches of N. W. Mongolia, vol. iv, pp. 60-2.]

The kam directs his way towards the south. The has to cross the Altai Mountains and the red sands of the Chinese deserts. Then he crosses a yellow steppe, such as no magpie can traverse. ''Singing, we shall cross it', says the kam in his Song. After the yellow steppe there is a 'pale' one, such as no crow can pass over, and the kam in his imaginary passage once more sings a song full of hopeful courage. Then comes the iron mountain of Tamir Shayha, which 'leans against the sky'. Now the kam exhorts his train to be all of one mind, that they may pass this barrier by the united force of their will. He describes the difficulty of surmounting the passes and, in doing so, breathes heavily. On the top he finds the bones of many kams who have fallen here and died through failure of power. Again he sings songs of hope, declares he will leap over the mountain, and suits the action to the word. At last he comes towards the opening which leads to the underworld. Here he finds a sea, bridged only by a hair. To show the difficulty of crossing this bridge, the kam totters, almost falls, and with difficulty recovers himself. In the depths of the sea he beholds the bodies of many sinful kams who have perished there, for only those who are blameless can cross this bridge. On the other side he meets sinners who are receiving punishment suited to their faults; e.g. an eavesdropper is pinned by his ear to a stake. On reaching the dwelling-place of Erlik, he is confronted by dogs, who will not let him pass, but at last, being appeased by gifts, they grow milder. Before the beginning of the shamanistic ceremony gifts have been prepared for this emergency. Having successfully passed these warders, the kam, as if approaching the Yarta of Erlik and coming into his presence, bows, brings his drum up to his forehead, and says, 'Mergu! mergu!' Then he declares whence and why he comes. Suddenly he shouts; this is meant to indicate that Erlik is angry that a mortal should dare to enter his yurta. The frightened kam leaps backward towards the door, but gathers fresh courage and again approaches Erlik's throne. After this performance has been gone through three times, Erlik speaks: 'Winged creatures cannot fly hither, beings with bones cannot come: how have you, ill-smelling blackbeetle, made your way to my abode?'

Then the kam stoops and with his drum makes certain movements if dipping up wine. He presents the wine to Erlik; and makes a shuddering movement like that of one who drinks strong wine, to indicate, that Erlik has drunk. When he perceives that Erlik's humour is somewhat milder tinder the influence of his draught he makes him offerings of gifts. The great spirit (Erlik) is moved by the offerings of the kam, and promises increase of cattle, declares which mare will foal, and even specifies what marking the young one will have. The kam returns in high spirits, not on his horse as he went, but on a goose--a change of steeds which he indicates by moving about the yurta on tiptoe, to represent flying.

     
Shamanism in Siberia, by M.A. Czaplicka, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XII

 

SHAMANISM AND SEX.

IN this chapter I propose to deal not only with the male and female shamans and their relation to each other, but also with it curious phenomenon-the mystical change of sex among shamans, by which a male shaman is 'transformed' into a female, and vice versa.

Nearly all writers on Siberia agree that the position of the female shaman in modern days is sometimes even more important than that occupied by the male.

Krasheninnikoff ascribes the shamanistic gift among the Kamchadal almost exclusively to women; Steller, who travelled through Kamchatka after him, states, however, that there were also men-shamans among the Yukaghir, Koryak, and Chukchee. Bogoras, Jochelson, and others saw as many notable women shamans as men. Tretyakoff (op. cit., p. 213) affirms the existence of women-shamans side by side with men-shamans among the Samoyed of Turukhan, and the same, according to Bielayewski,[1] is true of the Ostyak. Among the Tungus of Baikal [2] the woman can be a shaman as well as the man; and Gmelin [3] met among them a woman eighteen years of age who was held superior to any man-shaman. Among the Yakut and Buryat there are shamans of both sexes.[4] Solovieff [5] thinks that among the Yakut the female shamans are considered less important than the male, and the people ask their help only when there is no man-shaman in the neighbourhood. The shamanesses, according to him, are especially good in foretelling the future, looking for things that are lost, and curing mental diseases,

Among the Palaeo-Siberians, women receive the gift of shamanizing more often than men. The woman is by nature a shaman,'

[1. A Journey to the Glacial Sea, p. 114.

2. Siberian News, 1822, pp. 19-39.

3. ii. 82-4.

4. Sieroszewski; Potanin.

5. Remains of Paganism among the Yakut, 'Siberia' (Annual), i. 414.]

declared a Chukchee shaman to Bogoras. She does not need to be specially prepared for the calling and so her novitiate is much shorter and less trying. Ventrioloquism, however, is not practised among female shamans.

Taking into account the present prominent position of female shamans among many Siberian tribes and their place in traditions,' together with certain feminine attributes of the male shaman (such as dress, habits, privileges) and certain linguistic similarities between the names for male and female shamans,[2] many scientists (Troshchanski, Bogoras, Stadling) have been led to express the opinion that in former days, only female shamans existed, and that the male. shaman is a later development which has to some extent supplanted them.

Concerning the supposed evolution of the shaman from female to male There is no certain knowledge; one can only surmise. The different views of the origin of shamanism naturally affect the theory that shamans were originally female.

[1. Among several tribes traditions exist that the shaman's gift was first bestowed on woman. In Mongolian myths goddesses were both shamans themselves-like the Daughter of the Moon-and the bestowers of the shamanistic gift on mankind.

2. Neo-Siberians nearly all have a common name for the -woman-shaman, while each of these tribes has a special name for the man-shaman. The Yakut call him ayun; the Mongols, buge; the Buryat, buge and bo; the Tungus, samman and khamman; the Tartars, kam; the Altaians, kam and gam; the Kirgis, baksy; the Samoyed, tadibey. The Yakut, it is curious to note, though they have the word khamma, nevertheless do not call the shaman by a name similar to that in use among other Neo-Siberians, but give him a special appellation. This, according to Troshchanski (p. 118), may be explained by the fact that when the Yakut appeared in the present Yakut district they did not possess a man-shaman, but they had already a woman-shaman, for whom all these tribes have a name in common. Among Mongols, Buryat , Yakut, Altaians, Turgout, and Kirgis, the following names for the woman-shaman occur, utagan, udagan, ubakan, utygan, utugun, iduan, duana. All these words come from a root the meaning of which has not been certainly determined. In some Tartaric dialects udege, 'female shaman', means also 'housewife' and 'wife'. In Tungus, utakan means 'sorcerer' and 'cannibal'; but utagan seems to be a Mongol word in origin According to Potanin and Banzaroff, the term in question is etymologically connected with the Mongol word Etugen, hearth-goddess' (Etugen-eke 'mother-earth'). Potanin further connects the word for Earth-Goddess among different Altaic and Finno-Ugric tribes with the names of constellations, especially with the two bear constellations. In one Tartaric dialect utygan means 'bear'. According to ancient Mongol and Chineses myths, the gods of certain constellations are connected with the. protective spirits or the family hearth, just as they are connected with the goddess of the earth. Thus these terms for female shamans are related to the genesis of certain goddesses.]

Jochelson [1] expresses the opinion that there is no doubt that professional shamanism has developed from the ceremonials of family shamanism. The same author [2] also states that in family shamanism among the Koryak some women possess a knowledge not only of those incantations which are a family secret, but of many others besides, of which they make use outside the family circle on request. From this we can see very clearly how family shamanism among the Koryak has developed into professional shamanism.

Some one with unusual gifts, often a woman, is requested to use them on behalf of a larger circle outside the family, and thus becomes a professional shaman. This is especially true of the Koryak. There is, however, no evidence that among them the woman-shaman preceded the man. In the old days, as at the present time, the women-shamans were considered as powerful as the men, sometimes, indeed, an individual female shaman is even cleverer than a man. The 'transformed' shamans are considered very powerful also, though they exist merely in Koryak traditions. But since the change of sex is 'in obedience to the commands of Spirits',[3] it seems to belong to another category of facts and to have no connexion with the theory of an originally universal feminine shamanism.

Among the Chukchee [4] family shamanism, being quite simple and primitive, probably preceded individual shamanism, and the latter seems to have grown out of the former. The mother shares with the father the role of shaman in the family ceremonials; she has charge of the drum and amulets, and in exceptional cases it is she, and not the father, who performs the family sacrifice. Thus shamanism is not restricted to either sex, but 'the gift of inspiration is thought to be bestowed more frequently upon women, though it is reputed to be of a rather inferior kind, the higher grades belonging rather to men. The reason given for this is that the bearing of children is generally adverse to shamanistic inspirations, so that a young woman with considerable shamanistic power may lose the greater part of it after the birth of her first child.'[5]

The above statenients of the two best authorities on the Koryak and the Chukchee make it clear that among these people there are visible traces that fainily shamanism preceded the individual,

[1. The Koryak, i. 78. 

2. Op. cit., p. 47. 

3. Op. cit., p. 52.

4. Bogoras, The Chukchee, ii. 410.

5. Op. cit., p. 415.]

or professional, kind; and although woman plays an important role in both, there is no sufficient reason to suppose that in former times she alone could shamanize. Of course, the adherents to the theory of universal mother-right would try to see in this case a proof of the former higher position of woman in society, her moral supremacy, &c. As far as our materials go, we do not see evidence either of a superior position in the social structure or of the moral supremacy of women in these societies, but only of the superiority of individuals of either sex.

A similar state of things may be observed among other Palaeo-Siberians and Neo-Siberians, although among the latter a woman shaman is not very often met with.

In spite of the low social position of women among these natives, it is personal ability, irrespective of sex, which is the decisive factor in the case of the shamanistic vocation.

As proof that women were the original shamans, certain authors adduce the fact that the professional shaman does not possess his own drum. But neither is this the case with women or men-shamans among those peoples where professional shamanism is not yet clearly differentiated from family shamanism. As regards the female dress and habits of the shaman, I shall have opportunity to discuss this point when dealing with tribes whose shaman's garment is more elaborate, i.e. the Neo-Siberians.

Troshchanski [1] and, following him, Stadling [2] believe professional shamanism to be a special institution which has no direct connexion with the communal cult, though in the latter there are also shamanistic elements. In the later stages of its development the office of shaman is connected in certain cases with the communal cult, and thus 'white' shamanism came into existence. Troshchanski develops his theory chiefly on Yakut evidence, and though he tries to apply it to the whole of Siberia, we shall confine ourselves to what he says about the Yakut.[3]

Among them, where there are two categories of shamans, the white', representing creative, and the 'black', destructive forces, the latter tend to behave like women, since it is from women-shamans that they derive their origin. In support of this theory of their origin Troshchanski puts forward the following arguments:

[1. The Evolution of the Black Faith, 1902, pp. 123-7.

2. Shamanismen i Noru Asien, 1912, pp. 82-92.

3. Op. cit., pp. 123-7.]

1. The shaman has on his coat two iron circles representing the breasts.

2. He parts his hair in the middle like a woman, and braids it, letting it fall loose during the shamanistic ceremony.

3. In the Kolyma district neither a woman nor a shaman lies on the right side of the horse-skin in the yurta, because, as they say, it is on this side that one beats a horse.

4. It is only on very important occasions that the shaman wears his own garment; on lesser occasion's he wears a girl's jacket made of foal's hide.[1]

5. For three days after the birth of a child, at which the goddess of fecundity, Aiasyt, is present, no man may enter the room where the mother is lying, but only women and shamans.

Finally, according to Troshchanski, the female 'black' shaman was replaced by the male 'black' shaman. This transition was effected by means of the smith, who, as the maker of the woman-shaman's garment, held an influential position, and whose power increased in proportion to the length of his ancestry.[2] Through their contact with shamanistic implements they acquired mana and themselves became sorcerers and shamans.

The evolution of the 'white' shaman took place, he opines, on different lines. In family ceremonial the cleverest head of a family or member of a community was chosen; he was elected anew for each ceremony until eventually his tenure of the office became permanent.[3]

This theory of a dual evolution of shamans is not easy to substantiate. In the first place, we find that the 'white' shaman's garment is made by a 'white' smith; which fact, by Trosbehanski's mode of argument, would seem to imply a line of development for 'white' shamanism parallel to, and not divergent from, that of 'black' shamanism.

Again, all the supposed feminine habits of the shaman of today would not go to prove that the earlier female-shaman was the servant of abassy alone. We find in the past as well as in the present that the woman can be the priestess of the family cult and a professional shamaness, the servant of either aiy or abassy. Among the Yakut, however, where the worship of abassy is more developed than that of aiy, the 'black' shamans, both men and

[1. Jochelson (The Koryak, i. 53) was present at a ceremony in the Kolyma district where the shaman wore such a costume.

2 Troshchanki, op. cit., p. 125.

3 Op. cit., p. 124.]

women, predominate. On the other hand, among the Votyaks, where the cult aiy of is more developed than that of abassy, the 'white' shamans are much more numerous, and form the whole hierarchy.[1]

All that has been cited concerning the feminine habits of the present-day shaman was taken by Troshchanski as proof of his theory of the evolution of the 'black' shaman from the 'black' shamaness and by Jochelson as 'traces of the change of a shaman's sex into that of a woman'.[2]

Jochelson thus binds together the two questions dealt with in this chapter-the relation of the shamaness to the shaman', and the 'transformation of shamans', called also 'the change of sex'. This latter phenomenon, following J. G. Frazer,[3] I should prefer to call 'the change of dress', since (with the exception of the Chukchee, perhaps) the change of dress is not nowadays, at least, followed by what the physiologists would call 'change of sex'.

Frazer [4] says that the interchange of dress between men and women is an obscure and complex problem, and thinks it unlikely that any single solution would be applicable to all cases. In enumerating instances of such cases among the priests of Khasis[5] and the Pelew Islanders[6]-instances, that is, of men dressing and acting like women throughout life-he ascribes these phenomena to the inspiration of a female spirit, which often chooses a man rather than a woman for her minister and inspired mouthpiece.[7]

As to the people of Siberia, the 'change of sex' is found chiefly among Palaeo-Siberians, namely the Chukchee, Koryak, Kamchadal, and Asiatic Eskimo.'[8]

Even the earliest travellers record instances of this phenomenon. Thus Krasheninnikoff in 1755,[9] Steller in 1774,[10] Wrangel

[1. Bogayewski, p. 128.

2 Jochelson op. cit., i. 53.

3. Frazer, Adonis, Attis, Osiris, ed. 1907, pp. 384-433.

4. Op. cit., p. 433. 

5. Major Gurdon.

6. J. Kubary.

7. Effeminate sorcerers and priests are found among the Sea-Dyak of Borneo (Capt. Brooke, Schwaner); the Bugis of South Celebes (Capt. Mundy); Patagonians of South America (Falkner); the Aleutians, and many Indian tribes of North America (Dall, Langsdorff, Powers, and Bancroft). Frazer, Adonis, &c., p. 429.

8. Similar changes of sex were observed by Dr. Karsch (Uranismus oder Paderastie mid Tribadie bei den Naturvolkern, 1901, pp. 72-201) all over the American continent from Alaska to Patagonia.

9. Description of the Country of Kamchatka, ii. 24.

10. Beschreibung von dem Lande Kamtschatka, p. 289.]

in 1820,[1] Ludke in 1837,[2] and others. They do not give complete accounts, but merely mention the fact. It differs, however, in their description from ordinary homosexualism in that there is always reference to shamanistic inspiration or evil biddings.

More detailed descriptions are to be found in the excellent modern works of Bogoras and Jochelson. Bogoras describes the facts relating to the Chukchee in a chapter on 'Sexual Perversion and Transformed Shamans'.

'The sexual organs play a part in certain shamanistic ceremonies,' says Bogoras.[3] The shaman is said to be very often naked during his incantations, e.g. that used to invoke the moon, and to mention his genital parts.[4] The change of sex is called in Chukchee 'soft-man-being', yirka-laul-vairgin, 'soft man' (yirka-laul) meaning a man transformed into a being of the weaker sex. A man who has 'changed his sex' is also called 'similar to a woman' (ne uchica), and a woman in like condition 'similar to a man' (qa cikcheca). These latter transformations are much rarer.

Bogoras distinguishes various degrees of 'transformation' among the Chukchee:

1. The shaman, or the sick person at the bidding of a shaman, arranges and braids his hair like a woman.

2. The change of dress: Kimiqai, for instance, were woman's clothes by order of the spirits. In his youth he had been afflicted by in illness and had been greatly benefited by the change of dress. At the time described he was an elderly man with a beard, and had a wife and four children.[5]

3. The change in the habits of one sex is shown when the man 'throws away the rifle and the lance, the lasso of the reindeer herdman, and the harpoon of the seal-hunter, and takes to the needle and the skin-scraper '.[6] He learns the use of these quickly, because the 'spirits' help him all the time. Even his pronunciation changes from masculine to feminine. His body loses its masculine appearance, and he becomes shy.

4. In rare cases the 'soft man' begins to feel himself a woman; he seeks for a lover, and sometimes marries.

[1 Reise langs der Nordkuste von Sibirien und auf dem Eismeere, ed. 1841, p. 227.

2. Journey Around the World, 1834-6, p. 143.

3. The Chukchee, ii. 448.

4 Op. cit. p. 449.

5. Op. cit., p. 450.

6. Op. cit., p. 451.]

The marriage is performed with the usual rites, and the union is as durable as any other. The 'man' goes hunting and fishing, the 'woman' does domestic work. Bogoras thinks they cohabit modo Socratis, though they are sometimes said to have mistresses in secret and to produce children by them.[1] The wife does not, however, change her name, though the husband sometimes adds the name of his wife to his own.

 Public opinion is always against them,[2] but as the transformed shamans are very dangerous, they are not opposed and no outward objections are raised. Each 'soft man' is supposed to have a special protector among the 'spirits', who is usually said to play the part of a supernatural husband, the 'kele-husband' of the 'transformed' one. This husband is supposed to be the real head of the family and to communicate his orders by means of his 'transformed' wife. The human husband, of course, has to execute these orders faithfully under fear of prompt punishment.[3]

Sometimes the shaman of untransformed sex has a 'kele-wife' in addition to his own.

Bogoras himself was best acquainted with a 'soft man' called Tiluwgi, who, however, would not allow himself to be inspected fully. His human husband described him as a normal male person. In spite of this, his habits were those of a woman. The husband of Tiluwgi was an ordinary man and his cousin. The 'transformed shamans' generally chose a husband from among their nearest relations.

Bogoras never met a woman transformed into a man, but he heard of several cases. One transformed shamaness was a widow, who had children of her own. Following the command of the 'spirits', she cut her hair, donned the dress of a man, adopted the masculine pronunciation, and even learned in a very short time to handle the spear and to shoot with a rifle. At last she wanted to marry and easily found a young girl who consented to become her wife.[4]

Jochelson [5] states that he did not learn of the transformation of women-shamans into men among the Koryak of to-day; we find, however, accounts of such transformation in legends. Neither did he meet any men-shamans transformed into women.

'The father of Yulta, a Koryak from the village of Kainenskoye, who died not long ago and who had been a shaman, had worn

[1. Op. cit., p. 451.

2. The italics are mine.

3. Op. cit., p. 452.

4. Op. cit., p. 455.

5. The Koryak p. 53.]

women's clothes for two years by order of the spirits; but since he had been unable to obtain complete transformation he implored his spirits to permit him to resume men's clothes. His request was granted, but on condition that he should put on women's clothes during shamanistic ceremonies.[1]

This is, the only case familiar to Jochelson of the change of sex, or rather change of dress. The Koryak call the transformed shaman kavau or keveu; they are supposed to be as powerful as women-shamans.

The narratives concerning the Kamchadal kockchuch are much confused, for Krasheninnikoff does not rightly explain either who they were, or whether they were men or women. The kockchuch were women's dress, did women's work, and were treated with the same lack of respect as is shown to women. They could enter the house through the draught-channel, which corresponds to the opening in the roof of the porch of the Koryak underground house,[2] in the same way as the women and the Koryak qavau. Piekarski[3] finds that Krasheninnikoff contradicts himself in his statements concerning 'koekchuch women, who do not come into contact with men'.

Krasheninnikoff's descriptions of koekchuch are as follows: 'The Kamchadal have one, two, or three wives, and besides these some of them keep koekchuch who wear women's clothes, do women's work, and have nothing to do with men, in whose company they feel shy and not at their ease' (p. 24, ed. 1755).

'The Kamchadal women are tailors and shoemakers, which professions are considered useless to men, who are immediately regarded as kockchuch if they enter these vocations' (p. 40, ed. 1755).

'The women are not jealous, for not only do two or three wives of one man live together in peace, but they do not even object to the kockchuch, whom some Kamchadal keep instead of concubines' (p. 125, ed. 1755). 'Every woman, especially an old one, and every kockchuch, is a sorcerer and interpreter of dreams' (p. 81, ed. 1755).[4]

From the above quotations the koekchuch seem rather to be of

[1. Op. cit. p. 53.

2. Krsheninnikoff, ii. 114; see Troshchanski, op. cit., p. 120.

3. See Troshchanski, Op. cit., p. 120.

4. 'Thc female sex being more attractive and perhaps also cleverer, more shamans are chosen among women and koekchtech than from men' p. 15. 'The natives of the Kuril Islands have two or three wives each; . . . they have also koekchtech, like the Koryak and Kamchadal' (p. 183, ed. 1755).]

the eunuch type, though sometimes they play the role of concubines.

The kockchuch who was regarded by the community as being of an unusual type probably enjoyed special privileges higher than those of a sorcerer or a shaman. The worship of the pathological may have verged here into the worship of the supernatural.

The 'change of sex' is met with only among the Palaeo-Siberians,[1] whilst among the Neo-Siberians only does the shamanistic dress more often resemble female garments. It is true that among Yakut men-shamans traditions exist of their bearing children,[2] but this is connected rather with the idea of the power of shamanistic spirits which makes such miracles possible. As a rule, child-birth among the Palaeo-Siberian shamanesses results in either a complete or at least a temporary loss of the shamanistic gift. In a Koryak tale [3] the shanianistic power of Ememqut, son of Big-Raven, 'disappeared after the mythical Triton had bewitched him and caused him to give birth to a boy. His power was restored to him after his sister had killed the Triton's sister, by which deed the act of giving birth was completely eliminated.'

We observe also that in many Siberian communities a woman shaman is not permitted to touch the drum.

The question of the change of sex, especially as it concerns the most powerful shamans, cannot be explained on a purely physical basis. Several perversions occur among these people, as they do in all primitive and even in more civilized societies; but it does not follow that every pathological individual is the subject of magical worship. On the contrary, when reading the detailed description of the transformed shamans in Bogoras and Jochelson, we see that in nearly every case these shamans are at first normal people and only later, by inspiration of spirits, have to change their sex. As described in previous pages, some of them have secretly, along with an official husband of the same sex, normal sexual relations with a person of the other sex, and we may even assume that some of them actually became sexless, although in certain cases the outward show required by religious considerations may cover abnormal passions.

It is scarcely possible to see in these cases a religious conception

[1. The Yukaghir form an exception. Jochelson says: 'I found no indications of such an institution among the Yukagbir, except in the dress of the shamans, which includes articles of female attire. (The Yukaghir and Yukaghirized Tungus, p. 112.)

2. Sieroszewski.

3. Jochelson, op. cit., p. 55.]

of a divine two-sexed shaman embodying in one being a perfect man- and woman-nature. We do not find such gods or spirits among the Palaeo-Siberians, though we encounter this idea among the more advanced Neo-Siberians. In the religion of the natives of the Altai this idea is expressed by the name 'mother and father of the man', given to the Supreme Being.

It may be that the most satisfactory basis for an attempt at the solution of this problem would be the sociological one.

The extraordinary rights granted by the community to the shaman are clearly evident in the exceptional position he occupies. Shamans (male and female) may do what is not permitted to others, and indeed they must act differently, because they have a supernatural power recognized by the community.[1]

Taking some of the characteristics ascribed to shamans in previous chapters, we see that, inspired by the spirits, 'they may cut and otherwise injure their bodies without suffering harm.'[2] They may, during shamanistic performances, 'ascend to the sky together with the shaman's drum and sacrificial animal.'[3]

They may give birth to a child, a bird, a frog, &c.,[4] and they may change their sex if they are 'real shamans', with supernatural powers, with a true vocation.

Socially, the shaman does not belong either to the class of males or to that of females, but to a third class, that of shamans. Sexually, he may be sexless, or ascetic, or have inclinations of homosexualistic character, but he may also be quite normal. And so, forming a special class, shamans have special taboos comprising both male and female characters. The same may be said of their costume, which combines features peculiar to the dress of both sexes.

The woman-shaman is not restricted to taboos specifically female, for her social position is much higher than that of the ordinary woman: whilst purely male taboos are not applied to the man-shaman, who has, together with certain male taboos, some privileges of a woman; e.g. among the Yakut, access to the house of lying-in women during the first three days after the birth of a child.

[1. From this point of view it would appear that the high respect shown in individual cases to the female shaman is due to the position which shaman, as such, of whatever sex, occupies in society, and does not imply an earlier general female shamanism.

2. Jochelson, The Koryak.

3. Sieroszewski, 12 Lat w Kraju Yakutow, p. 403.

4. Op. cit., P. 399.]

Shamanhood is separated from society by a boundary-line of many taboos. When the shaman cannot keep these taboos he or she ceases to be a shaman; e. g. the woman during the period of child-birth and menstruation, when she again belongs to the community of women.

The class of shamans, in which the woman acquires certain attributes of a man, and the man certain attributes of a woman, seems in Siberia to be independent of father- or mother-right. It
 would be interesting to ascertain whether the 'spirits' inspiring the change of sex are of opposed sexes, as was suggested by J. G. Frazer.' [1]

The shaman class, through the exclusion of its members from both the male and the female sections of society, may in some cases be pathological, but this is in no sense a significant or indispensable characteristic, since in the only instances where the 'marriage' of transformed shamans with persons of the same sex has been observed in our time (i.e. among the Chukchee) it is always disapproved by public opinion.[2]

The magico-religious and sociological explanation of the change of dress among shamans does not, however, apply satisfactorily to the koekchuch, for professional shamanism among the Kamchadal was not organized and developed to the point of producing a distinct section of society inspired by shamanistic spirits. Neither does this explanation cover cases in which men are dressed in women's costume without being shamans at all. Perhaps we may here find aid in the suggestions put forward by Mr. Crawley:[3] in treating of the belief, very widespread among primitive peoples, in the possibility of the transmission of feminine qualities, especially weakness, by contagion. He cites

[1. Op. cit., 1907, pp. 384-433.

2. Since this chapter was written I have been able to familiarize myself with a very interesting pamphlet by the prominent Russian sociologist, A. Maksimoff, dealing with the same subject under the title 'The Change of Sex', Russian Anthrop. Journ., xxix. I was glad to see that Maksimoff also is not satisfied with the physiological explanation of this phenomenon. He gives two reasons for his doubts: (1) The phenomena, in common with the shamanistic practices, is in decadence everywhere in Siberia; and if it were only due to sexual perversions it would probably be rather on the increase during the present period of colonization, when we know that all sorts of diseases and every kind of sexual licence have increased among the Siberian natives. (2) In many similar cases among other peoples we can see that this phenomenon is purely ritualistic, e. g. in the case of the Mujerados of New Mexico (pp. 17-18).

3. 'Sexual Taboo: a study in the Relations of the Sexes,' Journal Of the Anthrop. Inst., xxiv. 124-5.]

many instances of 'the custom of degrading the cowardly, infirm, and conquered to the position of females' by putting women's clothes on them. Quoting from L. Morgan (The League of The Iroquois, p. 16) he says: 'When the Delawares were denationalized by the Iroquois and prohibited from going out to war, they were, according to the Indian notion, "made women", and were henceforth to confine themselves to the pursuits appropriate to women.' Is it not reasonable to suppose that we have in the koekuch of the Kamchadal simply another instance of a similar practice, especially when we consider the accounts given by Jochelson, Bogoras, and others of the treatment of slaves among some other Palaeo-Siberians? The object aimed at in the -treatment referred to by Mr. Crawley is the weakening to the point of emasculation of the character of enemies held captive or in subjection, so as to reduce their capacity for working mischief to the conquerors to a minimum. Jochelown, speaking of slavery as it formerly existed among the Yukaghir, says: 'The slave (captive) stayed in the house with the women . . . and did the housework on equal terms with the women." He makes a similar statement about the status of the captive slaves formerly held by the Koryak.[2] Close association with women, the primitive argues, produces effeminacy in a man, by contagion. Keep him with the women, put their clothes on him, and he is no longer dangerous, if hostile, and may be made useful in occupations suited to females. In the absence of satisfactory evidence for the other hypothesis put forward, and taking into consideration the attitude towards captive slaves of other Palaeo-Siberians as exhibited above, it would seem at least probable that the koekchuch of the Kamchadal were, or had developed from, a class of captive slaves.

Though Bogoras, in his account of the slave-class which existed until comparatively recent times among the Chukchee, does not refer to any definite attempt made by these people to feminize their captives, his statement that the word amulin applied to such slaves means primarily 'weakling', and that all the other terms applied to captive slaves have an implication of contempt, supports the assumption that the Chukchee hold the same view as other Palaeo-Siberians, including the Kamchadal, of what was the ideal condition of a slave-class.

[1. Joeliolson, The Yukaghir p. 133.

2 The Koryak, p. 766.]

     
Shamanism in Siberia, by M.A. Czaplicka, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XIII

 

GODS, SPIRITS, SOUL.

 

1. THE CHUKCHEE.

BENEVOLENT supernatural beings are called by the Chukchee vairgit, i. e. 'beings'. The most important are the 'benevolent beings sacrificed to' (taaronyo vairgit), those to whom the people bring sacrifices. They live in twenty-two different 'directions' of the Chukchee compass. The chief of these beings is the one residing in the zenith, which is called 'being-a-crown' (kanoirgin), or 'middle-crown' (ginon-kanon). Mid-day, the Sun, and the Polar Star are often identified with the 'middle-crown '. The Dawn and the Twilight are ' wife-companions', several of the tales describing them as being married to one wife. The 'directions ' of the evening are together called 'Darkness'. Sacrifices are made to them only on special occasions, and are often mingled with those offered to the kelet ('evil spirits') of the earth.'

The sun, moon, stars, and constellations are also known as vairgit; but the sun is a special vairgin, represented as a man clad in a bright garment, driving dogs or reindeer. He descends every evening to his wife, the 'Walking-around-Woman'. The moon is also represented as a man. He is not a vairgin,[2] however, but the son of a kele of the lower worlds. He has a lasso, with which he catches people who look too fixedly at him. Shamans invoke the moon in incantations and spells.

Among the stars, the pole-star is the principal vairgin, and is most often referred to as unpener, [2] the pole-stuck star', a name, .which, Mr. Bogoras asserts, is universal throughout Asia.[3]

There are several other vairgit beneficent to man, which Bogoras supposes to be merely vague and impersonal names of qualities. 'They represent a very loose and indefinite personification of the creative principle of the world, and are similar to Vakanda or Great Manitou of the Indians,' he says.[4] Their names are

[1. Bogoras, The Chukchee, 1907, J.N.P.E., pp. 303-5.

2. Vairgin, singular; vairgit, plural. Kele, singular; kelet, plural.

3. Op. cit , pp. 305-7.

4. Op. cit., p. 314.]

Tenan-tomgin ('Creator', lit. 'One who induces things to be created'); Girgol-vairgin ('Upper-Being); Marginen ('World', literally 'The Outer-One')., Yaivac-vairgin ('Merciful-Being'); Yagtac-vairgin ('Life-giving Being'); Kinta-vairgin ('Luck-giving Being'). These do not receive special sacrifices, but are all, except 'Creator', mentioned at the sacrifices to the Dawn, Zenith, and Midday. The 'Luck-giving Being' is sometimes represented as a raven, but the Creator is never so represented by the Chukchee (as he is among the Koryak), although he is sometimes known as 'the outer garment of the Creator'. The Chukchee, however, have many tales about Big-Raven, whom they call Tenan-tomgin.

Besides these 'Beings', the Reindeer Chukchee have also a 'Reindeer-Being' (Qoren-vairgin), who watches over the herds; and the Maritime people have their 'Beings of the Sea' (Anqa-vairgit), of whom the most important are Keretkun and his wife, sometimes called Cinei-new. 'They live on the sea-bottom or in the open sea, where they have a large floating house. They are larger than men, have black faces, and head-bands of peculiar form, and are clad in long white garments made of walrus-gut adorned with many small tassels.'[1] Another sea-spirit is the 'Mother of the Walrus', living at the bottom of the sea, and armed with two tusks like a walrus. Besides her, there is still another sea-spirit like a walrus, which is believed to work harm to people, crawling into their houses at night. These walrus-beings do not receive regular sacrifices, and sometimes assist the Shaman in the capacity of kelet. Keretkun, however, is the recipient of sacrifices at the autumn ceremonials. The Asiatic Eskimo have sea-deities similar to those of the Maritime Chukchee. [2]

The Chukchee classify the winds also as 'Beings', whose names are mentioned in incantations, the local prevailing wind being always regarded in a given locality as the chief of these 'Beings'.[3]

Spirits of tents and houses are called 'House-Beings' (Yara-vairgit). They are attached to houses, not to people, and if a house is destroyed they cease to exist with it. If the inhabitants of a house abandon it, the house-spirits turn into very dangerous earth-spirits.[4] A small share of every important sacrifice is placed for them on the ground in the corners of the sleeping-room.

Othcr spirits, which are neither kelet nor vairgit, also exist;

[1. Op. cit., p. 316.

2. Op. cit., pp. 316-18.

3. Op. cit., p. 320.

4. Op. cit., p. 318.]

e. g. the spirits of intoxicating mushrooms, which form a 'Separate Tribe' (yanra-varat).[1]

Some 'Beings' have so called 'assistants' (viyolet) which receive a share of the sacrifices. The 'assistant' is very often represented as a raven or as half a raven. Even the kelet have 'assistants'. [2]

All the forests, rivers, lakes, and the classes of animals are animated by 'masters' (aunralit) or 'owners' (etinvit). Some. times the Chukchee call these kelet-a word which, though it usually means 'evil spirits', sometimes is used in the simple sense of 'spirits '.[3] Wild animals are said to have the same sort of households as the Chnkchee themselves and to imitate men in their actions. For instance, 'one family of eagles has a slave, Rirultet, whom they stole from the earth a long time ago. He prepares food for all of them, and his face has become blackened with Soot.'[4] Animals, like spirits, can take the form of men. The ermine and the owl become warriors on certain occasions; the mice become hunters. 'In most cases, animals, while impersonating human beings, retain some of their former qualities, which identify them as beings of a special class, acting in a human way, but different from mankind.' So the fox-woman retains her strong smell, and the goose-woman does not take animal food.[5]

Lifeless objects, especially if they have originally been parts of living organisms, may become endowed with life; e. g. skins ready for sale may turn at night into reindeer, and walk about.[6]

These various 'owners' are very often of the kelet class; but, according to Bogoras, no Chukchee will confess to having made sacrifices to evil spirits, except under extraordinary circumstances.[7]

Bogoras divides the kelet of the Chukchee into three classes: (a) invisible spirits, bringing disease and death; (b) bloodthirsty cannibal spirits, the enemies of Chukchee warriors especially; (c) spirits which assist the shaman during shamanistic performances.

Kelet of the class (a) are said to live underground, and to have also an abode above the earth; but they never come from the sea, for, according to a Chukchee proverb 'nothing evil can come from the sea'.[8]

[1. Op. cit., p. 333.

2. Op. cit., 319.

3. Op. cit., p. 286.

4. Op. cit., p. 283.

5. Op. cit., p. 284.

6. Op. cit., p. 281.

7. Op. cit., p. 290.

8. Op. cit., p. 292.

9. In apparent contradiction to the belief expressed in this proverb is the existence of the kele in the form of a walrus, mentioned by Mr. Bogoras on p. 316, which is harmful to men.]

The kelet do not remain in their homes, but wander abroad and seek for victims. They are too numerous to be distinguished by special names. Some of them are one-eyed; they have all sorts of strange faces and forms, most of them being very small. They are organized in communities resembling those of men. On the Pacific shores they are often known as rekkenit (sing. rekken). These have various monstrous forms, and animals which are born with any deformity are sacrificed to them. The kelet have an especial fondness for the human liver. This belief is the origin of the Chukchee custom of opening a corpse to discover from the liver which spirit has killed the deceased.[1] The class (b), which is especially inimical to warriors, is spoken of chiefly in the tales. While incantations and charms are employed against spirits of the first class, against the giant cannibal kelet of the second category ordinary weapons of war are used. These spirits once formed a tribe of giants living on the Arctic shore, but being much harassed by the Chukchee, they changed themselves into invisible spirits.[2]

The third class (c) is that of shamanistic spirits, sometimes called 'separate spirits' or 'separate voices'. They take the forms of animals, plants, icebergs, &c., and can change their form very quickly-and also their temper; on account of this last peculiarity the shaman must be very punctilious in keeping his compact with them. The shaman says of them, 'These are my people, my own little spirits.'[3] We do not find in Bogoras any reference to benevolent shamanistic spirits or assistants of the shaman.

Besides these typical evil spirits, there is also a class of 'monsters'. Among these the chief is the killer-whale , which is surrounded by a taboo among all Arctic peoples: any one who kills a killer-whale is sure to die very soon. These monsters in Winter are transformed into wolves and prey upon the reindeer of the Chukchee. An exaggerated representation of a polar bear also appears as one of the 'monsters'. The mammoth plays an important part in Chukchee beliefs. It is said to be the reindeer of the kelet. If the tusks are seen above ground, this is a bad omen, and unless an incantation is uttered something untoward will happen.

'According to one story, some Chukchee men found two mammoth-tusks protruding from the earth. They began to beat the

[1. Op. cit., pp. 292-8.

2. Op. cit., pp. 298-300.

3. Op. cit., pp. 300-2.]

drum and performed several incantations. Then the whole carcass of the mammoth came to sight. The people ate the meat. It was very nutritious and they lived on it all winter. When the bones were stripped of all the meat, they put them together again, and in the morning they were again covered with meat. Perhaps this story has for its foundation the finding of a mammoth-carcass good for eating, as happened on the Obi in the eighteenth century, and also more recently in the Kolyma country.

'Because of these beliefs, the search for ivory of the mammoth was tabooed in former times. Even now, a man who finds a mammoth-tusk has to pay for it to the "spirit" of the place by various sacrifices. The search for such tusks is considered a poor pursuit for a man, notwithstanding the high price which the ivory brings."

In the pictorial representations of these 'monsters', or, rather, exaggerated animals, all which have a reindeer as the foremost figure are intended to represent benevolent spirits; while others in which a dog, horse, or mammoth stands in front, represent kelet.

Monstrous worms, blackbeetles, birds, and fish are the other exaggerated animal forms which Bogoras calls 'monsters'. [2]

 Soul. The soul is called wirit or uvekkirgin ('belonging to the body'). Another term is tetkeyun, meaning 'vital force of living being'. The soul resides in the heart or the liver, and animals and plants as well as men possess it. One hears, however, more about other 'souls'-those which belong to various parts of the body: e.g. there is a limb-soul, nose-soul, &c. And so a man whose nose is easily frost-bitten is said to be 'short of souls'. Very often the soul assumes the form of a beetle, and hums like a bee in its flight. When a man loses one of his souls, he may obtain its return through a shaman, who, if he cannot discover the whereabouts of the inissing soul, can send a portion of his own into the person who has suffered this loss. If a kele steals a soul, he carries it into his own dark abode, and there binds its limbs to prevent its escaping. In one of the tales 'a kele forces a stolen soul to watch his lamp and trim it'. Bogoras knew of a case of a man who struck his wife with a firebrand, and when the woman died after two days, and her relatives had examined her body and found no injury to any organ, they said that the husband's blow had injured her soul.

[1. Op. cit., p. 326.

2. Op. cit., pp. 323-30.]

'Kelet also have souls of their own, which may be lost or spirited away by shamans.'[1]

 Chukchee View of the Universe. According to the Chukchee belief there are several worlds, one above another. Some reckon five such worlds, others seven or nine. A hole, under the pole-star, forms a passage from one world to the other, and through this hole shamans and spirits pass from one to another of the worlds. Another way to reach the other world is to take a step downwards in the direction of the dawn. There are also other worlds' in the 'directions' of the compass, one under the sea, another small dark 'world' vaguely described as being above, which is the abode of the female kele-birds. Some of the stars also are distinct 'worlds' with their own inhabitants. The sky, they say, is a 'world ' too, and touches our earth at the horizon, where at four points there are gates. When the wind blows these gates are believed to be opening.[2]

 

II. THE KORYAK.

In contrast to the Chukchee and the Eskimo, who have whole classes of Supreme Beings (vairgit, Chukchee; kiyarnarak, Asiatic Eskimo), the Koryak, as Jochelson thinks, have a tendency to monotheism; although he considers it 'possible that all names now applied by them to one deity may have formerly been applied to various beings or phenomena of nature, and that, owing to their intercourse with the Russians, a monotheistic tendency of uniting all names of the various deities into one may have developed'.[3] That the Koryak conception of one Supreme Being is not indigenous, or at least not very old, may be judged from the very vague account of his nature and qualities which was all that Jochelson was able to obtain from these people, and also from the fact that he takes no active part in shaping the affairs of men. He is, of course, a benevolent anthropomorphic being, an old man with a wife and children, dwelling in the sky. He can send famine or abundance, but seldom uses his power to do either good or evil to men.

Jochelson says that the abstract names given to him are hardly consistent with the conception-distinctly material, as far as it goes-which the Koryak seem to have of his nature. Some of

[1. Op cit., pp. 332-3.

2. Op. cit., pp. 330 -2.

3. Jochelson, The Koryak, p. 24.]

these names are: 'Naininen (Universe, World, Outer one); Inahitelan or Ginagitelan (Supervisor); Yaqhicnin or Caqhicnin (Something-Existing), called by the Paren people Vahicnin, by those of Kamenskoye, Vahitnin, or by the Reindeer Koryak, Vahiynin (Existence, also Strength); Gicholan (The-One-on-High); Gicholetinvilan (The-Master-on-High) or simply Etin (Master); Thairgin (Dawn). In Tale 113 we meet with the name Kihigilan (Thunder-Man) for the Supreme Being.'[1]

The Supreme Being is propitiated for purely material reasons, such as the procuring of a food-supply by hunting land and sea animals, the picking of berries and roots, and the tending of the reindeer herds. If the Supreme Being ceases to look upon the earth disorder at once begins; e.g. Big-Raven is unsuccessful in his hunting when Universe (Naininen) has gone to sleep (Tale 9). In like manner, failure, to offer sacrifices may bring some such misfortune on a mail. In one of the tales (111), when young Earth-Maker (Tanuta), the husband of Yineaneut, Big-Raven's daughter, fails to make the customary sacrifice to Inahitelan's (Supervisor's) son Cloud-Man (Yahalan) at his wedding, Supervisor forces Yineaneut, or rather her soul, to the edge of the hearth, where her soul is scorched by the fire, and she wastes away.

Though the Supreme Being does not interfere actively in the affairs of men, their souls (uyicit or uyirit) go to him after death and hang in his dwelling on posts or beams, until the time comes when they are to be re-born. The duration of the future life of each soul is marked on a thong fastened to it, a short thong indicating a short life. Supervisor dwells in the clouds or the sky or the heaven-village. His wife is known variously as Supervisor-Woman, Rain-Woman, or Sea-Woman. His son, Cloud-Man (Yahal, or Yahalan), is the patron of young couples, and if a lover, young man or woman, desires to conquer the heart of the one beloved, this is accomplished by beating the drum; and the propitiation of this patron is also the reason why the bridegroom sacrifices a reindeer to Cloud-Man after marriage.

Jochelson found only one tale (9) relating directly to the Supreme Being, though there are references to him in some others. In this tale, which is full of coarse details, Universe sends heavy rain upon the earth from the vulva of his wife. Big-Raven and his son are obliged to change themselves into ravens,

[1. Op. cit., p. 24.]

fly up to heaven, and put a stop to the incessant rain by a trick. This tale must not be told in fine weather, but only to put an end to rain or a snow-storm.

As stated above, the Supreme Being sends Big-Raven to order human affairs. The native name for Big-Raven is Quikinnaqu or Kutkinnaku, which are augmentative forms of the words for 'raven'. He is also known as Acicenaqu (Big-Grandfather), or Tenantomwan (Creator). The tales about Big-Raven form part of the Pacific Coast cycle of raven myths, for we find this figure in the mythology of the north-western Amerinds as well as in that of the Siberians of north-eastern Asia. But, among the Koryak, Big-Raven plays a part also in the ritual of their religious ceremonies. 'Creator' is really a misnomer, for this being did not exercise any truly creative function: he was sent by the Supreme Being to carry out certain reforms in the already organized universe, and was therefore, so to speak, a reorganizer and the first man. He is also a supernatural being and a powerful shaman; and his name is mentioned in almost every incantation in shamanistic performances. 'When the shamans of the Maritime Koryak commence their incantations they say, "There, Big-Raven is coming!" The Reindeer Koryak told me that during shamanistic ceremonies a raven or a sea-gull comes flying into the house, and that the host will then say, "Slaughter your reindeer, Big-Raven is coming!"'[1]

The personage known by this Dame turns into a bird only when he puts on a raven's coat. The ordinary raven also figures in the mythology as a droll and contemptible character, a scavenger of dogs' carcasses and of excrement. One of the tales (82), about the swallowing of the sun by Raven (not Big-Raven) and the rescue of the luminary by Big-Raven's daughter, recalls a tale of the setting free of the sun told by the Indians of the North Pacific coast. The Koryak do not count it a sin to kill a raven.

Various contradictory accounts are given of the origin of Big-Raven. Some say that he was created by the Supreme Being; others that they do not know whence he came, although 'the old people' knew it.

Most of the Koryak tales deal with the life, travels, and adventures of Big-Raven, his wife Miti, and their children, of whom the eldest, their son Ememqut, is the best known. In

[1. Op. cit., p. 18.]

these tales, Big-Raven sometimes appears as a being of very low intelligence, who is often outmatched in cunning, not only by his wife, but even by mice. foxes, and other animals. Transformations, especially of the sexual organs of Big-Raven and his wife (allusions to which figure very largely throughout), supernatural deeds, and indecent adventures, form the subject of the greater part of the tales. 'The coarseness of the incidents does not prevent the Koryak from considering the heroes of these tales as their protectors.'[1] Many of the tales serve no other purpose than the amusement of the people.

In spite of the frivolous character ascribed to Big-Raven in some of the tales, he is said to have been the first to teach the people how to catch sea and land animals, the use of the fire-drill, and how to protect themselves against evil spirits. He lived on earth in the manner of the Maritime Chukchee, but some of his sons were reindeer-breeders. It is not certain how he disappeared from among men. According to some, he and his family turned into stones; others say that he wandered away from the Koryak. Traces of his having lived among them are still pointed out by the Koryak: on a sea-cliff in the Taigonos Peninsula are some large stones which are said to have been his house and utensils. His foot-prints and the hoof-marks of his reindeer are to be seen, say the Koryak, in the village of Kamenskoye.[2]

The Koryak, in common with other Siberian peoples, believe in another class of supernatural beings, known as owners or 'masters' (etin) of certain objects in which they are supposed to reside. Jochelson thinks that this conception among the Koryak is 'not vet differentiated from a lower animistic view of nature'. He finds the idea more highly developed in the inua of the Eskimo, the pogil of the Yukaghir; and especially so among the Neo-Siberians, e. g. in the Yakut icci and the Buryat ecen or isin. That the conception of a spirit-owner residing in 'every important natural object' is not so clear and well defined among the Koryak as among the other tribes mentioned, Jochelson considers to be proved by the vague and incoherent replies he received in answer to questions about the nature of these 'owners'.

The Koryak word for 'master of the sea' is anqakcn-etinvilan (anqa, sea). A Reindeer Korvak who had gone to the sea for summer fishing, and had offered a reindeer as a sacrifice to the sea,

[1. Op. cit., p. 20.

2. Op. cit., pp. 20-3.]

on being asked by Jochelson whether his offering was made to the sea or to the master of the sea, replied, 'I don't know. We say "sea" and "owner of the sea"; it's just the same.' Similarly Some of the Koryak say that the 'owner' of the sea is a woman, and others consider the sea itself as a woman. Certain hills, capes, and cliffs are called apupcl (apa, 'father' in Kamenskoye dialect, 'grandfatlier' in that of Paren). These are protectors of hunters and travellers, but it is doubtful whether the term is applied to the hill itself or to the spirit residing in it.'

The sky is considered as a land inhabited by a stellar people. The sun ('sometimes identified with The-Master-on-High'), the moon, and the stars are animated beings, and sacrificial offerings are made to the sun. 'Sun-Man (Teikemtilan) has a wife and children, and his own country, which is inhabited by Sun people.'[2] Marriages are contracted between his children and those of Big-Raven (Tales 12, 19, 21).

Mention is also made in the tales of a Moon-Man (or woman), and a Star-Man. [3]

The Koryak 'guardians' and 'charms' serve as protectors to individuals, families, or villages, whereas such greater supernatural beings as The-Master-on -High, Big-Raven, and the malevolent kalau are deities or spirits of the entire tribe-excepting those kalau that serve individual shamans. 'Guardians' form a class of objects that avert evil from men. Those about which Jochelson was able to obtain information include the sacred implements for fire-making, which comprise a fire-board (gicgic or gecgei), a bow (eyet), a wooden drill (maxem, 'arrow'), and a headpiece of stone or bone (ceneyine).[4]

The fire-board is of dry aspen wood, which ignites easily, and has holes in it for receiving the drill. It is shaped roughly to resemble a human being. The consecration of a new fire-board to the office of protector of the hearth and herd is accompanied with the sacrificing of a reindeer to The-Master-on-High, the anointing of the fire-board with the sacrificial blood and fat, and the pronouncing of an incantation over it. It would thus appear, Jochelson thinks, that the power to direct some vaguely conceived vital principle residing in a crude inanimate object to an activity beneficial to man lies in the incantation pronounced over it. "The headpiece has a hollow socket, which is placed upon the

[1. Op. cit., pp. 30-1.

2. Op. cit., Tales 12 and 21.

3. Op. cit., p. 31.

4. Op. cit., p. 33.

5. lbid.]

thin upper end of the drill. 'The headpiece is held by one person, the board by another, while the bow is turned by a third person,' the drill rotating on its thick lower end in one of the holes of the fire-board. The charcoal dust produced by drilling is collected in a small leathern bag, for 'it is considered a sin to scatter' this dust.[1]

Evil Spirits.[2] Evil spirits are called kalau (sing. kala), corresponding to the Chukchee kelet.[3] In the time of Big-Raven they were visible to men, but now they are usually invisible. In most of the myths which refer to them they are represented as living in communities like human beings. They are very numerous, and have the power of changing their size, so that sometimes they are very large and then again very small. Sometimes they seem to be ordinary cannibals and not supernatural beings at all.[4] When the kalau are visible they appear sometimes in the form of animals, or as dogs with human heads, or as human beings with pointed beads. 'Their arrows are supplied with mouths, and they can be shot without the use of a bow, and fly wherever they are sent.'[5] Some of the kalau live underground and enter the houses of men through the fire on the hearth; others dwell on the earth, in the west. Although invisible, they can make their approach felt. 'Thus, when Big-Raven's children begin to ail, he says: "The kalau must be close by."'[6]

 Kalau are divided into Maritime and Reindeer kalau. Some live in the forests, others in the tundra. Human beings are the spoils of their chase, as reindeer and seals are those of human hunters. The kalau of diseases form a special class, and the most prominent of these evil spirits have special names.

We do not find among the Koryak a class of spirits well disposed towards men, who will fight with the kalau. There is no generic name for good spirits. But the natural enemies of the kalau appear to be Big-Raven and his children. Some myths represent Big-Raven and his children as being destroyed by the Wait, or, again, the kalan are destroyed or made harmless by Big-

[1. Ibid.

2. Op. cit., pp. 27-30.

3. The people of Paren call them also kalak, or kamak, and among the Reindeer Koryak they are frequently called nenveticnin or ninvit.' (Op.cit., p. 27.)

4. Jochelson thinks that in this respect they resemble certain malevolent beings of the Yukaghir, called Mythical-Old-Men and Mythical-Old-Women. (Op. cit., p. 28.)

5. Jochelson, op. cit., p. 28. Ibid.]

Raven: 'He causes them to fall asleep; he takes out their cannibal stomachs during their sleep. and puts other ones in their places, usually those of some rodents. At still other times he devises some other means of protecting himself and his children against the invasion of the cannibals. In one story it is told that he heated stones in his house until they were red-hot, invited the kalau to sit on them, and thus burned them. At another time he got rid of them by making a steam bath for them, in which they were smothered. At times an incantation serves him as a means of rescue. In another story Big-Raven appealed to the Master-on-High for help against the mouthed arrows of the kalau with whom he had been at war; and the deity gave him an iron mouth, which caught all the arrows sent by the kalau.'[1] It will be seen, however, from the above that Big-Raven defends himself and his family rather than men from the attacks of kalau; and, as Jochelson says in one place, 'Men seem to be left to their own resources in their struggle with evil spirits, diseases, and death'.[2] For, as we have seen, even the Supreme Being plays no active part in the protection of men." On the contrary, he sends kalau to men 'that they may die, and that he may create other people'.[4] An old man called Yulta, from the village of Kamenskoye, told Jochelson that the kalau formerly lived with The-Master-on-High, but he quarrelled with them and sent them down to our world.[5] Another version has it that Big-Raven sent the kalau down to the people to give the latter a chance to test the power of the incantations he had taught them against the kalau. One of the tales relates that 'the dead ancestors send the kalau from the underground world into the village of their descendants to punish the young people for playing games at night and thus disturbing the rest of the old people'.[6]

 Kalau are, however, not always only harmful to men. 'Although', says Jochelson, 'on the whole the word kala denotes all powers harmful to man, and all that is evil in nature, there are numbers of objects and beings known under the name of kalak or kawak that do not belong to the class of evil spirits. Thus, the guardian spirits of the Koryak shamans, and some varieties of guardians of the village, of the family, or of individuals, are called by this name.'[7]

In the Koryak cosmogony there are five worlds-two above

[1. Op. cit., p. 29.

2. Op. cit., p. 25.

3. Op. cit., pp. 24-6.

4. Op. cit., p. 27.

5. Ibid.

6. Ibid.

7. Op. cit., p. 30.]

and two below the earth. The uppermost is the seat of the Supreme Being, the next is inhabited by Cloud-People (Yahalanu); next comes our earth; of the two worlds below, that nearest ours is the dwelling of the kalau; and, lowest of all (Ennanenak or Nenenqal-'on the opposite side'), is the abode of the shades of the dead (Peninelau, 'ancient people').[1]

At the present day only the shamans can pass from one world to another; but in the ancient days of Big-Raven (comparable to the Arunta age of Alcheringa) this was possible for ordinary people.[2]

The luminaries, the wind, fog, and other phenomena of nature, as well as imaginary phenomena, are supposed to be endowed with anthropomorphic souls; hence, all the wooden images of spirits have human faces. In the time of Big-Raven men could transform themselves either into the form of animals, or into that of inanimate objects[3] by donning an animal's skin or some covering of the shape of the object into which they desired to be transformed.[4]

'In the time of Big-Raven there was no sharp distinction between men, animals, and other objects; but what used to be the ordinary, visible state in his time became invisible afterwards. The nature of things remained the same; but the transformation of objects from one state into another ceased to be visible to men, just as the kalau became invisible to them. Only shamans, that is, people inspired by spirits, are able to see the kalau, and to observe the transformation of objects. They are also able to transform themselves by order of the spirits, or in accordance with their own wishes. There is still a living, anthropomorphic essence concealed under the visible inanimate appearance of objects. Household utensils, implements, parts of the house, the chamber-vessel, and even excrement, have an existence of their own. All the household effects act as guardians of the family to which they belong. They may warn their masters of danger, and attack their enemies. Even such things as the voice of an animal, sounds of the drum, and human speech, have an existence independent of the objects that produce them."

[1. Op. cit., p. 121. 

2. Ibid.

3. Op. cit., pp. 115-16.

4. Jochelson thinks that the transformation of men into women after putting on women's clothes, and vice versa, is closely related to this group of ideas. (Op. cit., p. 116.)

5 Jochelson, op. cit., p. 117.]

The Koryak word for the soul is uyicit. They appear to have a conception also of 'some other vital principle or a secondary soul',[1] whose name Jochelson was not able to learn, nor could he ascertain anything definite relating to it. 'Some vital principle', he thinks, 'is implied in the words wityivi ("breathing') and wuyilwuyil ("shadow").'[2] They draw no very sharp line of demarcation between life and death. A corpse is not 'deprived of the ability to move. The deceased may arise, if he is not -watched'.[3] How death occurs, according to their belief, is explained by Jochelson as follows: 'The soul (uyicit), or, to be more exact, the chief soul of the man, frightened by the attack of kalau upon it, deserts the body, and rises to the Supreme Being. According to some tales, the kala himself pulls the soul out of the body, and sets it free to go off to the sky, in order to possess himself of the body, or of the other souls[4] of the deceased.'[5]

The soul of a deceased person does not leave the earth at once, but hovers high above the corpse. It is like a flame. During illness it is outside the body, hovering low over it if the illness is slight, higher if it is severe. A powerful shaman is believed to be able to bring back the soul to the body of a person recently dead. When the soul of the deceased rises to the Supreme Being, the deceased himself and his other soul, or his shadow, descend underground to dwell with the Peninelau-'the ancient people, people of former times'.[6]

 

III. THE KAMCHADAL.

At the time of Krasheninnikoff and Steller the Kamchadal had several names for the Supreme Being, but these writers do not give any detailed descriptions of the Kamchadal's relations to their deities. On the contrary, Krasheninnikoff thought that they paid no religious worship to their god Kutchu or Kutkhu; and Steller, taking into account their rude and indecent mythology, calls the Kamchadal geborene Gotteslasterer.[7] The following

[1. Op. cit., p. 101.

2 Op. cit., p. 102.

3 Ibid.

4. Bogoras (Chukchee Materials, p. 17) says that the Chukchee attribute to a man the possession of five or six souls (uwirit). Many North American Indians have a similar belief. The Yukaghir belief that a man has three souls is said to be borrowed from the Yakut, who give a separate name to each of the three (ibid., footnote).

6. Op. cit., p. 101,

7. Op. cit., pp. 102-3.

8. Steller, Reise von Kamtschatka nach Amerika, p. 253.]

names of deities are recorded by Krasheninnikoff:[1] Kutkhu (Kutchu), his wife Ilkxum, his sister Xutlizic, his sons Simskalin and Tizil-Kutkhu, and his daughter Siduku. Tizil-Kutkhu married Siduku. They had a son Amlei, and a daughter, who also married each other, and the Kamchadal are the descendants of this last pair. Neither Steller nor Krasheninnikoff describes the functions of these gods. Kutkhu is called by Steller 'the greatest deity of the Kamchadal, who created the world and every living being'.[2] He mentions also another name for the Supreme Being, Dustechtschitsch, and Jochelson thinks that this deity may have corresponded to the benevolent Supreme Being of the Koryak. The Kamchadal of the present day call the Christian God by a similar name.[3]

According to other Kamchadal traditions, the earth was created by Kutq (Raven). In one such legend he makes it out of his son Simskalin: another has it that he brought the earth down from the sky with the help of his sister and fixed it immovably in the sea.[4]

The Koryak say that Big-Raven went away from them. The Kamchadal have a similar tradition; but according to them, Raven (Kutq) left them to go to the Koryak and Chukehee.[5]

Volcanoes and hot springs were regarded as the habitations of evil spirits called kamuli. Heaven and earth were densely populated by spirits, some of whom were good, but most were evil; sacrifices which are not offered to the gods were made to the spirits.[6]

When the Kamchadal feared being attacked by the whale or the walrus, they used special incantations to appease them and induce them to spare the boat and its crew. They venerated also the bear and the wolf, and never pronounced the names of these animals.[7] They offered sacrifices of fire at the holes of sables and foxes.[8]

They believed that animals and men lived on after death in another world.[9]

[1. Krasheninnikoff, The Description of the Country of Kamchatka, ed. 1755, p. 100.

2. Op. cit., p. 253.

3. Jochelson, The Koryak, p. 18.

4. Op. cit., p. 121.

5. Op. cit., pp. 23-4.

6. Krasheninnikoff, op. cit., pp. 73-5.

7. Op. cit., p. 80.

8. Ibid. 

9. Ibid.]

 

IV. THE GILYAK.

The highest benevolent deity of the Gilyak is known as Ytsigy, according to Schrenck.[1] But Sternberg[2] says that they call the universe Kurn, and apply the same name to their highest anthropomorphic deity. The 'owner' spirit of the mountain, and the mountain itself, is named Pal, and the sea and its 'owner' they call Tol. Their name for the island of Sakhalin is Mif, literally 'earth', and they believe that the island is a sort of covering for a certain immense god.[3] Natural objects all have a life of their own, and if one commits violence of any kind upon them sacrifice must be made to the injured 'owners'. Thus, when cutting down a tree, the Gilyak, lest they might hurt its 'owner', place upon it an inau [4] (chekhnkun-inau), into which the spirit can pass and retain its life.

Visible objects in general are merely masks or coverings for various anthropomorphic spirits which reside in them, and this is especially the case with objects such as stones or roots which have an outward resemblance to the human form.[5] Animals, though outwardly differing in form from man, are in reality human beings, with human feelings and souls, and human institutions, such as the clan. Some of them, indeed, are superior to man, with higher qualities of mind and body. Such are the bear, on land, and a certain large bird at sea. Both these cause all other animals to avoid their neighbourhood. The bear is not dangerous to man in the wilderness, except for a short time in the spring; and the bird is not only not harmful to men, but beneficent, for when he appears the terrified fishes, fleeing before him, are an easy prey for the fishermen. It is not the animal, however, which is the object of their cult, but only its 'owner', ys. The 'owners' of the tayga, of the mountain, of the sea, and of the fire, are, of course, the most important for men from the economic point of view. The gods of the sky are regarded as less important, for men do not come into direct contact with them. These live in the sky in clans, and are called tly nivukh. Of less importance, too, are the gods of the sun and moon; and nearly all sacrifices are offered to the 'owners' of the tayga, mountains, sea, and fire.[6]

[1. Natives of the Amur Country, vol. iii, p. 107.

2. The Gilyak, p. 42.

3. Op. cit., p. 43.

4. Sternberg says that the cult of inau is borrowed from the Ainu (ibid.).

5. Op. cit., p. 44.

6. Op. cit., pp. 45-9.]

Sacrifices, says Sternberg, are not usually accompanied by any elaborate ceremonials. They are based on the principle of exchange, i. e. one does not offer fish to the god of the sea, organie animals to the god of the tayga. When a Gilyak at sea fears the oncoming of a storm, he throws some tea-leaves into the water, and says: 'I pray thee see to it that the sea be not angry and that I return home safe and sound.'[1] Wherever a Gilyak goes he carries with him certain objects intended for sacrifices, such, for example, as roots and leaves of certain plants, especially of the martagan. They also make bloody sacrifices. In this case the victim is a dog. Offerings of dogs are made chiefly at the beginning of the season for the trapping of sables and at the bear-festival. On these occasions the victims are killed by strangling, and as the dogs are dispatched they ask them to make intercession to the gods for them.[2]

Clan-gods form a special category. They are the spirits of clansmen who have died by drowning or fire, or have been killed by bears. To them periodical sacrifices are made by the clan. The bear-festival belongs to this class of sacrifices.

Besides all these benevolent deities there are classes of less important good spirits-bol, lot, and urif. The malevolent beings are called milk or kinr (knin). They are very numerous, have various forms, and cause all sorts of misfortune, illness, and death. Many incantations and shamanistic ceremonies are practised to ward off their attacks; but even a shaman cannot deal with them by his own unaided power. He has to call to his assistance two spirit-helpers, kekhn and kenchkh. These assistants of the shaman are exceedingly clever and sometimes very wicked.[3]

The Gilyak believe that an ordinary man has one soul, a rich man two, while a shaman may have as many as four. Thus the shaman Chamkh had four souls, one of which he received from the mountain, another from the sea, the third from the sky, and the fourth from the underworld. His son Koinit, who had been chosen by the spirits to be a shaman, had already two souls, although he was only twelve years old, and Chamkh was a very poor man. Besides these principal souls, every one has a lesser soul, which they imagine as being like an egg, residing in the head of the principal soul. All that a man sees in dreams is the work of this lesser soul. After a man's death, which they believe to be

[1. Op. Cit., p. 50.

2. Op. cit., pp. 50-2.

3. Op. cit., p. 70.]

caused by his body being devoured by evil spirits, the soul, also attacked by the same spirits, may escape from them, and goes to the land of the dead called mylvo. Here it has the form of a man, and leads the same kind of life as on earth, except that a poor man becomes rich, and a rich man poor. From this place the soul goes to another land, and so on from land to land, turning into smaller and smaller beings in transit-a bird, a gnat, and at last a speck of dust. Some souls return to earth and are born again. The lesser soul continues to live for some time in the best-beloved dog of the deceased, which is especially cherished and cared for (see chapter on 'Death').[1]

 

V. THE AINU.

Batchelor says that the Ainu believe in one Supreme Being, Creator of all worlds, whom they call Kotan Kara Kamui, Moshiri Kara Kamui, Kando Koro Kami- 'the maker of places and worlds, and possessor of heaven'. Kamui means, in the first place, 'he who' or 'that which is greatest' or 'best' or 'worst'; a secondary (or more modern) meaning is 'he who' or 'that which covers' or 'overshadows'. In both meanings the word is akin to that for 'heaven', which itself has for its root a word signifying 'top' or 'above'. When applied to good powers kamui is a title of respect; and when the evil gods are called by this name it implies the fear or dread inspired by them. Besides these names, the Ainu sometimes refer to their Supreme Being under the title Tuntu, which means 'pillar', 'support', 'upholder'. He is the Creator, 'the summit, centre, and foundation (of the world), its originator and mighty "Support".'[2]

Batchelor thinks that the Ainu. regard this being is (i) the creator and preserver of the world; (ii) the sustainer of men in general; (iii) the special protector of every individual, with whom men can communicate in prayer.[3]

There is, according to the Ainu belief, also a multitude of less important deities, who are subject to the highest, and carry out his decrees. By their means he created and still sustains the world and mankind. Some of these gods are benevolent and have a double who is malignant. E.g. there are two gods of the sea called Rep un kamui. They are brothers. The younger,

[1. Op. cit., pp. 75-7.

2. Batchelor, The Ainu of Japan, pp. 248-51, 258.

3. Op. cit., p. 261.]

 Mo acha, 'uncle of peace', is beneficent to man, bringing fair weather for fishing: while his elder brother, Shi acha, is an evil deity who chases Alo acha from the seaside, and brings bad weather to spoil the fishing and wreck the boats.' Similarly with other deities of the waters, Wakka-ush kamui. These are female, and have charge of springs, streams, waterfalls, lakes, and ponds. Chiwash ekot mat, 'female possessor of places where fresh and salt waters mingle', watches over river-mouths and allows the fish to go in and out. Nusa, i. e. clusters of kema-ush-inao, or 'legged inao' (i. e. inao tied to stakes thrust into the ground), are set up by the water as sacrifices to these gods. Pet-ru-ush mat, 'females of the waterways', have oversight of all streams from the source to the sea. They, too, are worshipped with offerings of nusa, and appealed to for protection in descending the rapids, and for good fortune in fishing.[2] Sarak kamui, on the other hand, is the evil god of the rivers. The word sarak denotes accidental death, and this god is said to bring about death not only by drowning, but also by mishap of any kind.[3]

The goddess of the sun is generally regarded as the chief of the secondary gods, for she is considered to be the special ruler of all good things in the universe. There is also a god of the moon. Some consider the moon a female, and the sun a male; but the majority speak of the sun as being female. These luminaries would seem to be regarded rather as the dwellings of deities than as being deities themselves. If the god of the sun or of the moon depart from their dwellings, the day or the night is darkened. Hence the fear which the Ainu have of eclipses.[4]

The stars are not worshipped, though the term kamui ('god') is sometimes applied to them. The Milky Way, or 'river of the gods', crooked river', is a favourite resort of the gods for fishing.[5]

Next in importance to the deity of the sun is the goddess of fire. She warms the body, heals sickness, enables man to cook his food. She is especially to be feared because she is a witness to note the acts and words of men. Hereafter they are punished or rewarded, says Batchelor, according to her testimony concerning their actions in life. It appears that it is not the fire which is worshipped, but the goddess residing in the fire.[6]

'Every Ainu hut is supposed to have its special guardian god who is thought to rest upon the roof when the master is at home,

[1. Op. cit., p. 92.

2. Op. cit., pp. 93-4.

3. Ibid.

4. Op. cit., pp. 273-4.

5. Op. cit., p. 276.

6. Op. cit., p. 277.]

and give warning of approaching danger, and who accompanies the head of a family when he goes forth to his wars and on his hunting expeditions.'[1] Batchelor says also that they believe that every person has his own protecting spirit.[2]

Traditions inform us that the gods gather themselves together and consult with one another as to ways and means before they act, the Creator, of course, acting as president, just in the same
 way as the Ainu chiefs used to meet together for consultation before they acted.'[3]

If an Ainu finds that the particular god worshipped does not answer his prayer, he appeals to the Creator, sometimes even accusing the lesser god to him of neglecting his duty.[4]

They believe that their first ancestor, whom they call Aioina kamui, became divine, and, as Batchelor says,. 'has now the superintendence of the Ainu race'.[5]

The Ainu believe in evil as well as in good spirits. The chief evil spirit is Nitne kamui, and there are also other malignant beings who preside over accidents and diseases of the body and mind.[6]

The souls both of animals and men are believed to survive bodily death; and, according to Batchelor, the Ainu belief in a judgement of souls is strong and well defined.[7]

The Ainu believe that the soul will inhabit after death a body almost exactly resembling that which it has occupied in life; and that the community of souls in the future life, in its pursuits and enjoyments, is practically the same as the Ainu community on earth. Souls can revisit this earth as ghosts whenever they desire to do so and some of the living also have the power to go among the ghosts in their dwelling-place. In neither case can the visitor make himself heard, but he himself can both see and hear.[6]

The ghosts of deceased women are greatly feared, and that of an old woman especially is believed to have an extraordinary capacity for doing harm to the living. Even while alive on earth old women have great power over men, and children are much afraid of them. Formerly the hut in which the oldest woman of a family died was burnt after her death to prevent the spirit returning to work mischief to her offspring and to her sons- and daughters-in-law. The soul returning from the grave to exercise

[1. Op. cit., p. 261.

2 Ibid.

3. Op. cit, p. 263.

4. Op. cit., p. 264.

5. Op. cit., p. 252.

6. Op. cit., p. 247.

7. Ibid.

8. Op. cit., p. 225.]

its spells upon the living was thus unable to find its former home, and wandered about for a time in a furious rage. During this period the grave was carefully avoided.[1]
 All souls go first to Pokna-Moshiri, the underworld. Here there are three roads, one leading to Kanna-Moshiri, 'the upper world', our world; another to Kamui-Kotan, 'the place of god', or Kamui-Moshiri, 'the kingdom' or 'world of god'; and the third to Teinei-Pokna-Shiri, 'the wet underground world'. On reaching Pokna-Moshiri, the soul is sent, on the testimony of the goddess of fire, either to Kamui-Kotan or to Teinei-Pokna-Shiri, to be rewarded for a good life, or punished for an evil one. If the spirit denies having done evil, he is confronted by a picture representing his whole life which is in the possession of the fire-goddess. 'Thus the spirit stands self-condemned' to punishment in Teinei-Pokna-Shiri.[2]

Some of the Ainu hold that women, who are considered inferior to men 'both spiritually and intellectually', have 'no souls, and this is sometimes stated as a reason why women are never allowed to pray'. But Batchelor thinks that the real reason for this prohibition is that the Ainu are afraid that the women will appeal to the gods against their ill-treatment by the men.[3]

Such are the views attributed by Batchelor to the Ainu about a future judgement, heaven, and hell. According to Chamberlain,[4] these conceptions are not original with the Ainu. He says: 'Some of the Ainos say that Paradise is below the earth, and Hell below that again. But as they use the modern Japanese Buddhist names for those places, they would appear to be, consciously or unconsciously, giving a foreign tinge to their old traditions. The fact that many Aino fairy-tales mention Hades under the name of Pokna Moshiri, while none seemingly mention Heaven or Hell, favours the view that no moral thread was woven into the idea of the next world as originally conceived by the Aino mind.'

[1. Op. cit., p. 223.

2. Op. cit., pp. 237-8.

3. Op. cit., pp. 234-5. This statement of Batchelor's implies that the Ainu women have a very low social position. On the other hand, both Sternberg and Pilsudski, who have an intimate acquaintance with Ainu life, say that the social position of women among the Ainu is better than in any other of the tribes of Siberia, and consider that this is probably due to the existence of a matriarchate among the Ainu in comparatively recent times.

4. The Language, Mythology, and Geographical Nomenclature of Japan reviewed in the Light of Aino Studies, V. 19.]

 

VI. THE TURKIC TRTBES.

 

(1) THE YAKUT.

According to Troshchanski, the chief benevolent god of the Yakut is Urun-Aiy-Toyon, the white lord and creator of the earth and inan. This writer thinks that Urun-Aiy-Toyon was regarded as the father of light, and since among all the Turkic tribes the sun is considered the father of light, his opinion is that this god was originally the Yakut god of the sun. When the Yakut migrated northward, where the sun is not so much in evidence as in the south, they kept the name Urun-Aiy-Toyon as that of their principal 'white' god, and gave a new name to the sun--Kun-Toyon, 'Sun-Lord', or simply Kun, the latter being the ordinary word for 'light', 'day'. However, aiy and kun are often used synonymously.[1] While Troshchanski,[2] following Piekarski, says that Urnn-Aiy-Toyon is sometimes called Art-Toyon-Aga, 'Father-Ruler-of-All', or Ar-Aiy-Toyon, Sieroszewski[3] and Priklonski think that Art-Toyon-Aga is the highest god, living in the Ninth Sky, and that Urun-Aiy-Toyon, who lives in the Third Sky, is next to him in dignity. Sieroszewski says that the Yakut Olympus is organized on the plan of the clan-system of the Yakut. The sky-gods are divided into nine bis or agas, and the gods of the lower world into eight. The sky-gods are arranged in the following order:

(i) Art-Toyon-Aga, the powerful ruler of light and life, speaking in the storm and thunder, somewhat indifferent to human affairs, and to be appealed to only in exceptional circumstances. In his honour are celebrated the great clan ceremonies, ysyakh, in which sacrifice of kumys is made to him. Generally speaking, bloody sacrifices are not made to the benevolent deities. Only to the god of hunting, Bay-Nay, is sacrifice involving bloodshed offered, and even in this case such sacrifices are limited in the quantity of blood that may be shed.

(ii) Urun-Aiy-Toyon, 'White-Lord-Creator'.

(iii) Nalban-Aiy, Kubay-Khotun-La, 'Kind-Mother-Creatress'.

(iv) Nalygyr-Aissyt-Khotun, the benevolent goddess who presides over child-birth.

[1. The Evolution of the Black Faith (Shamanism) among the Yakut, pp. 33-7.

2. Op. cit., p. 37,

3. Sieroszewski, 12 Lat w Kraju Yakutow, pp. 388-9.]

(v) An-Alay-Khotun, the tutelary goddess of the earth, fields, and valleys, with her children, the spirits of araka-djaraka.

(vi) Sata-kura-Djasagai-Aiy, seven brothers, gods of light, war, &c.

(vii) Mogol-Toyon and his wife, the deities of the cattle.

(viii.) Bay-Nay, god of hunting.

(ix) Gods who guard the roads to the sky.[1]

Sieroszewski says that the natives are quite ready to give information about the clan arrangement of the sky-gods, but that it is very difficult to get similar information about the gods of the underworld, since very few of the ordinary people know anything about them, and the shamans are afraid of betraying the secrets of these formidable beings. The chief of the 'dark' spirits is Ulutuyer-Ulu-Toyon, 'Onmipotent Lord'. He is always described as living in the western sky, and, in contrast to the inactive Art-Toyon-Aga, he is the personification of action and of the passions. Ulu-Toyon is not always harmful to men, for he gives to them one of his souls, sur, and defends them from the attacks of abassylar. In some descriptions he appears as the highest of the active supernatural powers, and not necessarily evil; but in other accounts he is described as a 'dark' spirit, the ruler of abassylar, just as Art-Toyon-Aga is the ruler of aiy, who inhabit the eastern sky .[2]

The abassylar are divided into 'Upper', living in the western sky; 'Middle', living on the earth; and 'Lower', inhabiting the subterranean world; but, wherever they live, they are all harmful to men .[3]

 Ichchi, literally 'owner', signifies an ' owner'-spirit of various objects. Every river, lake, stone, and sometimes even parts of these, has its own ichchi, who controls it. Movable objects and those which can produce sounds also have their ichchi. Ichchi do not belong either to the aiy or to the abassylar, though in many cases, like the abassylar, they are harmful to men. Thus, for example, Kurar-Ichchi, the 'owner' of the wind, is by many writers considered as a 'black' spirit, since the wind is very often dangerous and harmful.[4] In the wanderings of the tribe through difficult country, by dangerous roads, or through trackless regions, accidents may often happen to a cart or some part of its equipment. Such misfortunes are attributed to the local ichchi, who must therefore be placated by sacrifices. The Yakut have a

[1. Op. cit., p. 390.

2. Op. cit,, p. 391.

3. Jochelson, The Koryak, p. 190.

4. Troshchanski, op. cit., pp. 26-30.]

special language for use during these journeyings. In this language, implements or other valuable objects are given certain nicknames instead of names proper to them, in order that the ichchi may not know that the objects in question are referred to for if they did, they would destroy or harm them. For the same reason the Yakut often employ Russian names for things they value, being certain that the ichchi will not understand these.[1]

The Yakut division of the universe is mainly horizontal, comprising two parts-east and south, the habitation of good spirits, and west and north, of evil spirits. The great evil spirit, Allara-Ogonur, 'Underground-Old-Man', lives in the far north. There is also a vertical division into upper, middle, and lower works, but this is less precise and not so important as the horizontal division, since abassylar, or evil spirits, are found in all three divisions, so that no one of the vertical worlds is restricted to the 'white' or good spirits, aiy.

The Yakut believe that man is composed of (i) tyn, 'life', 'breath'; (ii) kut, the physical soul; and (iii) sur, the psychic Soul. Tyn is common to men, animals, and plants, as among the Altaians. Kut is common to men and animals, and is composed of three parts: (a) buor-kut, literally 'earth-soul', i.e. soul composed of earthly elements; (b) salgyn-kut, literally 'air-soul', i.e. composed of air; (c) iya-kut, 'mother-soul', the maternal element. It might seem, says Troshchanski, that there are here three souls, but in fact kut is one soul composed of these three elements. A Yakut woman is always delivered of her child on the bare ground within the yurta, for the Yakut believe that the buor-kut is communicated to the infant from the earth at the moment of birth. Salgyn-kut it receives from the air shortly afterwards; while the third element, iya-kut, comes to the child from the mother.[3] Troshchanski considers that the proof of kut being but one soul composed of three parts is found in the fact that the Yakut believe that fishes have no kut, being cut off from both air and earth and not being viviparous.

The Altaians also have a conception of a kut, but theirs does not comprise three elements as does that of the Yakut.

 Kut is a physical conception of the soul, while sur, although in some degree a material conception, has more of a psychical

[1. Op. cit., p. 54.

2 Troshchanski, op. cit., p. 72.

3. Op. cit., p. 74.]

character than kut. The sur enters the mother by way of her temples at the moment of conception. The kut is sent by Art-Toyon-Aga, and the Sur by Ulu-Toyon. Sur is connected with the head, and has no shadow; kut with the abdomen, and has three shadows. After death kut is devoured by the abassylar; though there is also a belief that the kut remains for some days near the body of the deceased, and then departs to the other world.' Sur is common to man and the animals, and is even possessed by fishes.[2] Troshchanski[3] says that the word sur is also used to denote unusual psychic powers, such as are possessed by shamans; and, indeed, according to the legend,[4] shamans receive their heads (the seat of sur) from heaven. If, as Troshchanski thinks, the sur is priniarily connected with the shaman as his distinctive familiar spirit, and does not perish after death like the kut, nor go to the other world like the kut,[5] then it would seem clear that the amagyat, which according to some is a shamanistic spirit passing from one shaman to another, usually by heredity, is not in fact a spirit at all, but simply an impersonal power invariably associated with shamans.[6]

 

(2) THE ALTAIAINS.

According to the belief of the Altaians, the good spirits (aru neme) are all subjects of the good god Yulgen, and the bad spirits (kara neme) of the evil god Erlik. Yulgen is so kind and generous that he never does harm to men. Sacrifices are offered to him by all, but no one fears him. Every bridegroom must sacrifice to him a horse (iik) of a light colour after his marriage. The iik is surrounded with every mark of respect, red ribbon is tied to its mane, and no woman must mount upon its back. This sacrifice is offered in spring, in a birch thicket; no woman must be present at the ceremony, and even the shaman must of necessity be a man. The sacrificial meat may be partaken of by women, but only unmarried girls may share the feast at the spot where the sacrifice was offered; married women must not approach nearer than sixty feet from this spot.

[1. According to Mikhailowski, the Samoyed believe that the souls of ordinary men perish some time after the death of their possessors (Shamanism, p. 7), only the souls of shamans surviving.

2. Op. cit., pp. 75-6.

3. Op. cit., p. 79.

4. Op. cit, p. 78.

5. Op. cit., p. 77.

6. A similar hypothesis concerning amagyat is put forward in the chapter on 'The Shaman-his Vocation'.

7 Wierbicki, The Natives of the Altai, p. 43.]

Sacrifice is made to Erlik--usually of some animal--when an evil spirit attacks some one. The ceremony is performed either in the yurta, in the courtyard, or wherever the attack was made. propitiatory sacrifices are offered, not only to Yulgen and Erlik, but also to secondary good spirits, such as aru neme and ak neme, and to secondary evil spirits (kara neme), which are known to the Tartars of Chern as shaitan, almys, khawa, kuremes. The sun, the moon, as well as the mountains, rivers, and forest, are also propitiated, or rather the propitiation is offered to their 'owner' (eczi). Besides these superior beings, every clan (seok) has its own deity, and every family its own family god of the yurta, called bashtut-khan (or among the Tartars of Chern, erke).

Images of gods are called by the Yenisei Turks tyns, and by the Altaians, kurmes. These are made of various materials, often skin or wood.

There exists, apparently, some understanding between Yulgen and Erlik. As the Altaians say, 'Yulgen and Erlik have one door.'.[1] Sometimes, when Yulgen has been expecting a sacrifice and fails to receive it, being too kind-hearted to punish the culprit himself, he informs Erlik, and then sacrifices have to be made to both. In such cases Erlik commands Kagyr Khan to punish the culprit until he makes the expected sacrifice. Kagyr Khan has power over every yurta, and hence minor libations are made to him at all festivals.

The intermediary between gods and men at all sacrifices, and the priest at these ceremonies, as well as the prophet, is the kam or shaman. His power is greater or less according to the degree of tes bazyn-yat[2] (probably 'ancestor-spirit' or 'power of ancestor-spirit') possessed by him. [3]

The local division of the universe is partly horizontal, partly vertical; and the good spirits live in seventeen floors above the earth, while the bad occupy seven or nine under it. Erlik Khan, the chief of the bad spirits, lives on the lowest floor, where the sun and moon are supposed to give only a very feeble light. This Erlik Khan is held to have been originally a heavenly spirit, which shows that even in the past the 'white' spirits were predominant.[4]

The Altaians believe that the soul of man is composed of

[1. Ibid.

2. This conception is sirnilar to that of amagyat aniong the Yakut.

3. Wierbicki, The Natives of the Altai, p. 43.

4 Ibid.]

several parts, or rather exists ill several conditions or stages. When a man is ill,[1] they consider that one of his souls, suzy, is absent, but that another soul, called tyn, still remains in the body, so that the suzy can be recalled.

(a) Tyn [2] signifies vitality, i.e. a soul common to plants, animals, and man. If the suzy does not return soon to the body, the tyn perishes. The soul of a dead man is called uziup-tyn. The word tyn comes from tynip, 'I breathe', or tynit, 'breath'. The Altaians say that one can bear a sound as of the snapping of a string when the tyn is departing. One must not approach too near to a dying man, for the belief is that in such a case the tyn of a living person can pass into the latter.

(b) Suzy is derived from su, 'water', 'river', and uzak, 'long'. The word suuzak means 'long-lived', 'healthy'; and suzy signifies primarily the strength necessary for a man or animal in order that he may be healthy and live long.

(c) Kut is almost the same as suzy, or is, so to speak, the next stage of suzy. This word is derived from kudap, 'I vanish'. Kut connotes, in fact, the destruction of some vital principle. The expression er kudup vardy means 'the earth has lost its vitality' or 'has become barren'.

(d) Tula is probably derived from tulup, 'I tear'. Animals have no tula, it belongs only to men. During a shaman's performance he represents this soul as a small white bullet continually in motion like quicksilver.

(e) Sur, from surup, 'I pursue', 'I drive away'. This soul separates from a man at death, and is banished from the dead man's habitation forty days after his death. Surmet means a 'picture', 'representation'. The Altaians believe that both men and animals, or their surmet, continue to exist after bodily death, and have the same relations to one another as on earth.

(f) Sune, denoting a phase of the soul also peculiar to man, comes from sunep, 'I advise', 'discuss'. The word refers to the intellectual powers of man. It is this soul which assumes after death the living likeness of its possessor, and wanders in the dwelling of the dead man, sometimes calling out to his relatives.[3]

[1. Op. cit., p. 77.

2. Tyndu-agash, fresh, growing tree; tyndu-elen, fresh grass (ibid.),

3. Op. cit., p. 78.]

 

VII. THE MONGOLIC TRIBES.

 

THE BURYAT.

The Buryat religion is a form of polytheism. They have classes of supernal beings, each class having at its head one who is above the rest, but they have no conception of a Supreme Being over all. The highest spirits are called tengeri or tengeriny. They inhabit the sky.[1] There are ninety-nine tengeri each with a name of its own, divided into two groups-western, baruni, and eastern, zuni. Those of the west are kind, they predominate in numbers, being fifty-five, and are called sagani tengeri-White Tengeri. The eastern (forty-four in number) are mischievous, and are known as kharan tengeri, or Black Tengeri.[2]

Bauzaroff[3] speaks of the old Mongols as being heaven-worshippers, and this may be true of former times; now, however, we find among them a curious conception of heaven not as an indivisible whole, but as a collection of distinct bodies.

Following what Mr. Klementz [4] calls the theory of the atmospheric explanation of myths, Agapitoff and Khangaloff, in their Materials for the Study of Shamanism in Siberia, explain the ninety-nine tengeri as being each a personification of some atmospheric state, dull, bright, cold, stormy, &c.

The chief of the west tengeri is Khan-Tiurmas Tengeri among the Buryat of Balagansk, and Zayan-Sagan-Tengel among the Buryat of Kudinsk.[5] Not only the west tengeri, but also certain secondary spirits called burkhans or khats, and generally all the western or good zayans, are subordinate to this chief.

The east tengeri,[6] in contrast to those of the west, are hostile to men, among whom they send misfortunes, quarrels, sickness, and death. In the beginning there was no difference between these two classes of tengeri; but in consequence of a quarrel which arose among these spirits, some separated themselves and went to the east, where they have since remained as east tengeri, permanently hostile to the others and to men. There is a tradition among some of the Buryat, e.g. those of the Kuda River, that the white

[1. The sky as seen by daylight is called tengeri; the night sky is oktorgo.

2. Khangaloff, 1895, pp. 1-2.

3. Banzaroff, pp. 6, 26.

4. 'The Buriat,' E. R. E., p. 2.

5. In Buryat the word zayan means literally 'creator', and sagan, white'. Colloquially the former word has the ineaning 'god', 'deity'.

6. Khangaloff, op. cit., p. 10.]

 tengeri are older than the black-a tradition which may not be unconnected with the other just mentioned. The chief of the east tengeri is Ata-Ulan-Tengeri among the Balagansk Buryat, and among the Kudinsk Buryat, Khimkhir-Bogdo-Tengeri. Not only the black tengeri but also other lesser zayans are subordinate to him.

The Buryat believe that the visible sky has a door through which the -western tengeri look from time to time, to see how human affairs are going. If they behold some misfortune they send to the aid of men certain of their children, called khats. If a man should happen to look up at the sky when this door (tengerin-uden) opens, he will be very lucky, and all that he may then ask from heaven will be granted him. During the brief moment when this door is open, a glory falls Upon the earth and transfigures it to unwonted beauty.[1]

The most important of the western khats are Khan-Shargan-Noyon and Bukha-Noyon-Babai.

The other benevolent spirits are known among the Kudinsk Buryat as satini-burkat. They are held in great reverence, because, as their name shows (sa, 'tea'), they are tutelary spirits of tea-planting, and the offering made to them consists always of tea, never of tarasun.[2]

The Balagansk Buryat include among their benevolent spirits a dayda-delkha-ijin, that is, the 'host or owner of the whole earth', who is represented as an old man with grey hair. His name is Daban-Sagan-Noyon. His wife is also old and white-haired, and her name is Delent-Sagan-Khatun. The Buryat arrange tailgans to this zayan in the autumn after the harvest.

The Buryat of Olhonsk offer sacrifice to the 'hostess' of the sea, Aba-Khatun.

The Buryat of Balagansk have also important deities called sagani-khordut.[3]

Speaking generally, every feature of the whole landscape has its 'owner' (ijin). E.g. in the lakes and rivers there are spirits known as ukhun-khat; and in the forest lives oin-ijin, the 'Owner
 of the forest, a spirit harmful to men.[4]

The attitude of the Buryat towards the many 'owners' whom they see in nature is shown in the following prayer: 'Ye keepers of the echo in the high mountains, ye keepers of the winds of the

[1. Op. cit., p. 18.

2 Op. cit, p. 30.

3. Op. cit., p. 44.

4. Shashkoff, 1864, p. 49.]

wide sea; my lords who lodge in the high mountains, my gods who live in the wilderness! Be our support in our need! In the evil years be generous, grant us fertility in the lean months! When We sit within our yurtas ye are not a danger to us; when we are without, there is no hindrance to your power. In the warm night ye give us light, in the hot midday ye send us shade. Banish from us evil, bring near to us the good! Since ye have made yourselves Creators, save us from all perils! Ye suffer not our plate-like faces to sweat, nor our hearts, like buttons, to flutter. Guardians of our beads, ye who prepare food for our mouths! Through the doors of our yurtas send us rays of light, through our smoke-holes let us see the sun!"

A special class in the spiritual world is formed of 'smiths', who are also western, or white, and eastern, or black. The former protect men and heal them of ills. They are subordinate to the western tengeri, and they have given to men knowledge of their art. The first white smith was Bojintoy, a heavenly zayan. When, at the behest of the western tengeri, white smiths and black descended to earth, Bojintoy remained in the sky. He had one daughter and nine sons, all of whom were smiths.[1]

The eastern khats are of the same number as the western. Their head is Erlen-Khan and his family. Although they do nothing but mischief to men, they have communication sometimes with the western khats, the intermediaries, who have no other function to perform, being called ilshi or bydek. There are also nine 'cow' khats, who also belong to the eastern zayans but are not subject to their power.[3]

In the region of the evil spirits there are two dungeons, one of which, the larger, is known as Khalga, and to this the greatest black shamans go after death. It is tinder the rule of Khara-Eren-Noyon, and a soul can only leave the dungeon if the governor is well disposed towards it. The other dungeon is smaller, and is called Erlen-Tama. It is not accessible to shamans, and is under the direct control of Erlen-Khan.[4]

Eastern or black 'smiths' are called kara-darkhat.[5] They are specially protected by the eastern tengeri, who taught the smith's art to the first 'black' smith on earth, Khojir-Khara-Darkhan. The latter has seven sons, all of whom are great black 'smiths'.[6]

[1. Op. cit., p. 17.

2. Op. cit., pp. 38-9.

3. Op. cit., p. 17.

4. Op. cit., p. 51.

5. Darkhan, singualr-'a smith'. Darkhat is plural.

6. Op. cit., p. 53.]

The Buryat of Balagan believe that every disease has its zagan. Thus the disease common in their district, Sibirskaya yazva (called in Buryat bomo), has as its 'owner' Bolot-Sagan-Noyon.[1]

In the clan Olzoyev, in the district of Unginsk, there are two large white stones, Bumal-Sagan-Sbulun (literally, 'descending white stones'), which are believed to have fallen from the sky, and are worshipped by the natives.[2]

The souls of the greatest shamans after death become zayans and protectors of men. Even the souls of black shamans are said to arrange human business with the black zayans. Every ulus and clan has its own zayans-the souls of deceased shamans and shamanesses. Their bodies are burned or placed in coffins, which are put on trees in a neighbouring forest or on a mountain, whence they are called 'the old people of the mountain', khadaulan-obokhod. In every district there are such 'old people of the mountain', for whom are made tailgans and kiriks, with other lesser propitiatory offerings. These 'old people' are purely local divinities, and are not worshipped outside of the particular locality to which they belong..[3]

There are also two classes of ongons or fetishes-'black' and 'white'. They represent different spirits and are made of various kinds of material, usually of skins, and are of different forms, but generally have human faces. One kind of ongons serve only for the amusement of people. These are known as nadani ongon, nadani being the name given to an evening's amusement. The shaman calls upon the spirits represented by these ongons to amuse the young people during an evening party. When the spirit invoked arrives, the shaman himself pretends to be its ongon, and begins to make jests at the expense of the people present, who must not make any objection, but affect to be amused, for these ongons must be welcomed with merriment, and are annoyed otherwise.[4]

Although the Buryat have many legends about animals, which figure largely in their mythology, animals never rise to the rank of deities. Some are even said to have a future life, e.g. the horse, eagle, hedgehog, swan, fox, and even the worms in the fields. The snake is often represented in ritual as well as in mythology. It is a curious fact that the bear, which plays such an important part in the beliefs and ceremonies of other

[1. Op. cit., p. 54.

2. Op. cit., p. 45.

3. Op. cit., pp. 82

4. Op. cit., p. 76.]

shamanists, docs not enter into the myths and ritual of the Buryat.

The sun and the moon are among the principal tutelary spirits. In most of the tales they are represented as being of the male sex, and as taking women for wives. When there is an eclipse of the sun or moon, said a Balagansk shaman, this is because they have been swallowed by an alkha, a monster without trunk or limbs, having only a head. The sun, or the moon, then cries 'Save me!' and all the people shout and make a great noise to frighten the monster.[1]

The Buryat believe that man is composed of three parts: oyeye, material body; amin, lower soul, breath; and sunyesun, soul belonging to man only. Amin is connected with death; when it leaves the body, death occurs. Sunyesun has a similar connexion with sleep, leaving the body when one is sleeping. Batoroff [2] relates the history of the soul after death as follows: When the time comes for a man to die, erliks capture one of his souls, and bring it before Erlik-Nomon-Khan for judgement. After this soul has been captured, it sometimes happens that a man may live on for as long as nine years, but he never enjoys his former health and strength.

The second part of the soul does not leave the earth, but changes at the death of the man into a bokholdoy, which continues to live in a dwelling on earth and in a manner exactly similar to that which the man formerly followed. There are different classes of bokholdoys.

The third part of the soul is born again in the form of a human being but Batoroff [3] does not tell us when and how this reincarnation takes place.[4]

 Bokholdoys are sometimes the souls of deceased shamans, to whom the Buryat bring sacrifices, says Batoroff;[5] these bokholdoys, then, form the class of zayans to which reference was made above. Bokholdoys are more or less powerful, according to the quality of the shamans in life. This depends, Batoroff thinks,[6] on the utkha of the deceased shaman, which means literally, his descent or genealogy; but from other references to a shaman's utkha it

[1. Agapitoff and Khangaloff. p. 17.

2. 'Buryat belief's on the bokholdoys and anakhoys,' E. S. S. I. R. G. S., vol. ii, part ii, p. 13.

3. Op. cit., p. 14.

4. For further information as to peculiar Buryat beliefs about the soul, See the chapter on 'Death'.

5. Op. cit., p. 10. Ibid.]

seems clear that the word denotes supernatural, shamanistic power, like the Yakut amagyat.[1] The less important bokholdoys do not receive any propitiatory offerings other than an occasional libation, which may be performed by any one, not necessarily by a shaman.

 Ada or anakhay are, according to some traditions, souls of wicked persons or of women who have died childless. No sacrifices are made to them and they are represented as one-eyed, evil, malicious spirits, who always remain in the same ulus or house. They sometimes take the form of a dog or cat, always one-eyed; they wander at night, but not every one can see them, though any one can smell their disagreeable odour. They are afraid of being seen, of angry men, of fire, of metals, of weapons, and of the smell of heath. Though easily frightened, they are not easily banished from a house, and as they are especially harmful to young children under the age of seven, parents frequently arrange, naydji[2] with the shamans for their children's protection.[3]

The less important kind of bokholdoys are called ukher-ezy; these are the souls of sinful women who have died a violent death. No sacrifices are made to them, and nobody fears them. They can be seen by the same people as can see anakhay, but other people can perceive their odour. They come to wander on earth at the time when these women would have died in the ordinary course of events but for the violence which in fact ended their lives.[4] Klementz mentions also two other kinds of malicious spirits who originated from human souls, namely, mu-shubu -in the form of an evil-disposed bird-and dakhuls.[5]

 

VIII. THE FINNIC TRIBES.

In his account of the natives of north-western Siberia, the Ugrian Ostyak, Vogul, and Samoyed, Gondatti,[8] in speaking of their religion, pays most attention to the Vogul mythology. He says that the gods of the Vogul are divided into two classes, viz. of good and bad gods. The chief of the beneficent deities is Yanykli-Torilin (called also Numi-Toruni or Voykan-Toruin).

[1. See chapter on 'Shaman's Vocation'.

2. This term is explained in the chapter on 'Birth'.

3. Op. cit., pp. 10-11.

4 Op. cit., p. 13.

5. 'The Buriats,' E. R. E., p. 3.

6. Gondatti, Traces of Paganism among the Aborigines of North-Western Siberia, 1888, pp, 6-7.]

The principal evil deity is Khul. Yanykh-Torum. is, however, not the highest of the gods; there is another, higher than he, Kors-Torum. (The Creator), the progenitor of all the gods. Kors-Torum has never revealed himself to man, and the Vogul say that they cannot picture to themselves what he is like, that whatever they know of him is only known through the lesser gods.[1] He never descends to earth, but sometimes sends thither his eldest son, Yanykh-Torum. Yanykh-Torum has the form of a man, but from the splendour of his raiment he shines like gold. Like his father he never carries any weapon. About once a week he descends to earth to see how men's affairs are going on. If they pray to him to send rain or fair weather he gives commands to his younger brother, Sakhil-Torum, who dwells in the dark clouds, to do what is required. Sakhil-Torum, like his brother, has the form of a man, and drives reindeer, which have tusks like a mammoth, in the clouds. His reindeer are laden with casks of water. When they are sluggish he whips them up, and as they plunge under his strokes the water in the casks is spilled and falls on the earth as rain.

The following tale is told about the sons of Yanykh-Torum: When they were grown up their father sent them down to earth. On their arrival, they began to fight with the heroes who lived on earth in those days. To bring about peace, Yanykh summoned his sells and said to them, 'He among you who can first tie his bridle to-morrow to the silver post which stands before my house, shall be made elder and ruler over his brothers and over men.' The next day the first to appear was the youngest son, Mir-Susne-Khum. Since that time he has been the ruler of his brothers and of men, whom they try to keep in peace.[2]

[1. The Samoyed chief god Nini, or Ileumbarte (literally, 'giver of life'), although he is ruler both of earth and heaven, never descends to the unclean earth lest he might soil himself upon it, but communicates with man only through the tadebtsy (spirits), who for this purpose choose tadibey (shamans) from among men. (Islavin, The Samoyed, p. 109.) Lepekhi says that the tadebtsy of the Samoyed are not divided into bad and good spirits, but that they can harm or help men according to eircumstances. These tadebtsy are so numerous that there is no place on earth where they are not found. (Lepekhin, Full Collection of Scientific Travels in Russia, I.R.A.S., 1818, pp. 260-2.) Jackson says that the Samoyed regard atmospheric phenomena-storms, rain, snow-as the 'direct expressions, of the 'great god Num', and that his attitude towards men is one of complete indifference. (Notes on the Samoyeds of the Great Tundra, Joumal of the Anthropological Institute, vol. xxiv, p. 398.)

2. Op. cit., pp. 17-18]

Yanykh-Torum has seven sons, but neither he nor Kors-Torum has any daughters. Besides Yanykh and Kors-Torum and their sons there are many other gods. These latter are of secondary rank, and are specially connected with individuals, the family, or the clan.

Each category of gods has its own special sacrificial places.[1]

Kul-Odyr, or Kul, is the chief of the spirits of darkness, and the secondary dark spirits are known as menkva. These resemble the Koryak kelet in having the power of changing their forms. They are represented as being very tall, with heads of a conical shape. They sometimes kill and devour human beings. Other malicious spirits, called uchchi, inhabit the forest. They have the paws and teeth of a dog. In the forest, too, lives Mis-Khuni. He has many daughters, who try to entice men to live with them as their husbands. If they succeed, this brings good fortune to the fathers of the men thus captured.[2]

In the water lives the good god Vit-Khon, as well as a dark spirit, Vit-Kul. The first was sent by Numi to have charge of the fishes.

The mythology of the Finnic tribes is very rich in tales about heroes, called in Vogul pokatur or odyr. These heroes were continually quarrelling and fighting among themselves, especially about women, therefore Numi punished them by sending a deluge upon the earth.[3]

Representations of gods and fetishes are made of wood, metal, or bone. They are usually very rude in form, and now that these people can obtain children's dolls very cheaply from Russian traders they are ceasing to make their own fetishes.[4]

A man, according to the belief of the Finnic tribes, is composed of three parts: body, shadow (isi), and soul (lili khelmkholas). LiIi khelmkholas passes, after the death of a man, to an infant of the same clan, or, if the clan has become extinct, to one of another clan, but never to an animal. The shadow goes to a cold underworld, situated in the icy seas beyond the mouth of the Obi, and ruled over by Kul Odyr. Here it lives for as long as the term of the dead man's former life on earth, and follows the same pursuits-reindeer-breeding, fishing, &c. Then the shadow begins to grow smaller and smaller, until it is no larger than a blackbeetle, ker-khomlakh (according to some, it actually does turn into a blackbeetle), and finally disappears altogether.[5]

[1. Op. cit., p. 7.

2. Op. cit., p. 35.

3. Op. cit., p. 36.

4. Op. cit., p. 16.

5. Op. cit., p. 39.]

 

    
Shamanism in Siberia, by M.A. Czaplicka, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XIV

 

SOME CEREMONIES

 

I. THE CHUKCHEE.

CHUKCHEE ceremonials have as the only object of their performance the material welfare of the community, and incantations are the main substance of their rites.

The Reindeer Chukchee's only regular ceremonials are those connected with the herd; these they call 'sacrifices' or 'genuine sacrifices '. 'Strictly speaking,' says Bogoras, 'every slaughtering of reindeer is a sacrifice and is performed according to certain rules. After the animal is stabbed the Chukchee watch carefully to see on whieh side it falls. To fall on the wounded side is a less favourable omen than to fall on the other; and to fall backwards is still worse, and forebodes misfortune.'[1]

Besides reindeer, dogs are also slaughtered, and sometimes substitute sacrifices are offered, of reindeer made of willow-leaves or even of snow. Most sacrifices are offered to the good spirits. Evil spirits are also sacrificed to, but the offerings to these are made at midnight, in darkness, and are never spoken of.[2]

The most regular sacrifices are the Autumn Slaughtering,[3] Winter Slaughtering,[4] the Ceremonial of Antlers,[5] the Sacrifice to the New Moon, the Sacrifice to the Fire, the Sacrifice for Luck in Hunting," and a ceremonial connected with the killing of wild reindeer bucks.[7] Besides these seasonal ceremonials there is also a Thanksgiving Ceremonial, which each family must perform once or twice a year, on different occasions.[8]

Bogoras gives a summary account of the ceremonials of the Maritime Chukchee as follows: 'The cycle of the ceremonials with the Maritime Chukchee opens with two short ceremonials in the beginning of the autumn, which are often joined together. One of them is a commemorative sacrifice to the dead. The

[1. Bogoras, The Chukchee, p. 368.

2. Op. cit., pp. 369-70.

3. Op. cit., p. 372.

4. Op. cit., p. 376.

5. Op. cit., p. 377.

6. Op. cit., p. 378.

7. Op. cit., p. 379.

8. Op. cit., p. 381.]

other is a sacrifice to the sea, in order to ensure good fortune in subsequent sealing on the sea-ice in winter.

'Late in the autumn, or rather in the beginning of the winter, the chief ceremonial of the year is performed. It is consecrated to Keretkim, or is made a thanksgiving ceremonial to the spirits of sea-mammals killed since the fall. Early in spring there follows the ceremonial of boats, which are made ready for the approaching season. In the middle of summer the ceremonial of heads is performed. This is for thanksgiving to the spirits of sea-animals killed since early in the spring.
 'These four ceremonials are performed with varying similarity by both the Maritime Chukchee and the Asiatic Eskimo. To these must be added some slight ceremonials effected while moving from the winter lodging to the summer tent.

'Most of the Maritime Chukchee offer sacrifice also in midwinter to the star Pehittin, and perform in the middle of spring a ceremonial analogous to the ceremonial of antlers of the reindeer. breeders, which is called by the same name, Kilvei. The sacrifice to the whale is performed, in addition, each time after a whale has been killed or has drifted ashore.

'Bloody and bloodless sacrifices are offered during these ceremonials. The Maritime Chukchee, of course, can slaughter only dogs for their bloody sacrifices. In comparison with the Koryak, however, they are merciful to their dogs and kill them in no very great numbers. In this, as in other respects, they occupy a middle ground between the American Eskimo, who do not sacrifice dogs, and the Koryak, who often kill almost all the animals of their single team.'[1]

The ceremonial dedicated to Keretkun,[2] the sea-god, is especially important among the Maritime Chukchee. When the seal-gut overcoats for the family (which are said to be similar to those worn by Keretkun and his family), the ceremonial head-dresses and the incantation-paddle, on which there are pictorial representations of prayers, are ready, a net is suspended overhead, and various images of birds and small paddles are hung from it. On each side of the hearth is placed a reindeer-skin, the two skins representing the inner rooms of the house. Keretkun, who is represented by a small wooden image, enters the house and is placed on a lamp, which is put either on one of the skins or

[1. Op. cit., pp. 385-6.

2. Op. cit., pp. 892-401.]

in a sleeping-room. Here he remains until the end of the ceremony. A fire is made before him and kept burning throughout the three days of the ceremonial. Among those people, like the Asiatic Eskimo, who have no wood, a second lamp is kept burning before that on which Keretkun is placed. Puddings made of various roots mixed with oil and liver are sacrificed to the god. On the first day the household enjoys the festival alone, singing and dancing and beating the drum.

'The second day belongs to the guests and particularly to the shamans, who have to show, in turn, their skill in drumming and singing.'[1] It is on this day that, in many villages, the so-called 'exchanging of presents' takes place. Usually, the guests assemble at the entrance of the sleeping-room, bringing various household articles, which they thrust under the partition, loudly demanding what they wish in exchange. The mistress takes whatever is offered and must give in exchange whatever is demanded.

In some cases the exchange is made between relatives only, and especially between those who are partners in the marriages called by Bogoras 'group-marriage'. A man will send his wife to one of his marriage-partners to ask for certain articles, and afterwards the donor sends his wife to ask for an equivalent.

Another variety of ceremonial exchange, which also forms a part of the second day's ceremonies, is what is called by Bogoras the 'trading-dance'.[2] It takes place between the members of a 'compound marriage', beginning with a dance in which a male member of the group has one of the women for his partner. 'Frequently the man looks on only, while the woman dances before him. He must provide a reindeer-skin, however, to spread on the ground under her feet while she is dancing. While the dance is being Performed the other dancers remain quiet, and look on together with the other spectators. After the dance, the man must give some present to the woman; and the following night they sleep together, leaving their respective mates to arrange matters between themselves. On the next day the husband of the woman and the wife of the man perform a similar dance, in which the man gives an equivalent of the present of the day before, and each newly mated couple sleeps together for another night. Such dances are

[1 Ibid.

2 A special meaning of 'trade' in the U.S.A. is the exchange of commodities in business; trading=bartering, swapping'.]

arranged chiefly among cousins or other relatives, who, among the Chukchee, frequently assume the bond of compound marriage. Conversely, a new bond of compound marriage may be concluded through a trading-dance.'

The third day of the Keretkun ceremonial is the women's day. This time it is they who act as drummers and dancers. 'A new[1] detail is that of a night-watch, which must be kept for the sake of Keretkun, who is supposed to stay in the house all the time, This watch is kept by an old man or woman', who is often a shaman, invited specially for this purpose. The shaman sits on
 a stool made of a whale's vertebra, and 'sings and beats the drum in a subdued key, in order not to awaken the supernatural guest'. The keeper of the watch on the last night must be a woman.

On the evening of the last day a reindeer is cooked, and the meat distributed among the guests, who carry their shares home with them on departing.

Finally, the image of Keretkun is burned over his lamp. Then all the refuse of the sacrificed reindeer is gathered up and cast into the sea, to symbolize the returning to the sea of all game killed since the last ceremonial. This same symbolic act is performed at almost all of the Maritime ceremonials.

 

II. THE KORYAK.

The Koryak offer sacrifices to their Supreme Being to secure prosperity for the future. At these sacrifices, some blood from the wounds of the victim, dog or reindeer, are sprinkled on the ground as an offering to the kala, with the words: 'This blood is for thee, kala!'[2] Thus we see that bloody sacrifices among these people are offered to malevolent as well as to benevolent beings.

Besides occasional sacrifices, the Koryak have several sacrificial ceremonies which are regular or seasonal, and all connected with the cult of the animals on -which their livelihood depends. Thus the Maritime Koryak worship sea-animals, and the Reindeer

[1. Differing that is, from the custom of the Reindeer Chukchee, whose procedure at the autumn ceremonial and the 'thanksgiving' is in most other respects similar to that described here.

2. Jochelson, The Koryak, p. 93. 'Otherwise the kala might intercept the sacrifice and prevent its reaching the Supreme Being' (ibid.).]

Koryak their herd. This is illustrated by the following list of festivals:

 Maritime Koryak:[1]
 1. Whale-festival.
 2. The putting away of the skin-boat for the winter.
 3. Launching the skin-boat.
 4. Wearing of masks.

 Reindeer Koryak: [2]
 1. Ceremony on the return of the herd from summer pastures.
 2. The fawn-festival.

 Ceremonies common to both: [3]
 1. Bear-festival.
 2. Wolf-festival.
 3. Practices in connexion with fox-hunting.

Jochelson's description[4] of the wolf-festival is here quoted as being typical of the ritual practices common to both Reindeer and Maritime Koryak:

'After having killed a wolf, the Maritime Koryak take off its skin, together with the head, just as they proceed with the bear; then they place near the hearth a pointed stick, and tie an arrow, called ilhun or elgoi, to it, or drive an arrow into the ground at its butt end. One of the men puts on the wolf-skin and walks around the hearth, while another member of the family beats the drum. The wolf-festival is called elhogicnin, i. e. 'wolf-stick festival'.

'The meaning of this ceremony is obscure. I have been unable to get any explanation from the Koryak with reference to it. "Our forefathers did this way", is all they say. I have found no direct indications of the existence of totemism among the Koryak; but the wearing of the skin of the wolf and of the bear during these festivals may be compared to certain features of totemistic festivals, in which some members of the family or clan represent the totem by putting on its skin.

'The wolf-festival differs from the bear-festival in the absence of the equipment for the home journey.' The reason is this, that

[1. Jochelson, op. cit., p. 65.

2. Op. cit., pp. 86-7.

3. Op. cit., pp. 88-90.

4 op. Cit., pp. 89-90.

5. The essential part of the whale-festival is based on the conception that the whale killed has come on a visit to the village; . . . that it will return to the sea to repeat its visit the following year'; and that, if hospitably received, it will bring its relatives with it when it comes again. Hence it is symbolically equipped with grass travelling bags filled with puddings for its return to the sea. (Op. cit., pp. 66, 74, 76'.) A similar procedure is followed at the bear festival. (Op. cit., p. 89.)]

the bear is sent home with much ceremony, to secure successful bear-hunting in the future, bear's meat being considered a delicacy, while the festival serves at the same time to protect the people from the wrath of the slain animal and its relatives. The wolf, on the other band, does not serve as food, but is only a danger to the traveller in the desert. He is dangerous, not in his visible, animal state-for the northern wolves, as a rule, are afraid of men -but in his invisible, anthropomorphic form. According to the Koryak conception, the wolf is a rich reindeer-owner and the powerful master of the tundra . . . [and] avenges [himself] particularly on those that hunt [wolves].' The Reindeer Koryak, who have special reason to fear the wolf on account of their berds, regard this animal as a powerful shaman and an evil spirit.

'After having killed a wolf, the Reindeer Koryak slaughter a reindeer, cut off its head, and put its body, together with that of the killed wolf, on a platform raised on posts. The reindeer-head is placed so as to face eastward. It is a sacrifice to The-One-on-High, who is thus asked not to permit the wolf to attack the herd. Special food is prepared in the evening, and the wolf is fed. The night is spent without sleep, in beating the drum, and dancing to entertain the wolf, lest his relatives come and take revenge. Beating the drum and addressing themselves to the wolf, the people say, "Be well!" (Nimeleu gatvanvota!), and addressing The-One-on-High, they say, "Be good, do not make the wolf bad!"'[1]

 

III. THE AINU.

Although the bear-festival is common to all the Palaeo-Siberians and is celebrated also by some of the Neo-Siberians, it has reached its highest development among the Ainu. We give here a short description of the principal features of this festival, following Kharuzin's account.[2]

Towards the end of winter the Ainu catch a bear-cub and bring it into the village, where it is reared and fed by a woman. When it is sufficiently grown to break out of its wooden cage, which usually happens some time in September or October, this marks

[1. Op. cit., p. 89.

2. N. Kharuzin, Ethnography, 1905, vol. iv, pp. 371-2. For a more detailed description see B. Pilsudski's Niedzwiedzie Swieto u Ainow (in Sphinx, Warsaw, 1905).]

the time for the holding of the festival. Before the ceremonies, apologies are made to the spirits for the capture and detention of the bear, assurances are given that the treatment of the bear has been marked with the greatest tenderness, and it is explained that, as they cannot feed the animal any longer, they are obliged to kill it. The person entrusted with the conduct of the festival invites all relations and friends, usually practically the whole village. Before the ceremonies are begun, libations are made to the family hearth-fire by the host and all his guests. Sacrifices are made to the spirit-'owner' of the dwelling in a corner of the house sacred to him. The woman who has reared the bear weeps to show her sorrow at its approaching fate. The company approach the cage of the bear, libations are made, and some wine is given to the animal in a special cup. The women and girls dance round the cage, clapping their hands and singing. Then the foster-mother of the bear, and women who have reared other bears for former festivals, perform a dance of their own before the cage, with tears in their eyes, stretching out their hands towards the animal, and uttering endearing words. After some other ritual observances, the bear is taken out of its cage, a cord is fastened round its neck, and a stick is thrust down its throat by the united force of several people, so that the animal is choked to death. With much solemnity the body is laid out, -and surrounded with various embellishments, which are more numerous and elaborate if the animal is a female. Food and drink are offered to the spirit of the victim, and then follow much feasting and merriment, which is intended to render the bear spirit joyous and gay. The body is flayed and disembowelled, and the head cut off, the blood being collected in a pot and drunk by the men only among the guests. The liver is also consumed, and of this each woman and girl present receives a small portion. The rest of the meal is preserved for the next day's feast, and all the guests of both sexes partake of this.

 

IV. THE TURKIC TRIBES.

 

(1) THE YAKUT.

There are among the Yakut two kinds of sacrificial ceremonies -bloody and bloodless. The former is that made to abassylars, the latter to aiy and ichchi;[1] so that if one does not know beforehand

[1. Sieroszewski (12 Lat w Kraju Yakatow, p. 389) says that to only one aiy, Bay-Baynay, the god of hunting are bloody sacrifices offered.]

whether the sacrifice is being offered to black or to white spirits, this can be ascertained from the nature of the ceremony. Although bloody sacrifices are not made to Urun-Aiy-Toyon, yet it is customary to dedicate certain animals to him, i. e. such animals are not to be used for work, and mares so dedicated are not to be milked. Formerly it was the custom to dedicate in this manner all mares which had foals: they were let loose to wander on the steppes.

There are some aiy, which although they have this name, yet are of the class of abassy.[1] Sacrifices of the choicest meat and drink are made to them through the fire. The offerings to abassylars have the character of a compromise or bargain. The evil spirit wishes to have the kut (one of the souls) of a man, and the shaman gives instead the kut of an animal.

There are two tribal festivals of the Yakut: a spring festival, aiy-ysyakh, and an autumn festival, abassy-ysyakh. As the name shows, the first is celebrated for the good spirits in general, and for Urun-Aiy-Toyon in particular.[2] After the sacrifice, which is followed by certain sports or games, a dramatic representation of the struggle between spring and winter is given. One man, called the aiy-uola, is dressed in white and mounted on a white horse to represent the spring, while another, abassy-uola, represents winter by being dressed in black or reddish garments and mounted on a horse of corresponding colour.

The abassy-ysgakh is held in autumn, and in the open air like the first festival, but at night. It is dedicated to the black spirits, and especially to Ulu-Toyon. While the first festival is conducted by the clan-father, the second is under the direction of nine shamans and nine shamanesses.[3]

 

(2) THE ALTAIANS.

Sacrifice to Bai-Yulgen. The description of this ceremony, as given by Mikhailowski,[4] is compiled from the works of the

[1. Troshchanski, The Evolution of the Black Faith, 1902,p. 103.

2. Op. cit., pp. 105-6.

Sieroszewaski (op. cit., p. 388) calls the highest good spirit, or god, Art-Toyon-Aga (Uyun-Artoyen), which literally means 'Master-Father-Sovereign'. He lives in the ninth heaven, and is great and powerful, but indifferent towards human affairs. The spring ysyakh is primarily in his honour, says Sieroszewski, while Urun-Aiy-Toyon, 'White-Master-Creator', is next to him in dignity.

3. Ibid.

4 Mikhailowski, Shamanism, pp. 63-7.]

missionary Wierbicki and the well-known linguist and traveller, Radloff. The ceremony lasts for two or three days, or rather, evenings, the first evening being occupied by the preparatory ritual. A spot is chosen in a thicket of birch-trees in a meadow, and there the kam (shaman) erects a decorative yurta. In this is planted a young birch, crowned with a flag, and having its lower branches lopped off, and nine notches cut in its trunk to represent steps (tapty). The yurta is surrounded by a penfold, and by the entramce to this is set a birch-stick with a noose of horsehair. A holder of the head (Bash-tutkan-kiski) of the sacrificial horse is chosen from among those present. The kam flourishes a birch-twig over the horse to indicate that its soul is being driven to Bai-Yulgen's abode, whither the soul of the Bash-tutkan accompanies it. He then collects spirits in his tambourine, calling each one by name, and answering for each as it arrives: 'I also am here, Kam!' As he speaks he makes motions with his tambourine as if taking the spirits into it. When he has secured his assistants, the kam goes out of the yurta, mounts upon a scarecrow made to resemble a goose, and flapping his arms as if they were wings, chants loudly and slowly:'

	 
		Beneath the white sky,
		 Above the white cloud,
		 Beneath the blue sky,
		 Above the blue cloud,
		 Skyward ascend, O bird!
		
		 The goose replies (through the shaman himself, of course) in a series of quacks-'Ungaigak, ungaigak, kaigaigak gak, kaigai gak.' The kam, still on his feathered steed, pursues the pura (soul) of the sacrificial horse, neighing in imitation of the unwilling victim, until, with the help of the spectators, he drives it into the penfold to the stick with the horsehair noose, the guardian of the pura. After violent efforts, to the accompaniment of neighings and other noises produced by the shaman to imitate the struggles of the pura, the latter frees itself and runs away. It is at last recaptured, and fumigated with juniper by the shaman, who has now dismounted from his goose. Then the real sacrificial horse is brought and blessed by the kam, who thereafter kills it by opening the aorta. The bones and skin form the actual sacrifice. The flesh is consumed by those present at the ceremony, the choicest portion falling to the kam.

[1. Op. cit., p. 63.]

'The most important part of the performance takes place oil the second day after sunset; it is then that the kam must display all his power and all his dramatic art. A whole religious drama is performed, descriptive of the kam's pilgrimage to Bai-Yulgen in heaven. A fire burns in the yurta, the shaman feeds the lords of the tambourine, i.e. the spirits personifying the shamanistic power of his family, with the meat of the offering and sings:[1]

	 
		Accept this, O Kaira Khan!
		 Master of the tambourine with six horns,
		 Draw near with the sound of the bell!
		 When I cry 'Chokk'! make obeisance!
		 When I cry 'Me'! accept this!
		
		 The 'owner' of the fire, representing the power of the family of the master of the yurta, who has organized the festival, is addressed in a similar invocation. Then the kam takes a cup and makes noises with his lips to imitate the sounds of drinking made by an assemblage of invisible guests. He distributes morsels of meat to the company, who devour them as representatives of the unseen spirits. Nine garments, on a rope decked with ribbons, the offering of the host to Yulgen, are fumigated with juniper by the shaman, who sings:

	 
		Gifts that no horse can carry
		      Alas! Alas! Alas!
		 Gifts that no man can lift
		      Alas! Alas! Alas!
		 Garments with triple collar-
		 Turn them thrice before thine eyes,
		 Let them be a cover for the steed,
		      Alas! Alas! Alas!
		 Prince Yulgen full of gladness!
		      Alas! Alas! Alas!
		
		 The kam next invokes many spirits, primary and secondary, having first donned his shaman's garment, and fumigated his tambourine, which he strikes to summon the spirits, answering for each, as it arrives, 'Here am I, kam!' Merkyut, the Bird of Heaven, is invoked as follows:

	 
		Birds of Heaven, the five Merkyuts!
		 Ye with mighty talons of brass,
		 Of copper is the moon's claw,
		 And of ice its beak;
		 Mightily flap the spreading wings,
		 Like to a fan is the long tail.
		 The left wing veils the moon
		 And the right obscures the sun,
		 Thou, mother of nine eagles,
		 Turning not aside, thou fliest over Yaik,
		 Over Edil thou weariest not!
		 Draw nigh with song!
		 Lightly draw nigh to my right eye,
		 Of my right shoulder make thou thy resting-place
		
		 [1. Op. cit., p. 64.]

The answering cry of the bird comes from the lips of the shaman: 'Kagak, kak, kak! Kain, here I come!' The kam seems to bend beneath the weight of the huge bird. His tambourine sounds louder and louder, and he staggers under the burden of the vast number of spirit-protectors collected in it. Having walked several times round the birch placed in the yurta, the shaman kneels at the door and asks the porter-spirit for a guide. His request granted, he comes out to the middle of the yurta, and with convulsive movements of the upper part of his body and inarticulate mutterings, beats violently upon the tambourine. Now he purifies the host, hostess, their children, and relatives by embracing them in such a way that the tambourine with the spirits collected in it touches the breast and the drum-stick the back of each. This is done after he has scraped from the back of the host with the drum-stick all that is unclean, for the back is the seat of the soul. Thus all are liberated from the malign influence of the wicked Erlik. Then the people return to their places and the shaman 'drives all potential misfortunes out of doors',[1] and, beating his tambourine close to the ear of his host, drives into him the spirit and power of his ancestors that he may understand the prophecies of the shaman. In pantomime he invests each member of the family with breastplates and hats, and then falls into an ecstasy. He beats his tambourine furiously, rushes about as if possessed, and, after mounting the first step cut in the birch-trunk, runs round the fire and the birch, imitating the sound of thunder. Next he mounts a bench covered with a horse-cloth, which represents the pitra, and cries: [2]

	 
		One step have I ascended,
		     Aikhai! Aikhai!
		 One zone I have attained.
		     Shagarbata!
		 To the topmost tapty [the birch steps] I have mounted.
		     Shagarbata!
		 I have risen to the full moon.
		     Shagarbata!
		
		 [1. Ibid.

2. Op. cit, p. 65.]

Hurrying on the Bash-tutkan, the kam passes from one zone of heaven to another. The goose once more takes the place of the wearied pura, affording temporary relief to the Bash-tutkan, who relates his woes vicariously by means of the shaman. In the third zone a halt is made, the shaman prophesies impending misfortunes, and declares what sacrifices are to be offered by the district. If he foretells rainy weather he sings:

	 
		Kara Shurlu of the six rods
		 Drips on the low ground,
		 No hoofed beast can protect itself,
		 No creature with claws can uphold itself.
		
		 Similar prophecies may be made in other regions of the sky.

When the Bash-tutkan is rested the journey is continued, progress being indicated by mounting one step higher on the birch for every new zone attained. Variety is given to the performance by the introduction of various episodes. 'In the sixth sphere of heaven takes place the last episodical scene, and this has a comic tinge. The shaman sends his servant Kuruldak to track and catch a hare that has hidden itself. For a time the chase is unsuccessful, now personages are introduced, and one of them, Kereldei, mocks Kuruldak, who, however, at last succeeds in catching the hare.'[1]

Previously, in the fifth heaven, the kam has interviewed Yayuchi ('Supreme-Creator'), and learned many secrets of the future, some of which he communicates aloud. In the sixth heaven he makes obeisance to the moon, and in the seventh to the sun, for these heavens are the abodes of these luminaries. Only a few shamans are powerful enough to mount beyond the ninth heaven. Having reached the highest zone attainable by his powers, the kam drops his tambourine, and beating gently with the drum-stick, makes a humble petition to Yulgen:

	 
		Lord, to whom three stairways lead,
		 Bai-Yulgen, possessor of three flocks,
		 The blue vault which has appeared,
		 The blue sky that shows itself,
		 The blue cloud that whirls along,
		 The blue sky so hard to reach,
		 Land a year's journey distant from water,
		 Father Yulgen thrice exalted,
		 Shunned by the edge of the moon's axe,
		 Thou who usest the hoof of the horse
		 O Yulgen, thou hast created all men
		 Who are stirring round about us.
		 Thou, Yulgen, hast bestowed all cattle upon us,
		 Let us not fall into sorrow!
		 Grant that we may withstand the evil one!
		 Let us not behold Kermes [the evil spirit that attends man],
		 Deliver us not into his hands!
		 Thou who a thousand thousand times
		 The starry shy hast turned,
		 Condemn me not for sin!
		
		 [1. Op. cit., p. 65

2. Op. cit., p. 66.]

'From Yulgen the shaman learns whether the sacrifice is accepted or not, and receives the most authentic information concerning the wealth and the character of the coming harvest; he also finds out what sacrifices are expected by the deity. On such an occasion the shaman designates the neighbour who is bound to furnish a sacrifice, and even describes the colour and appearance of the animal. After his conversation with Yulgen, the ecstasy of the shaman reaches its highest point, and he falls down completely exhausted. Then the Bash-tutkan goes up to him, and takes the tambourine and drum-stick out of his bands. After a short time, during which quiet reigns in the yurta, the shaman seems to awake, rubs his eyes, stretches himself, wrings out the perspiration from his shirt, and salutes all those present as if after a long absence.'[1]

This sometimes concludes the festival, but more often, especially among the wealthy, a third day is spent in feasting and libations to the gods[2]

 

V. THE MONGOLIC TRIBES.

Sacrifices among the Mongols are either: (a) regular or public (tailgan), or (b) occasional or private (kirik).

Banzaroff says that Georgi, as long ago as the latter part of the eighteenth century, observed three regular sacrificial ceremonies among the Mongols: the spring, summer, and autumn festivals. Banzaroffs traces the origin of these festivals to a period long

[1. Ibid.

2. Ibid.

3. Banzaroff, The Black Faith, p. 38.]

antedating the Christian era. The festival which has been best described in recent times is that called urus-sara ('the month of sara'), which is intended to celebrate and symbolize the renewing of all things. When the earth is green again, the flocks increase, and milk is abundant, the Kalmuk make sacrifice of all these gifts in the form of kumys, herbs, and horses. The sacrificial horses are tied to a rope, which is stretched between two poles. A man on horseback, accompanied by another riding a colt, passes along the row of victims, pours over them kumys, and fastens to their manes pieces of pink cloth. Then the sacrifice is offered.[1]

The autumn festival of the Mongols, like the urus-sara, is very ancient. Banzaroff finds mention of it in writers of pre-Christian times, and in the Middle Ages it is referred to by Marco Polo, who says it was celebrated on August 28th. This ceremony is known as sagan-sara ('white month'), and the Mongols used to date their New Year from the time of its celebration. The majority of these people nowadays celebrate the beginning of the year in winter, but they, like the few who adhere to the old date, still call the New Year and the festival which is held then sagan-sara.[2]

An English traveller of the middle of the nineteenth century, who witnessed the celebration of the spring festival in the valley of Ichurish in the Altai, describes it as follows:

'In the spring the Kalmucks offer up sacrifices to their deity; the rich give horses, those who are poor sacrifice sheep or goats. I was present at one of the ceremonies. A ram was led up by the owner, who wished for a large increase to his herds and flocks. It was handed to an assistant of the priest, who killed it in the usual manner. His superior stood near, looking to the east, and began chanting a prayer, and beating on his large tambourine to rouse up his god, and then made his request for multitudes of sheep and cattle. The ram was being flayed; and when the operation was completed, the skin was put on a pole, raised above the, framework, and placed with its head to the east. The tambourine thundered forth its sound, and the performer continued his wild chant. The flesh was cooked in a large cauldron, and the tribe held a great festival.'[3]

Speaking only of the greater Buryat ceremonials, Khangaloff

[1. Op. cit., p. 39.

2. Op. cit., pp. 39-40.

3. T. W. Atkinson, Oriental and Western Siberia, 1858, pp. 382-3.

4. New Materials respecting Shamanism among the Buryat, 1890, p. 97.]

mentions about thirty such, and says that these are by no means all, and that years of further investigation would be necessary to render it possible to give a complete list.

Among the Balagansk Buryat every male child must offer certain sacrifices to the western khats to ensure their protection while the children are still in infancy as well as during their future adult life. These sacrifices, viz. (i) morto-ulan-khurgan, (ii) erkhindkhi-ulan-khurgan, (iii) Charga-tekhe, (iv) yaman-khonin-khoer, must, without fail, be offered by all boys, but upon girls they are not obligatory. Besides these sacrifices there are others which are made on behalf of all young children, irrespective of their sex, to certain zayans and zayanesses, termed ukhan-khata. These are called ukhan-budla, oshkin-budla. We shall quote here Khangaloff's description of the ceremony ukhan-budla:

'Some time after having a child born to him, a Buryat, either fit the instance of a shaman or on his own initiative, will make preparation for the performance of the ceremony called ukhan-budla. A shaman is invited to perform the ceremony. When the shaman appears, water is brought from a spring, or sometimes from a lake or river. Before drawing the water, some copper coins are dropped into the place from which it is taken. A bundle of coarse grass of the steppes, another of rushes, and nine silken threads are prepared. When everything is ready, the shaman makes libation to the zayans and zayanesses, pronouncing the following words:

	 
		The boys, like the rushes,
		 The maids, like mushrooms;
		 From the grass of the steppe
		 They have made a scourge;
		 With the water of the spring
		 They have made budla (ablution);
		 With the nine silken threads
		 They have made a scourge.
		
		 After this the water is poured into a pot and heated. Then they put into the pot the grass also, and a broom is made of the rushes. The child is placed in a shallow vessel surrounded by nine stones, and the shaman says: "The black stone is the door, the tawny stone is the courtyard." He then takes the broom, dips it into the water, and striking the child lightly with it, tells him tells him that he must not cry, but grow quickly. Now nine knots are made in the nine threads, and they are placed around the child's neck. The water is spilled on the floor of the yurta, and the broom is placed over the door to prevent the entrance of evil spirits. Thus ends the ukhan-budla.'[1]

As a rule Buryat ceremonies are performed by the shamans; but some of the minor ones, such, for instance, as the 'feeding' of the ongons, are conducted by the master of the house. Women's ongons are made and fed by women. Frequently animals are dedicated to ongons, either for some shorter or longer period or for life. Such an animal must not be used for any heavy, work, and no married woman must touch it. The Mongols call this custom setertey, which denotes both the dedication and the taboo.[2]

Another case of the dedication of animals is that which is some times practised with regard to a horse whose master has died. The animal is taboo, and must not be used for heavy work. Under
 ordinary circumstances, when a Buryat dies, his horse is either killed or set loose to wander at large upon the steppes.[3]

[1. Op. cit., p. 91.

2. Shashkoff, Shamanism in Siberia, p. 58.

3. Graelin, Reise durch Sibirien, 1751-2, iii. 33.]




===== BOOK: slaa.txt =====



Sun Lore of All Ages, by William Tyler Olcott, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

  

SUN LORE OF ALL AGES

  

by

  

WILLIAM TYLER OLCOTT

  

New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons

  

[1914]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, July 2007, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

Sun Lore of All Ages, by William Tyler Olcott, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. v]

  

Introduction

IN the compilation of the volume Star Lore of All Ages, a wealth of interesting material pertaining to the mythology and folk-lore of the sun and moon was discovered, which seemed worth collating in a separate volume.

Further research in the field of the solar myth revealed sufficient matter to warrant the publication of a volume devoted solely to the legends, traditions, and superstitions that all ages and nations have woven about the sun, especially in view of the fact that, to the author's knowledge, no such publication has yet appeared.

The literature of the subject is teeming with interest, linked as it is with the life-story of mankind from the cradle of the race to the present day, for the solar myth lies at the very foundation of all mythology, and as such must forever claim preeminence.

Naturally, there clusters about the sun a rich mine of folk-lore. The prominence of the orb of day, its importance in the maintenance and the development of life, the mystery that has ever

[p. vi]

enveloped it, its great influence in the well-being of mankind, have secured for the sun a history of interest equalled by none, to which every age and every race have contributed their pages.

In the light of modern science, this mass of myth and legend may seem childish and of trifling value, but each age spells its own advance, and the all-important present soon fades into the shadowy and forgotten past. It is therefore in reviving past history that progress is best measured and interpreted. The fancy so prevalent among the ancients that the sun entered the sea each night with a hissing noise seems to us utterly foolish and inane, but let us not ridicule past ages for their crude notions and quaint fancies, lest some of the cherished ideas of which we boast be transmuted by the touch of time into naught but idle visions.

It is therefore important for the student of history to study the past in all its phases, and whatever can be brought to light of the lore of bygone ages should have for us a charm and should find a place in our intellectual lives.

W. T. O.

NORWICH, CONN.

Sun Lore of All Ages, by William Tyler Olcott, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

  

Contents

           

        

       PAGE

     
      I.--

       SOLAR CREATION   MYTHS

       <page 3>

     
      II.--

       ANCIENT IDEAS   OF THE SUN AND THE MOON

       <page 35>

     
      III.--

       SOLAR MYTHOLOGY

       <page 53>

     
      IV.--

       SOLAR MYTHOLOGY   (Continued)

       <page 91>

     
      V.--

       SOLAR FOLK-LORE

       <page 119>

     
      VI.--

       SUN WORSHIP

       <page 141>

     
      VII.--

       SUN WORSHIP (Continued)

       <page 163>

     
      VIII.--

       SUN-CATCHER   MYTHS

       <page 205>

     
      IX.--

       SOLAR FESTIVALS

       <page 227>

     
      X.--

       SOLAR OMENS,   TRADITIONS, AND SUPERSTITIONS

       <page 253>

     
      XI.--

       SOLAR   SIGNIFICANCE OF BURIAL CUSTOMS. ORIENTATION

       <page 267>

     
      XII--

       EMBLEMATIC AND   SYMBOLIC FORMS OF THE SUN

       <page 287>

     
   

Sun Lore of All Ages, by William Tyler Olcott, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1] [p. 2]

[p. 3]

  

Chapter I

  

Solar Creation Myths

IN the literature of celestial mythology, the legends that relate to the creation of the chief luminaries occupy no small part. It was natural that primitive man should at an early date speculate on the great problem of the creation of the visible universe, and especially in regard to the source whence sprang the Sun and the Moon.

This great question, of such vital interest to all nations since the dawn of history, presents a problem that is still unsolved even in this enlightened age, for, although the nebula hypothesis is fairly well established, there are astronomers of note to-day who do not altogether accept it.

The myths that relate to the creation of the sun generally regard that orb as manufactured and placed in motion by a primitive race, or by the God of Light, rather than as existing before the birth of the world. In other legends, the Sun was freed from a cave by a champion, or sprang into life as the sacrifice of the life of a god or hero.

[p. 4]

These traditions doubtless arose from the fundamental belief that the Sun and the Moon were personified beings, and that at one time in the world's history man lived in a state of darkness or dim obscurity. The necessity for light would suggest the invention of it, and hence a variety of ingenious methods for procuring it found their way into the mythology of the ancient nations.

Of all the solar creation myths that have come down to us, those of the North American Indians are by far the most interesting because of the ingenuity of the legends, and their great variety. We would expect to find the same myth relating to the creation of the sun predominating, as regards its chief features, among most of the Indian tribes. On the contrary, the majority of the tribes had their own individual traditions as to how the sun came into existence. They agree, however, for the most part, in ascribing to the world a state of darkness or semi-darkness before the sun was manufactured, or found, and placed in the sky.

The great tribes of the North-west coast believe that the Raven, who was their supreme deity, found the sun one day quite accidentally, and, realising its value to man, placed it in the heavens where it has been ever since.

According to the Yuma Indian tradition, their great god Tuchaipa created the world and then

[p. 5]

the moon. Perceiving that its light was insufficient for man's needs, he made a larger and a brighter orb, the sun, which provided the requisite amount of light.

The Kootenays believed that the sun was created by the coyote, or chicken hawk, out of a ball of grease, but the Cherokee myth [*1] that related to the creation of the sun was more elaborate, and seems to imply that the Deluge myth was known to them.

"When the earth was dry and the animals came down, it was still dark, so they got the sun and set it in a track to go every day across the island from east to west just overhead. It was too hot this way, and the Red Crawfish had his shell scorched a bright red so that his meat was spoiled, and the Cherokee do not eat it. The conjurers then put the sun another handbreadth higher in the air, but it was still too hot. They raised it another time, and another until it was seven handbreadths high, and just under the sky arch, then it was right and they left it so. Every day the sun goes along under this arch and returns at night on the upper side to the starting place."

This myth reveals a belief, common to many of the Indian tribes, that originally the sun was much nearer to the earth than now, and his scorching heat

[p. 6]

greatly oppressed mankind. Strangely enough, although it can be nothing but a coincidence, the nebular hypothesis of modern science predicates that the solar system resulted from the gradual contraction of a nebula. This implies that the planet earth and the sun were once in comparatively close proximity.

Among the Yokut Indians, there was a tradition that at one time the world was composed of rock, and there was no such thing as fire and light. The coyote, who of all the animals was chief in importance, told the wolf to go up into the mountains till he came to a great lake, where he would see a fire which he must seize and bring back. The wolf did as he was ordered, but it was not easy to take the fire, and so he obtained only a small part of it, which he brought back. Out of this the coyote made the moon, and then the sun, and put them in the sky where they have been to this day.

The significant feature of this myth is the fact, that, contrary to the general notion, the moon's creation antedated that of the sun. The explanation of this seeming incongruity appears in the legend of the Yuma Indians given above. The moon, although created first, did not give sufficient light, hence it was necessary to manufacture a source of light of greater power and luminosity.

The legends of the Mission Indians of California

[p. 7]

reveal an altogether different view of the situation. In the myths cited above, the sun was manufactured to add to man's comfort. In the following legend the Earth-Mother had kept the sun in hiding, waiting for mankind to grow old enough to appreciate it; so, when the time came, she produced the sun and there was light.

In order that the Sun might light the world, the people of the earth decided that it must go from east to west, so they all lifted up their arms to the sky three times and cried out each time, "Cha, Cha, Cha!" and immediately the Sun rose from among them and went up to his appointed place in the sky.

One of the Mewan Indian sun myths reveals a novel tale to account for the presence of the sun. These Indians regarded the earth as an abode of darkness in primitive times, but far away in the east there was a light which emanated from the Sun-Woman.

The people wanted light very much, and appealed to Coyote-Man to procure it for them. Two men were sent to induce the Sun-Woman to return with them, but she refused the invitation. A large number of men were then sent to bring her back, even if they had to resort to force. They succeeded in binding the Sun-Woman, and brought her back with them to their land, where she ever after afforded people the light that is so necessary

[p. 8]

for their well-being. It was said that her entire body was covered with the beautiful iridescent shells of the abalone, and the light which shone from these was difficult to gaze upon.

According to a Wyandot Indian myth, the Little Turtle created the Sun by order of a great council of animals, and he made the Moon to be the Sun's wife. He also created the fixed stars, but the stars which "run about the sky" are supposed to be the children of the Sun and Moon.

The following Yuma legend [*1] indicates that the moon was considered by their ancestors as of greater importance than the sun: "Kwikumat said, 'I will make the moon first.' He faced the east, and placing spittle on the forefinger of his right hand rubbed it like paint on the eastern sky until he made a round shiny place. 'I call it the moon,' said Kwikumat. Now another god, whom Kwikumat created, rubbed his fingers till they shone, and drawing the sky down to himself he painted a great face upon it rubbing it till it shone brightly. This he called the sun."

There is a tradition among the Pomo Indians of California, that, in very early times, the sun did not move daily across the heavens as it does now, but only rose a short distance above the eastern horizon each morning, and then sank back again.

[p. 9]

[paragraph continues] This arrangement did not suit people very well, and Coyote-Man determined to better conditions, so he started eastward to see what the trouble was with the sun.

He took with him some food, a magic sleep-producing tuft of feathers, and four mice. On the fourth day he arrived at the home of the sun people, who received him cordially, and a great dance was arranged in the dance house. In the midst of this building the sun was suspended from the rafters by ropes of grape-vines.

Coyote-Man liberated the mice, and told them to gnaw at the grape-vine ropes that held the sun. Meanwhile, he danced with the sun people, and, by the aid of the sleep-producing feathers, he succeeded in stupefying all the dancers. The mice by this time had freed the sun, which Coyote-Man seized and carried off with him. On his homecoming, the sun was laid on the ground, and the people discussed what should be done with it, but Coyote-Man decided that it should be hung up in the middle of the sky. This difficult task was delegated to the birds, but they all failed until it came the crows'' turn. They were successful in hanging up the sun, and it has remained in its proper place ever since.

The Apache myth agrees with most of the Indian myths as regards the darkness that traditionally

[p. 10]

reigned over the world, and the peoples' desire for light, but their notion of the creation of the sun itself differs materially from the other Indian myths.

The myth relates that, originally, the only light in the world was that which emanated from the large eagle feathers that people carried about with them. This was such an unsatisfactory means of illuminating the world, that a council of the tribe was called for the purpose of devising a better system of lighting. It was suggested that they manufacture a sun, so they set about it. A great disk was made, and painted a bright yellow, and this was placed in the sky. The legend does not relate how this was accomplished. This first attempt at sun-making was not altogether successful, as the disk was too small. However, they permitted it to make one circuit of the heavens before it was taken down and enlarged. Four times it was taken down, and increased in size, before it was as large as the earth and gave sufficient light. Encouraged by their success at sun-making, the people made a moon, and hung it up in the sky. It appears that this light company's business, and its success, aroused the ire of a wizard and a witch who lived in the underworld. They regarded the manufacture of the sun and moon as presumptuous acts on the part of man, and attempted to

[p. 11]

destroy the luminaries; but the sun and moon fled from the underworld, leaving it in perpetual darkness, and found a safe abiding place in the heavens, where they have ever remained unmolested.

The Navajo Indian legend of the creation of the sun, moon, and stars is decidedly novel, and reveals the wide range of the imagination of primitive man in his conception of the creation of the celestial bodies.

The early Navajo, it appears, in common with many other Indian tribes, met in council to consider a means of introducing more light into the world; for, in early times, the people lived in semidarkness, the obscurity resembling that of twilight.

The wise men concluded that they must have a sun, and moon, and a variety of stars placed above the earth, and the first work that was done to bring this about was the creation of the heavens in which to place the luminaries. The old men of the tribe made the sun in a house constructed for this special purpose, but the creation of the moon and stars they left to other tribes.

The work of creating the sun was soon accomplished, and the problem then presented itself of raising it up to the heavens and fixing it there. Two dumb fluters, who had gained considerable prominence in the tribe, were selected to bear the sun and moon (for they had also constructed a

[p. 12]

moon), Atlas-like, on their respective shoulders. These were great burdens to impose on them, for the orbs were exceedingly ponderous. Therefore, the fluters staggered at first under the great weight that bore them down, and the one bearing the sun came near burning up the earth before he raised it sufficiently high; but the old men of the tribe lit their pipes and puffed smoke vigorously at the sun, and this caused it to retire to a greater distance in the heavens.

Four successive times they had to do this to prevent the burning up of the world, for the earth has increased greatly in size since ancient times; and, consequently, the sun had to be projected higher in the heavens, so that its great heat would not set the world on fire.

It will be noted that the language of the myths, as translated, has been followed closely. This was in order to bring out more fully their quaint imagery. The Indian was ever a poet, and a study of the tribal legends reveals many charming bits that would lose their beauty of expression were they transposed into the diction of our more prosaic tongue.

In the Ute Indian myth which follows, it appears that the sun had to be conquered and subjected to man's will, before it would perform its daily task in an orderly and regular way.

[p. 13]

It is related that the Hare-God was once sitting by his camp-fire in the woods waiting the wayward Sun-God's return. Weary with watching, he fell asleep, and while he slumbered the Sun-God came, and, so near did he approach, that his great heat scorched the shoulders of the Hare-God. Realising that he had thus incurred the wrath of the Hare-God, the Sun-God fled to his cave in the underworld.

The Hare-God awoke in a rage, and started in pursuit of the Sun-God. After many adventures, he came to the brink of the world, and lay in wait for the object of his vengeance. When the Sun-God finally came out of his cave, the Hare-God shot an arrow at him, but the sun's heat burned it up before it reached its mark. However, the Hare-God had in his quiver a magic arrow which always hit the mark. This he launched from his bow, and the shaft struck the Sun-God full in the face, so that the sun was shattered into a thousand fragments. These fell to the earth and caused a great conflagration.

It was now the turn of the Hare-God to be dismayed at the results of his actions, and he fled before the destruction he had wrought. As he ran, the burning earth consumed all his members save his head, which went rolling over the face of the earth. Finally, it, too, became so hot that

[p. 14]

the eyes of the god burst, and out gushed a flood of tears which extinguished the fire.

But the Sun-God had been conquered, and awaited sentence. A great council was called, and, after much discussion, the Sun-God was condemned to pursue a definite path across the sky each day, and the days, nights, and seasons were arranged in an orderly fashion.

The following Cherokee Indian myth reveals the Sun as the arbiter of man's fate: "A number of people were engaged to construct a sun, which was the first planet made. Originally it was intended that man should live forever, but the sun, when he came to survey the situation, decided that, inasmuch as the earth was insufficient to support man, it would be better to have him succumb to death, and so it was decreed."

In Creation Myths of Primitive America, by Jeremiah Curtin, there is a particularly interesting solar myth. It is, therefore, given in much detail, as it is considered one of the most remarkable of the solar legends. As a pure product of the imagination, it ranks with the best examples of Egyptian and Grecian mythology.

The myth relates the efforts of a wicked and blood-thirsty old man named Sas [*1], to kill his son-in-law, Tulchuherris. After many ineffectual attempts

[p. 15]

to accomplish his fell purpose, he proposed a pine-bending contest, for he felt sure that, by getting his son-in-law to climb to the top of a lofty tree, he could bend it low, and, by letting go of it, suddenly hurl the object of his enmity into the sky and thus destroy him.

Tulchuherris had, however, a wise protector hidden in his hair, in the guise of a little sprite named Winishuyat, who warned him of his peril, and enabled him to turn the tables on his wicked father-in-law.

In the words of the myth: "He [Tulchuherris] rose in the night, turned toward Sas, and said: 'Whu, whu, whu, I want you Sas to sleep soundly.' Then he reached his right hand toward the west, toward his great-grandmother's, and a stick came into it. He carved and painted the stick beautifully, red and black, and made a fire-drill. Then he reached his left hand toward the east, and wood for a mokos [arrow straightener] came into it. He made the mokos, and asked the fox dog for a f ox-skin. The fox gave it. Of this he made a headband, and painted it red. All these things he put into his quiver. 'We are ready,' said Tulchuherris. 'Now, Daylight, I wish you to come right away.' Daylight came. Sas rose, and soon after they started for the tree. 'My son-in-law, I will go first,' said Sas, and he climbed the tree. Go higher,'

[p. 16]

said Tulchuherris, 'I will not give a great pull, go up higher.' He went high and Tulchuherris did not give a great pull so that Sas came down safely. Tulchuherris now climbed the tree, almost to the top. Sas looked at him, saw that he was near the top, and then drew the great pine almost to the earth, standing with his back to the top of the tree. Tulchuherris sprang off from the tree behind Sas, and ran away into the field. The tree sprang into the sky with a roar. 'You are killed now, my son-in-law, 'said Sas, 'you will not trouble me hereafter.' He talked on to himself and was glad. 'What were you saying, father-in-law?' asked Tulchuherris, coming up from behind. Sas turned, 'Oh! my son-in-law, I was afraid that I had hurt you. I was sorry.' 'Now, my brother,' said Winishuyat, 'Sas will kill you unless you kill him. At midday he will kill you surely unless you succeed in killing him. Are you not as strong as Sas?'

"'Father-in-law, try again, then I will go to the very top and beat you,' said Tulchuherris. That morning the elder daughter of Sas said to her sister after Sas had gone, 'My sister, our father has tried all people, and has conquered all of them so far, but to-day he will not conquer. To-day he will die. I know this. Do not look for him to-day. He will not come back. He will never come back to us.'

[p. 17]

"Sas went up high. I will kill him now thought Tulchuherris, and he was very sorry, still he cried: Go a little higher. I went higher. I will go to the top next time. I will not hurt you, go a little higher.' Sas went higher and higher, till at last he said: 'I cannot climb any more, I am at the top, do not give a big pull, my son-in-law.' Tulchuherris took hold of the tree with one hand, pulled it as far as it would bend, pulled it till it touched the earth, and then let it fly. When the tree rushed toward the sky it made an awful noise, and soon after a crash was heard, a hundred times louder that any thunder. All living things heard it. The whole sky and earth shook. Olelbis, who lives in the highest place, heard it. All living things said: 'Tulchuherris is killing his father-in-law. Tulchuherris has split Sas.' The awful noise was the splitting of Sas. Tulchuherris stood waiting. He waited three hours perhaps, after the earth stopped trembling, then, far up in the sky he heard a voice saying: 'Oh, my son-in-law, I am split; I am dead. I thought I was the strongest power living, but I am not. From this time on I shall say Tulchuherris is the greatest power in the world.'

"Tulchuherris could not see any one. He only heard a voice far up in the sky saying: 'My son-in-law, I will ask you for a few things. Will you give

[p. 18]

me your fox-skin head-band? Tulchuherris put his hand into his fox-skin quiver, took out the band, and tossed it to him. It went straight up to Sas and he caught it. 'Now will you give me your mokos?' Tulchuherris took out the mokos and threw it. 'Give me your fire-drill.' He threw that.

"Another voice was heard now, not so loud, 'I wish you would give me a head-band of white quartz.' This voice was the smaller part of Sas. When Tulchuherris had given the head-band as requested, he said: 'My father-in-law, you are split. You are two. The larger part of you will be Sas (the Sun), the smaller part Chanah (the Moon), the white one, and this division is what you have needed for a long time, but no one had the strength to divide you. You are in a good state now. You, Chanah, will grow old quickly and die, then you will come to life, and be young again. You will be always like that in this world. Sas, you will travel west all the time, travel every day without missing a day. You will travel day after day without resting. You will see all things in the world, as they live and die. My father-in-law, take this too from me.' Tulchuherris then threw up to Sas a quiver made of porcupine skin. 'I will take it, 'said Sas, 'and I will carry it always.' Then Tulchuherris gave Chanah the quartz head-band,

[p. 19]

and said: 'Wear it around your head always, so that when you travel in the night you will be seen by all people.'

"Sas put the fox-skin around his head, and fastened the mokos crosswise in front of his forehead. The fire-drill he fastened in his hair behind, placing it upright. At sunrise we see the hair of the fox-skin around the head of Sas before we see Sas himself. Next Tulchuherris threw up two red berries saying: 'Take these and make red cheeks on each side of your face, so that when you rise in the morning, you will be bright and make everything bright.'

"Tulchuherris then went west and got some white roots from the mountains, and threw them up to Sas saying: 'Put these across your forehead.' Next he stretched his right hand westward, and two large shells, blue inside, came to his palm. He threw these also up to Sas saying: 'Put these on your forehead for a sign when you come up in the morning. There is a place in the east which is all fire. When you reach that place, go in and warm yourself. Go to Olelpanti now. Olelbis, your father, lives there. He will tell you where to go.'

"Sas therefore went to Olelpanti where he found a wonderful and very big sweat-house. It was toward morning, and Olelbis was sleeping.

[p. 20]

[paragraph continues] Presently he was startled by a noise and awoke, and saw some one near him, He knew at once who it was. Sas turned to him and said: 'My father, I am split. I thought myself the strongest person in the world, but I am not; Tulchuherris is the strongest.' 'Well my son, Sas,' said Olelbis, 'where do you wish to be? and how do you wish to live?' 'I am come to ask you,' replied Sas. 'Well,' answered Olelbis, 'you must travel all the time, and it is better that you go from east to west. If you go northward and travel southward, I don't think that would be well. If you go west and travel eastward I don't think that will be well either. If you go south and travel northward I don't think that will be right. I think that best which Tulchuherris told you. He told you to go east, and travel to the west. He said there is a hot place in the east that you must go into and get hot before you start every morning. I will show you the road from east to west. In a place right south of this is a very big tree, a tobacco tree, just half-way between east and west. When you come from the east, sit down in the shade of the tree, rest a few minutes, and go on. Never forget your porcupine quiver or other ornaments when you travel. . . . Go to the east. Go to the hot place every morning. There is always a fire in it. Take a white oak staff, thrust the end of it into the fire,

[p. 21]

till it is one glowing coal. When you travel westward carry this burning staff in your hand. In summer take a manzanita staff, put it in the fire, and burn the end. This staff will be red-hot all the day. Now you may go east and begin. You will travel all the time day by day without sleeping. All living things will see you with your blowing staff. You will see everything in the world, but you will be always alone. No one can ever keep you company or travel with you. I am your father, and you are my son, but I could not let you stay with me.'"

Among the Yana Indians of California, there is a myth similar, in some particulars, to the preceding legend. It accounts for the creation of the moon, but, as the sun figures prominently in the myth, it is given in full. It relates that once a youth named Pun Miaupa ran away from home after a quarrel with his father, and came to the house of his uncle.

He told his uncle that he desired to win for his wife Halai Auna, the Morning Star, the youngest and most beautiful daughter of Wakara, the Moon. His uncle tried to persuade him from making the attempt, knowing the danger to which his nephew would be exposed, for Wakara always killed his daughter's suitors; but finding the youth obdurate, he set out with him for Wakara's house. After a

[p. 22]

long journey they reached their destination, and now the uncle, who was a magician, knowing his nephew was in great peril, entered his nephew's heart.

Wakara received the youth cordially, and after a time placing him in the midst of a magic family circle, performed an incantation, and the group were transported magically to the house of Tuina, the Sun. Tuina was wont to slay men by giving them poisoned tobacco to smoke, but, although he presented five pipes to Pun Miaupa, he smoked them all with no ill effects, being protected from harm by his uncle, who all the time dwelt in his heart; and Halai Auna was glad that Tuina had been foiled in his attempt to slay her suitor.

Pun Miaupa's uncle now came forth from his nephew's heart, and through his powerful magic caused a great deluge to descend, and Tuina, and Wakara, and their families were all drowned save Halai Auna; but, so great was her grief over the loss of her family, that the magician took pity on her and restored them to life. He then entered his nephew's heart, and all returned to Wakara's house. Wakara was still bent on killing Pun Miaupa, and proposed a tree-bending contest similar to that in which Sas and Tulchuherris engaged, but he, too, shared the fate of the wicked Sas and was hurled into the sky where he remained.

[p. 23]

[paragraph continues] Pun Miaupa laughed and said: "Now my father-in-law, you will never come here to live again, you will stay where you are now forever. You will become small, and then you will come to life and grow large. You will be that way always, growing old and becoming young again." Thus the moon changes in its phases from small to great as it pursues its heavenly way.

The following beautiful solar creation myth is from Japan. [*1] It is entitled "The Way of the Gods" and contains a reference to a floating cloud in the midst of infinite space, before matter had taken any other form. This well describes the original nebula from which scientists aver the solar system was evolved. It is strange to find in the pages of mythology that record the creation of the celestial bodies allusions, that, in the light of modern science, savour more of fact than of fancy.

The myth is as follows: "When there was neither heaven, nor earth, nor sun, nor moon, nor anything that is, there existed in infinite space the Invisible Lord of the Middle Heaven, with him there were two other gods. They created between them a Floating Cloud in the midst of which was a liquid formless and lifeless mass from which the earth was evolved. After this were born in Heaven seven generations of gods, and the last and most

[p. 24]

perfect of these were Izanagi and Izanami. These were the parents of the world and all that is in it. After the creation of the world of living things Izanagi created the greatest of his children in this wise. Descending into a clear stream he bathed his left eye, and forth sprang Amaterasu, the great Sun-Goddess. Sparkling with light she rose from the waters as the sun rises in the East, and her brightness was wonderful, and shone through heaven and earth. Never was seen such radiant glory. Izanagi rejoiced greatly, and said: 'There is none like this miraculous child.' Taking a necklace of jewels he put it round her neck, and said: 'Rule thou over the Plain of High Heaven.' Thus Amaterasu became the source of all life and light, the glory of her shining has warmed and comforted all mankind, and she is worshipped by them unto this day.

"Then he bathed his right eye, and there appeared her brother, the Moon-God. Izanagi said: 'Thy beauty and radiance are next to the Sun in splendour; rule thou over the Dominion of Night."

In Norse mythology it is said that Odin arranged the periods of daylight and darkness, and the seasons. He placed the sun and moon in the heavens, and regulated their respective courses. Day and Night were considered mortal enemies. Light came from above, and darkness from beneath,

[p. 25]

and in the process of creation the moon preceded the sun.

There is, however, a Norse legend opposed to the view that the gods created the heavenly bodies. This avers that the sun and moon were formed from the sparks from the fire land of Muspelheim. The father of the two luminaries was Mundilfare, and he named his beautiful boy and girl, Maane (Moon) and Sol (Sun).

The gods, incensed at Mundilfare's presumption, took his children from him and placed them in the heavens, where they permitted Sol to drive the horses of the sun, and gave over the regulation of the moon's phases to Maane.

Among the Eskimos of Behring Strait the creation of the earth and all it contains is attributed to the Raven Father. It is related that he came from the sky after a great deluge, and made the dry ground. He also created human and animal life, but the rapacity of man threatened the extermination of animal life, and this so annoyed the Raven that he punished man by taking the sun out of the sky, and hiding it in a bag at his home. The people, it is said, were very much frightened, and disturbed at the loss of the sun, and offered rich gifts to the Raven to propitiate him; so the Raven relented somewhat, and would hold the sun up in one hand for a day or two at a time, so that

[p. 26]

the people could have sufficient light for hunting, and then he would put it back in the bag again.

This arrangement, though better than nothing, was not, on the whole, satisfactory to people, so the Raven's brother took pity on them, and thought of a scheme to better conditions. He feigned death, and after he had been buried and the mourners had gone away, he came forth from the grave, and took the form of a leaf, which floated on the surface of a stream. Presently, the Raven's wife came to the stream for a drink, and dipping up the water she swallowed with it the leaf. The Raven's wife soon after gave birth to a boy who cried continually for the sun, and his father, to silence him, often gave him the sun to play with. One day, when no one was about, the boy put on his raven mask and coat, and taking up the sun flew away with it, and placed it in its proper place in the sky. He also regulated its daily course, making day and night, so that ever thereafter the people had the constant light of the sun to guide them by day.

The ancient Peruvians believed that the god Viracocha rose out of Lake Titicaca, and made the sun, moon, and stars, and regulated their courses. Tylor [*1] tells us that originally the Muyscas, who inhabited the high plains of Bogota, lived in a

[p. 27]

state of savagery. There came to them from the east an old bearded man, Bochica (the Sun), who taught them agriculture and the worship of the gods. His wife Huythaca, however, was displeased at his attentions to mankind, and caused a great deluge which drowned most of the inhabitants of the earth.

This action angered Bochica, and he drove his wicked wife from the earth and made her the Moon (for heretofore there had been no moon). He then dried up the earth, and once more made it habitable, and comfortable for man to live in.

The Manicacas of Brazil regarded the sun as a hero, virgin born. Their wise men, who claimed the power of transmigration, said that they had visited the Sun, and that his figure was that of a man clothed in light; so dazzling was his appearance that he could not be seen by ordinary mortals.

According to Mexican tradition, Nexhequiriac was the creator of the world. He sent down the Sun-God and the Moon-God to illuminate the earth, so that men could see to perform their daily tasks. The Sun-God pursued his way regularly and unhindered, but the Moon-God, being hungry, and perceiving a rabbit in her path, pursued it. This took time, and then she tarried to eat it, but when she had finished her meal, she found her brother, the Sun, had outdistanced her, and was

[p. 28]

far ahead, so that ever thereafter she was unable to overtake him. This is also the reason, says the legend, why the sun always appears to be ahead of the moon, and why the sun always looks fresh and red, and the moon sick and pale. Those who gaze intently at the moon can still see the rabbit dangling from her mouth.

The Bushmen of South Africa have a curious legend to account for the creation of the sun. According to this tradition, the Sun was originally a man living in a dwelling on earth, and he gave out only a limited amount of light, which was confined to a certain space about his house, and the rest of the country was in semi-darkness. Strangely enough, the light which he gave out emanated from one of his arm-pits when his arm was upraised. When he lowered his arm, semi-darkness fell upon the earth. In the day the Sun's light was white, but at night the little that could be seen was red like fire. This obscure light was unsatisfactory to the people, and, just as we have seen the Indians of North America met in council to decide the question of a better light for the world, the Bushmen considered the matter, and an old woman proposed that the children seize the Sun while he was sleeping, and throw him up into the sky, so that the Bushman's rice might become dry for them, and the Sun make bright the whole world.

[p. 29]

[paragraph continues] So the children acted on the suggestion, and approached the sleeping Sun warily; finally, they crept up close, and spoke thus to him: "Become thou the sun which is hot so that the Bushman's rice may dry for us, that thou mayst make the whole earth light, and the whole earth may become warm in summer." Therewith, they all seized the Sun by the arm, and hurled him up into the sky. The Sun straightway became round, and remained in the sky forever after to make the earth bright, and the Bushmen say that it takes away the moon and pierces it with a knife.

According to New Zealand traditions, the sun is the eye of Maui, which is placed in the sky, and the eyes of his two children became the morning and the evening star. The sun was born from the ocean and the story of its birth is thus related [*1]: "There were five brothers all called Maui, and it was the youngest Maui who had been thrown into the sea by Taranga his mother, and rescued by his ancestor Great-Man-In-Heaven, who took him to his house and hung him in the roof. One night, when Taranga came home, she found little Maui with his brothers, and when she knew her last born, the child of her old age, she took him to sleep with her, as she had been wont to take his brothers before they were grown up. But the little Maui

[p. 30]

became vexed and suspicious when he found that every morning his mother rose at dawn and disappeared from the house in a moment, not to return till nightfall. So one night he crept out, and stopped up every crevice in the wooden window, and the doorway, that the day might not shine into the house. Then broke the faint light of early dawn, and then the sun rose and mounted into the heavens, but Taranga slept on, for she knew not that it was broad daylight outside. At last she sprang up, pulled out the stopping of the chinks, and fled in dismay. Then Maui saw her plunge into a hole in the ground and disappear, and thus he found the deep cavern by which his mother went down below the earth as each night departed."

Another Maori legend relates that Maui once took fire in his hands, and when it burned him he sprang with it into the sea. When he sank in the waters the sun set for the first time, and darkness covered the earth. When Maui found that all was night he immediately pursued the sun and brought him back in the morning.

The Tonga tribe, of the South Pacific Islands, have a curious myth respecting the creation of the sun and moon. It appears that in primitive times, before there was any light upon the earth, Vatea and Tonga-iti quarrelled as to the parentage of a child. Each was confident the child was his, and

[p. 31]

to end the dispute they decided to share it. The infant was forthwith cut in two; Vatea took the upper half as his share, and squeezing it into a ball tossed it up into the sky where it became the sun. Tonga-iti allowed his share, the lower part of the infant, to remain on the ground for a day or two, but seeing the brightness of Vatea's half, he squeezed his share too, and threw it up into the dark sky when the sun was absent in the underworld, and it became the moon. Thus the sun and the moon were created, and the paleness of the moon is due to the fact that all the blood was drained out of it when it lay on the ground.

An Australian legend relates that the world was in darkness till one of their ancestors, who dwelt in the stars, took pity on them, and threw into the sky an emu's egg, which straightway became the sun.

The Dyaks have a myth that the sun and the moon were created by the Supreme Being out of a peculiar clay which is found in the earth, but is very rare and costly. Vessels made from this clay are considered holy and a protection against spirits. These people, and other tribes dwelling in mountainous regions where the sun's red disk disappears from sight each night behind the mountains, speak of the sun as setting in a deep cleft in the rocks.

There are numerous other myths, of many

[p. 32]

lands, that tell in the language of imagination of the birth of the sun and moon. Most of them, however, are fundamentally identical with those cited.

The close agreement in the traditions of many of the primitive inhabitants of the earth, that there was life in the world before the luminaries occupied the heavens, and that people then lived in a state of semi-darkness, is perhaps the most striking feature of the myths.

In fact, these ancient legends reveal many points that are of interest, especially where similarities exist in the early traditions of widely separated tribes. It seems extraordinary that men, in different parts of the world, could have independently conceived the grotesque notions that often characterise the solar creation myths.

There seems to have been no limit to the fancies concerning the creation of the heavenly bodies by the ancients, but there is little doubt that, were the world to-day deprived of the teachings of science, our imaginative instinct would enable us to construct a myth to account for the presence of the sun, a myth that would be fully as fantastical as any which mythology has bequeathed to us.

Footnotes

^5:1 19th Report U. S. Ethnology Bureau.

^8:1 Journal American Folk-Lore, vol. xxii.

^14:1 Sas was the Wintu Indian word for Sun.

^23:1 The Child's Guide to Mythology, Helen A. Clarke.

^26:1 Primitive Culture, Edward B. Tylor.

^29:1 Primitive Culture, Edward B. Tylor.

Sun Lore of All Ages, by William Tyler Olcott, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 33]

[p. 34] [p. 35]

  

Chapter II

  

Ancient Ideas of the Sun and the Moon

A STUDY of mythology reveals many legends and traditions that concern the Sun and the Moon as related in some way by family or marital ties. Consequently; in spite of the fact that the purpose of this volume is to afford a comprehensive review of solar lore, these legends were considered sufficiently interesting as a further revelation of the solar myth to be included.

In the early history of all people we find the Sun and Moon regarded as human beings, more or less closely connected with the daily life of mankind, and influencing in some mysterious way man's existence, and controlling his destiny. We find the luminaries alluded to as ancestors, heroes, and benefactors, who, after a life of usefulness on this earth, were transported to the heavens, where they continue to look down on, and, in a measure, rule over earthly affairs.

The chief nature of the influence supposedly

[p. 36]

exerted by the Sun and Moon over men was parental. In fact, the very basis of mythology lies in the idolatrous worship of the solar great father, and the lunar great mother, who were the first objects of worship that the history of the race records.

"The great father," says Faber, [*1] "was Noah viewed as a transmigratory reappearance of Adam, and multiplying himself into three sons at the beginning of each world, the great mother was the earth considered as an enormous ship floating on the vast abyss, and the ark considered as a smaller earth sailing over the surface of the Deluge. Of these, the former was astronomically typified by the sun, while the latter was symbolised by the boat-like crescent of the moon."

As human beings, the Sun and Moon were naturally distinguished as to sex, although there is in the early traditions concerning them no settled opinion as to the sex assigned to each, nor their relation to one another. Thus, in Australia, the Moon was considered to be a man, the Sun a woman, who appears at dawn in a coat of red kangaroo skins, the present of an admirer. Shakespeare speaks of the Moon as "she," while in Peru, the moon was regarded as a mother who was both sister and wife of the Sun, like Osiris and Isis in

[p. 37]

[paragraph continues] Egypt. Thus the sister marriages of the Incas had in their religion a meaning and a justification.

The Eskimos believed that the Moon was the younger brother of the female Sun, while the early inhabitants of the Malay peninsula regarded both the Sun and Moon as women. One of the Indian tribes of South America regarded the Moon as a man, and the Sun his wife. The story goes that she fell twice; the first time she was restored to heaven by an Indian, but the second time she set the forest blazing in a deluge of fire.

Tylor [*1] tells us that the Ottawa Indians, in their story of Iosco, describe the Sun and Moon as brother and sister. "Two Indians," it is said, "sprang through a chasm in the sky, and found themselves in a pleasant moonlit land. There they saw the moon approaching as from behind a hill. They knew her at first sight. She was an aged woman with white face and pleasing air. Speaking kindly to them, she led them to her brother the sun, and he carried them with him in his course and sent them home with promises of happy life."

Other Indian tribes, such as the Iroquois, Athapascas, and Cherokees, regarded the Sun as feminine, and, as a whole, the North American myths represented the Sun and Moon more frequently

[p. 38]

as brother and sister than as man and wife. In Central and South America, on the contrary, particularly in Mexico and Peru, the Sun and Moon were regarded as man and wife, and they were called, respectively, grandfather and grandmother.

This confusion in the sex, ascribed to the Sun and Moon by different nations, may have arisen from the fact that the day is mild and friendly, hence the Sun which rules the day would properly be considered feminine, while the Moon which rules the chill and stern night might appropriately be regarded as a man. On the contrary, in equatorial regions, the day is forbidding and burning, while the night is mild and pleasant. Applying these analogies, it appears that the sex of the Sun and Moon would, by some tribes, be the reverse of those ascribed to them by others, climatic conditions being responsible for the confusion.

In the German language, the genders of the Sun and Moon are respectively feminine and masculine, contrary to the rule of the Romance languages, whereas, in Latin, the Sun is masculine and the Moon feminine. In the Upper Palatinate of Bavaria to-day it is still common to hear the Sun spoken of as "Frau Sonne," and the Moon as "Herr Mond," and this story is told of them:

"The moon and sun were man and wife, but the moon proving too cold a lover, and too much addicted

[p. 39]

to sleep, his wife laid him a wager by virtue of which the right of shining by day should belong in future to whichever of them should be the first to awake. The moon laughed but accepted the wager, and awoke next day to find the sun had for two hours already been lighting up the world. As it was also a condition and consequence of this agreement that unless they awoke at the same time they should shine at different times the effect of the wager was a permanent separation, much to the affliction of the triumphant sun, who, still retaining a spouselike love for her husband, was, and always is, trying to repair the matrimonial breach."

From the conception that the Sun and Moon were husband and wife many legends concerning them were created, chief among these being the old Persian belief that the stars were the children of the Sun and Moon.

The primitive natives of the Malay peninsula believed that the firmament was solid. They imagined that the sky was a great pot held over the earth by a slender cord, and if this was ever broken the earth would be destroyed. They regarded the Sun and Moon as women, and the stars as the Moon's children. A legend relates that the Sun had as many children as the Moon, in ancient times, and fearing that mankind could

[p. 40]

not bear so much brightness and heat, the Sun and Moon agreed to devour their children.

The Moon pretended to thus dispose of hers, and hid them instead; but the Sun kept faith, and made way with all her children. When they were all devoured, the Moon brought hers out from their hiding-place. When the Sun saw them she was very angry, and pursued the Moon to kill her, and the chase is a perpetual one. Sometimes the Sun comes near enough to bite the Moon, and then men say there is an eclipse. The Sun still devours her children, the stars, at dawn, and the Moon hides hers during the daytime, when the Sun is near, only revealing them at night when her pursuer is far away. One of the native tribes of Northern India believes that the Sun cleft the moon in two for her deceit, and thus cloven and growing old again she remains.

The daughters of the Sun and Moon are represented in Finnish mythology as young and lovely maidens, seated sometimes on the border of a red shimmering cloud, sometimes upon a rainbow, sometimes at the edge of a leafy forest. They were surpassingly skilful in weaving, an accomplishment probably suggested by the resemblance borne by rays of light to the warp of a web. As might be expected in such a climate, the gods of the Sun, Moon, and stars are represented as serene

[p. 41]

and noble beings, dwelling in glorious palaces, possessing all that earth contained of beauty, and generally willing to share with mankind the knowledge of mundane affairs, which their penetrating rays and lofty position secured for them.

In Finnish, the appellation "Paeivae," came to mean Sun and Sun-God, "Knu," Moon and Moon-God. Paeivae had two sons, one of whom was named "Panu." [*1]

There are many legends of the sun and moon that relate their disputes and marital troubles, for mythology reveals that as husband and wife the Sun and Moon did not live happily together.

In the Kanteletar (a collection of Finnish popular songs), an amusing tale is told which concerns the Sun, Moon, and Pole Star, who, as the story goes, were suitors for the hand of a beautiful maiden hatched from a goose egg. "The pole star was successful, and won the maiden, who objected to the moon, as there was nothing stable in his appearance, inasmuch as his face was sometimes narrow, and sometimes broad. Moreover, he had a bad habit of roving about all night, and remaining idle at home all day, which habit was highly detrimental to the true interest of a house-hold.

[p. 42]

[paragraph continues] She objected to the sun as he caused not only the heat in summer but also the cold in winter, and the variations of the weather. The pole star she accepted because he always came home punctually."

In Bavaria, a tale is told about a maid "who was drawn up by the moon, thereby incurring the sun's jealousy. The sun, to get even with her faithless consort, spying the girl's lover asleep in a wood took him up to herself. The maid and her lover perceiving themselves thus remote from one another were naturally anxious to meet again, and a great grief it was to the moon when he found that the maiden no longer cared for him. The tears he sheds in consequence are what we call 'shooting stars.'"

Thorpe [*1] gives the following account of the relationship between the Sun and Moon:

"The moon and the sun are brother and sister. They are the children of Mundilfori, who, on account of their beauty, called his son 'Mani,'" and his daughter 'Sol,' for which presumption the gods in their anger took the brother and sister, placed them in the sky, and appointed Sol to drive the horses that draw the chariot of the sun, which the gods had formed to give light to the world. The names of the horses that bear her car

[p. 43]

are the 'Watchful,' and the 'Rapid,' and under their shoulders the gods placed an ice-cold breeze to cool them.

"A shield stands before the sun; if it were not for this, the great heat would set the waves and mountains on fire. Two fierce wolves accompany the sun, a widespread and popular superstition, one named 'Skoll' follows the sun, and which she fears will devour her, the other called 'Hati' runs before the sun, and tries to seize the moon,--and so in the end it will be. The mother of these wolves is a giantess, who dwells in a wood to the east of Midgard. She brought forth many sons who are giants and all in the form of wolves. One of this race called 'Managarm' is said to be the most powerful. He will be sated with the lives of all dying persons. He will swallow up the moon, and thereby besprinkle both heaven and air with blood, then will the sun lose its brightness, and the winds rage and howl in all directions. Mani directs the course of the moon. He once took up two children from the earth as they were going from a well bearing a bucket on their shoulders. They followed Mani, and may be observed from the earth."

Among the Indians of North America we find many legends relating to the Sun and Moon, who were regarded by them as living beings. They

[p. 44]

taught their children that the sun represents the eyes of the mighty Manito by day, the god the Indians worshipped, and that the moon and stars were his eyes by night, and that they could not hide their words or acts from him. We find practically this same belief among the natives of Australia, who regard the sun as the eye of the greater god, and the moon as the eye of the lesser god.

The following is Father Brebeuf's version of the Huron legend of "the white one and the dark one," an interesting bit of Indian mythology:

"The sun and moon were known to the Hurons as Iouskeha and Taoniskaron, respectively. When they were grown up they quarrelled and fought a duel. Iouskeha was armed with a stag horn, while Taoniskaron contented himself with some wild rose berries, persuading himself that as soon as he should thus smite his brother he would fall dead at his feet, but it happened otherwise, and Iouskeha struck him so heavy a blow in the side that the blood gushed forth in streams. Taoniskaron fled and from his blood which fell upon the land came the flints which the savages still call 'Taoniscara,' from the victims name. Iouskeha was regarded by the Indians as their benefactor, their kettle would not boil were it not for him, it was he who learned from the Tortoise the art of

[p. 45]

making fire. Without him they would have no luck hunting, and it is he who makes the corn grow.

"Iouskeha the sun takes care for the living, and all things concerning life, and therefore, says the missionary, they say he is good; but the moon, who is the creatress of earth and man, makes men die, and has charge of their departed souls, and they say she is evil. The sun and moon dwell together in their cabin at the end of the earth, and thither it was that four Indians made a mythic journey. The sun received the travellers kindly, and saved them from the harm the beautiful but hurtful moon must have done them." [*1]

In early Iroquois legends, the Sun and Moon are god and goddess of day and night, respectively, and acquired the characters of the great friend and enemy of man, the good and evil deities.

The Cheyenne Indians have a legend that relates to a dispute that took place between the sun and moon as to which was superior. The Sun said that he was bright and glorious to behold, that he ruled the day, and that no being was superior to him. The Moon replied that he ruled the night, and looked after all things on earth, and kept all men and animals from danger and that he had no superior. The Sun retorted, "It is I who light up

[p. 46]

the world. If I should rest from my work everything would be darkened, mankind could not do without me." Then the Moon replied: "I am great and powerful. I can take charge of both night and day, and guide all things in the world, It does not trouble me if you rest." Thus the Sun and the Moon disputed, and the day they spoke thus to each other became almost as long as two days, so much did they have to say to each other. Neither gained his point, although the Moon declared there were a great many wonderful and powerful beings on his side. He had reference to the stars.

The old theologists ascribed to both the Sun and Moon the guardianship of certain gates or doors in the firmament. These imaginary portals, they claimed, were in the two opposite tropics, and from them it was believed that all human souls were mysteriously born.

The Japanese believe that the moon is inhabited by a hare, and that the sun is the abode of a three-legged crow, hence the expression, "The golden crow, and the jewelled hare," meaning the sun and moon.

There was a belief current in ancient times, in countries remote from each other, that those great in authority, or of a superior order of society, were descendants of the Sun.

[p. 47]

Among the Hindus, the members of the military caste to which the rajahs always belong are styled "Surya-bans," and "Chandra-bans," or Children of the Sun, and Children of the Moon.

"The first Egyptian dynasty is said to have been that of the 'Aurites,' or Children of the Sun, for the Oriental word 'Aur' denotes the solar light.

"The Persian sun-god Mithras bore the name of 'Azon-Nakis,' or the lord Sun, and from him both his descendants, the younger hero gods, and his ministers the magi, were denominated 'Zoni' and 'Azoni,' or the posterity of the Sun.

"Among the Greeks we find an eminent family distinguished by the name of the 'Heliadae,' or Children of the Sun, and originally this family consisted of eight persons. The Greeks were also familiar with the Children of the Moon. This ancient title was the ancient appellation of the Arcadians.

"Among the early Britons it was acknowledged that the solar 'Hu' was the father of all mankind. The Incas of Peru traced their genealogy from the sun, and called themselves Children of the Sun." [*1]

It is natural that the diurnal motion of the sun and moon should have stimulated the imagination of ancient man, and led him to account for this

[p. 48]

movement in a variety of fanciful ways. At an early date the idea was current that there was a subterranean world, into which the sun descended at nightfall, and traversed during the dark hours, to emerge from the cave in the east at dawn.

Among the red races, one tribe thought that the Sun, Moon, and stars were men and women, who went into the western sea every night, and swam out by the east. They say "the sun cometh forth every morning at the Place of Breaking Light." From this idea there rose the fancy that the Sun at evening was swallowed up by some monster, and the personified sun is a hero or a virgin who is swallowed and afterwards released or rejected, as in the Greek myths of Perseus and Andromeda, and Hercules and Hesione, the old Norse story of Eerick and the Dragon, and the more similar Teutonic myth of Little Red Riding Hood.

The Mexicans believed that "when the old sun was burnt out, and had left the world in darkness, a hero sprang into a huge fire, descended into the shades below, and arose deified and glorious in the east as 'Tonatiuh,' the sun. After him there leapt in another hero, but now the fire had grown thin, and he rose only in milder radiance as 'Metztli,' the moon." [*1]

[p. 49]

From persons possessing an all-powerful influence over mankind, the sun and moon came to be regarded as places where men could be consigned, and the extremes of heat and cold associated with them respectively gave rise to the idea that the sun and moon were places where men were sent in punishment for earthly misdeeds, there to suffer eternally for their sins.

The belief in the power of the sun and moon as persons to take up to them human beings from earth may next be shown to have had an influence over mythology. The sun and moon were both believed to possess this power of abducting mortals whom it pleased them to transport to the sky.

The Greeks of modern Epirus have a tale of a childless woman, who, having prayed to the Sun for a girl, gained her request, subject only to the condition that the girl be restored to the Sun when she became twelve years of age. When the child had reached that age, and was one day picking vegetables in the garden, whom should she meet but the Sun. That luminary bade her go and remind her mother of her promise. The mother, in terror and consternation, shut the doors and windows to keep her child safe from the sun, but unfortunately she forgot the keyhole, by which entrance the Sun penetrated and succeeded in carrying off his prey.

The Bushmen, almost the lowest tribe of South

[p. 50]

[paragraph continues] Africa, have the same star lore and much the same mythology as the Greeks, Australians, Egyptians, and Eskimos. They believe that the Sun and Moon originally inhabited the earth and talked with men, but now they live in the sky and are silent.

The Homeric hymn to the Sun-God Helios, in the same way (as Professor Max Muller observes), regards the Sun as a half-god, almost a hero, who had once lived on earth. This mythological sojourn of the Sun and Moon on the earth seems to have stimulated the mind of primitive man, and has given rise to a wealth of legends and traditions which is to be found in the ancient history of all nations.

Footnotes

^36:1 The Origin of Pagan Idolatry, G. S. Faber.

^37:1 Primitive Culture, Edward B. Tylor.

^41:1 Herr Schiefner calls attention to the similarity between this name and the Sanscrit "bhame," which he says is found in the Vedas, meaning the sun, and also an epithet for fire.

^42:1 Northern Mythology, Benjamin Thorpe.

^45:1 Primitive Culture, Edward B. Tylor.

^47:1 The Origin of Pagan Idolatry, G. S. Faber.

^48:1 Primitive Culture, Edward B. Tylor.

Sun Lore of All Ages, by William Tyler Olcott, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 51]

[p. 52] [p. 53]

  

Chapter III

  

Solar Mythology

SOME one has said: "If no other knowledge deserves to be called useful but that which helps to enlarge our possessions or to raise our station in society, then mythology has no claim to usefulness. But if that which tends to make us happier and better can be called useful, a knowledge of mythology is useful, for it is the handmaid of literature, and literature is one of the best allies of virtue and promoters of happiness."

The solar myth, above all others, commands the attention and interest of the student of mythology, for it is the very basis of the science; it permeates the early history of all people, its influence has made itself felt in every age, and many of the customs that govern our lives to-day are of solar origin.

The sun, above all that human eyes behold, is the chief element in life, the very essence of our existence, and to its beneficent influences we owe all that we possess to-day, that is of worth. How

[p. 54]

few realise this fact. "'Differentiated sun-shine,' is the striking and suggestive phrase used by John Fiske in his Cosmic Philosophy to stand for all things whatsoever to be found in this great world of ours; from the tiny sun-dew, hid in the secret abiding places of spreading swamp lands, and the inconsequent midget it opens its sticky little fist to grasp, to the great forest tree, and all-consequent man armed with his conquering broadaxe. It is merely a terse symbolic way of describing the processes of cosmic evolution from the sun as the original source and continuous guiding power of our own special universe."

"Back of the present sun figures in primitive and culture lore are the animistic conceptions of the sun such as that of Manabozho, or the great white hare, of Algonquin legend, or Indra the bull sun of India. In course of time the zoomorphic sun gives place to the anthropomorphic sun, and finally we arrive at such personifications of the sun as Osiris in Egypt, Apollo in Greece, and Balder in Norse mythology. Indeed it might almost be said that all the great steps in the onward march of the human race could be found recorded in the various and multiple personifications of the sun." [*1]

Our ideas concerning natural phenomena are

[p. 55]

but the result of past ages of research in the fields of science; but when we come to a consideration of the phenomena that day and night present, in their ever-changing phases, we find it extremely difficult to clearly understand the mental viewpoint of primitive man regarding this continual change, for the uninterrupted sequence and constant repetition of this phenomena has dulled our faculties and it escapes our attention.

In ancient times, however, this continual daily process was closely observed and seriously considered, and the sun in all its aspects became at an early date in certain countries a personified godhead.

The expression "swallowed up by night" is now a mere metaphor, but the idea it conveys, that of the setting sun, was a matter of great importance to the ancients. However, the daily aspects of the sun were not alone matters of concern, the seasonable changes were closely observed, and the spring-tide sun, returning with youthful vigour after the long sleep in the night of winter, had a different name from the summer and autumnal sun. There are consequently, a multiplicity of names for the sun to be found in a study of primitive history and mythology, and an enormous mass of sun myths depicting the adventures of a primitive sun hero in terms of the varying aspects which the sun assumes during the day and year.

[p. 56]

There was simply no limit to the images suggested by these aspects, as Sir George Cox puts it [*1]:

"In the thought of these early ages the sun was the child of night or darkness, the dawn came before he was born, and died as he rose in the heavens. He strangled the serpents of the night, he went forth like a bridegroom out of his chamber, and like a giant to run his course. He had to do battle with clouds and storms, sometimes his light grew dim under their gloomy veil, and the children of men shuddered at the wrath of the hidden sun. His course might be brilliant and beneficent, or gloomy, sullen, and capricious. He might be a warrior, a friend, or a destroyer. The rays of the sun were changed into golden hair, into spears and lances, and robes of light."

From this play of the imagination the great fundamental solar myths sprang, and these furnished the theme for whole epics, and elaborate allegories. Out of this enduring thread there came to be woven the cloth of golden legend, and the wondrous tapestry of myth that illuminates the pages of man's history.

It is our pleasant task to review this variegated tapestry that fancy displays, and inspect the great treasure-house of tradition where the people of all

[p. 57]

ages have stored the richest gift of their imagination, the solar myth.

Perhaps the earliest sun myths are those founded on the phenomena of its rising and setting. The ancient dwellers by the seashore believed that at nightfall, when the sun disappeared in the sea, it was swallowed up by a monster. In the morning the monster disgorged its prey in the eastern sky. The story of Jonah is thought to be of solar origin, his adventure with the whale bearing a striking analogy to the daily mythical fate of the sun.

Goldhizer, [*1] an eminent mythologist, claims that the Biblical story of Isaac is a sun myth, and the first Enoch, the son of Cain, is of pure solar significance. He is a famous builder of cities, a distinct solar feature, but the fact that he lived exactly 365 days, the length of the solar year, proclaims his solar character. Cain is a sun hero and among his descendants none but solar figures are to be found. Noah is clearly a mythical figure of the sun resting, the word Noach denoting "him who rests."

The word which pre-eminently denotes the sun in the Semitic languages, the Hebrew "Shemesh," conveys the idea of rapid motion, or busy running about. Thus we see in the Psalms the sun likened to a giant or hero running a course.

Swift steeds were associated with the sun in

[p. 58]

[paragraph continues] Classical, Indian, Persian, and Hebrew mythologies, and in the Hebrew worship in Canaan, horses were dedicated to the sun, as indeed they were in Greece at a later date.

In the Veda the sun is frequently called "the runner," "the quick racer," or simply "the horse." This idea of the swift flight of the sun is further carried out by attributing wings to the sun, or dawn, and on the Egyptian and Assyrian monuments we find the winged solar disk inscribed.

From this it was but a step of the imagination to regard the sun as a bird, and when the sun set the ancients said: "The bird of day is weary, and has fallen into the sea." It is even thought that the hare is symbolic of Eastertide, for the very reason that fleetness of foot was its chief attribute. It is also a significant fact that the solar personification of the North American Indians was called "the Great White Hare."

"The more the Babylonian mythology is examined," says Sayce, "the more solar is its origin found to be, thus confirming the results arrived at in the Aryan and Semitic fields of research. With two exceptions only the great deities seem all to go back to the sun."

Of the mythology of Egypt, the eminent authority Renouf makes the statement: "Whatever may be the case in other mythologies, I look upon the

[p. 59]

sunrise and sunset, on the daily return of day and night, on the battle between light and darkness, on the whole solar drama in all its details that is acted every day, every month, every year, in heaven and in earth as the principal subject of Egyptian mythology."

The predominant mythological figures of Egypt were so much involved in the sun worship of that country, and to such an extent Sun-Gods, that a discussion of their personality and deeds pertains more properly to the chapter on Sun Worship, and is omitted therefore in this place.

There is one feature of solar mythology that is striking because of its universality, and that is the connection which the figures personifying the sun in various lands have with navigation. The Jewish Midrash compares the course of the sun to that of a ship, and curiously enough to a ship coming from Britain, which is rigged with 365 ropes (the number of days in the solar year), and to a ship coming from Alexandria which has 354 ropes (the number of days of the lunar year).

In Egypt we see on the monuments the figure of Ra, the Sun-God, in his boat sailing over the ocean of heaven. "The sun king Apollo is with the Greeks," says Goldhizer, [*1] "the founder of navigation," and even the legendary Charon, the ferry-man

[p. 60]

of the underworld, is a development of the solar myth. The Roman Sun-God, Janus, is also brought into connection with navigation, and the Peruvian sun deity came to them from the sea, and took his leave of them in a ship which floated down a river to the sea where it vanished.

The ancient Egyptians called the sun "the Cat," for, "like the sun," says Horapollo, "the pupil of the cat's eye grows larger with the advance of day." The Egyptians imagined that a great cat stood behind the sun which was the pupil of the cat's eye.

The following sun myth found in India is quoted from Anthropology by Edward B. Tylor. It relates that: ''Vamana, the tiny Brahman, to humble the pride of King Bali, begs of him as much land as he can measure in three steps, but when the boon is granted, the little dwarf expands into the gigantic form of Vishnu, and striding with one step across the earth, another across the air, and a third across the sky, drives Bali into the infernal regions, where he still reigns. This most remarkable of all Tom Thumb stories seems really a myth of the sun, rising tiny above the horizon, then swelling into majestic power, and crossing the universe. For Vamana the dwarf is one of the incarnations of Vishnu, and Vishnu was originally the sun. In the hymns of the Veda the idea of

[p. 61]

his three steps is to be found before it had become a story, when it was as yet only a poetic metaphor of the sun crossing the airy regions in his three strides."

The ancient Hindus enthroned the Sun-God in a burning chariot, and saw in his flashing rays spirited and fiery steeds arrayed in resplendent and gleaming trappings. Where we would say, "the sun is rising," or, "he is high in the heavens," they remarked, "the sun has yoked his steeds for his journey."

One of the common appellations for the sun in mythology is "the cow," and the sun's rays are described as the cow's milk. In the Veda this is one of the most familiar conceptions. These are good examples of the part imagination has played in the development of solar mythology. Given the notion that the sun is a chariot, the rays are seen immediately to resemble steeds, and, likewise, if the sun be likened to a cow, the rays must peradventure represent milk.

The sun's rays are compared more consistently with locks of hair or hair on the face or head of the sun. The Sun-God Helios is called by the Greeks "the yellow-haired," and long locks of hair and a flowing beard are mythological attributes of the sun in many lands. In an American Indian myth the Sun-God is described as an old man with a

[p. 62]

full beard, and the long beards of the Peruvian and Toltec Sun-Gods are often referred to in the mythological references concerning them.

If mythology is regarded as a wondrous piece of tapestry, wrought by imagination and fancy, displaying in many hues the noble deeds of gods and heroes of the ancient world, then, the part woven by the Greeks may well be considered the most conspicuous for brilliancy of conception and beauty of design of all that enters into this marvellous and priceless fabric.

It has been said that Greek mythology, in its dynastic series of ruling gods, shows an evolution from a worship of the forces of nature to a worship of the powers of the mind. It is beyond question the most complete in its details, the most perfect viewed from an artistic standpoint, the most beautiful and enduring of all the world's store of legendary lore that has come down to us, and in this wealth of mythology, the solar myth stands out supreme, as the central figure, clothed in the matchless imagery of a naturally poetical and highly artistic people.

In the following discussion of the Greek sun myths, there is much that seems so grotesque and fanciful as to border on absurdity, but the seriousness of the subject cannot be doubted, and, in order to understand it fully, with a true sense of

[p. 63]

appreciation, we must ever regard the legends as interpreting the natural phenomena of day and night. Bearing this fact in mind will enable us to grasp the significance of much that would otherwise be meaningless.

The daily motions and varying aspects of the living and energetic sun hero may be said to comprise the motif of almost every legend and myth bequeathed to us by the ancients.

As in the study of sun worship, the Sun-God Helios first occupies the scene as the central figure in a widely spread and popular cultus, we will first consider the legends that cluster about this mythical personage whom the Greek nation once revered and worshipped with all the fire of religious ardour.

The most interesting myth concerning Helios is that told of him in the Odyssey. It relates that when the hero Odysseus was returning to his home in Ithaca, the goddess told him of the verdant island of Trinacria, where the Sun-God Helios pastured his sacred herds, consisting of seven herds of cows and seven herds of lambs, fifty in each herd, a number which ever remained constant. Odysseus, desirous of visiting this fair isle, set out forthwith, having been warned by Circe to leave the herds of the Sun unmolested lest he suffer evil consequences. Having landed on the island, his

[p. 64]

companions enjoyed to the full the delightful climate, but as food was short, they ignored the warning of the goddess, slaughtered the Sun's best cattle, and feasted on them for six days, when they took their departure.

Helios, deeply incensed by their conduct, and grieving for his lost herds, in which he had taken great pride and pleasure, besought Jove's aid to punish them:

"O Father Jove, and all ye blessed gods
  Who never die, Avenge the wrong I bear
  Upon the comrades of Laertes' son
  Ulysses, who have foully slain my beeves,
  In which I took delight whene'er I rose
  Into the starry heaven, and when again
  I sank from heaven to earth. If for the wrong
  They make not large amends, I shall go down
  To Hades, there to shine among the dead.

 The cloud-compelling Jupiter replied:
 "Still shine, O sun: among the deathless gods
  And mortal men, upon the nourishing earth,
  Soon will I cleave, with a white thunderbolt
  Their galley in the midst of the black sea."

[paragraph continues] And so it came about that through the might of Jove a frightful storm arose, which well-nigh wrecked the vessel of the wanton adventurers; but Odysseus, resorting to heroic measures, prevented the loss of the ship, and his companions thus escaped with their lives.

[p. 65]

"Nothing is so common in Aryan Mythology," says Paley, "as the mention of cows or oxen in connection with the Sun. They seem to represent bright forms that appear to go forth in the form of luminous fleeting clouds from the home of the Sun in the east. The stealing, and recovering, or killing of these oxen is the subject of many tales in the early Greek legends."

The isles of Greece, the isles of Greece:
 Where burning Sappho lived and sung,
 Where grew the arts of war and peace,--
 Where Delos rose, or Phoebus sprung:
 Eternal summer gilds them yet,
 But all except the sun, is set.
                                     BYRON.

We come now to the most conspicuous figure in Grecian mythology, the redoubtable hero, whose life-deeds furnish the theme for innumerable legends, songs, poems, epics, and many of the noblest and most beautiful conceptions in the world of art.

The fact that this distinguished and exalted personage personifies the sun, stamps Phoebus Apollo as the greatest and most widely known Sun-God that mythology and history have produced.

The story of his glorious birth at Delos, and his successful combat with the great serpent that Hera set in his path in the vale of Crissa, and the establishment of his oracle at Delphi, is related

[p. 66]

in the Chapter on Sun Worship as pertaining more particularly to his deification.

In the mythological biography of such a distinguished character as Phoebus Apollo we should expect, of course, to find allusions to his love affairs, and one of these is described in the myth of Daphne which follows:

Daphne, the personified Dawn, springs from the waters at the first flush of morning light, and as the beautiful tints of early day fade gradually in the light of the rising orb, Daphne flees from Apollo as he seeks to win her. In her flight she prays the gods to assist her, and it is related that, in answer to her prayer, she was transformed into a laurel tree, which was ever thereafter sacred to Apollo.

Another myth refers to a hunting trip in which Apollo was accompanied by his friend Hyacinthus. They engaged in a game of quoits, and Apollo cast a quoit which rebounded and struck Hyacinthus a fatal blow. Filled with remorse at the untimely death of his friend by his hand, he transformed Hyacinthus into a beautiful flower which ever after bore his name.

According to Murray [*1] "the object of this myth was to point to the alternating decay and return of life in nature, which in this instance is conceived

[p. 67]

under the form of a youth, the disc which was thrown by Apollo being clearly a symbol of the sun which scorches vegetation."

It is further related of Apollo that incensed at Zeus for causing the death of his son Aesculapius by a thunderbolt, he shot some of the Cyclopes, the forgers of thunderbolts. This brought down upon him the wrath of the Supreme Being, and Apollo was banished from Olympus. During his period of exile he served Admetus as a herdsman.

Keary [*1] claims that Admetus is really one of the names for Hades, and this reference to his service under him indicates his descent into the underworld for the sake of purification. Here again we find the belief current that the sun at nightfall descends into the realms beneath the earth and waters.

During his term of banishment Apollo served Laomedon, the prince of Troy. As this master did not pay him the agreed amount Apollo brought down upon the city a dreadful pestilence which depopulated the entire neighbourhood. Vexed at his exile, Apollo joined with Poseidon in an effort to dethrone Zeus. The plot failed, and both gods were sentenced to assist in building the walls of Troy.

Apollo was far famed as a musician, and once

[p. 68]

had a quarrel with Pan who claimed that the flute was a sweeter instrument than the lyre, which was Apollo's favourite instrument. They agreed to refer the matter to Midas, King of Lydia, who favoured Pan, and Apollo, in his displeasure at the verdict, punished Midas by causing his ears to lengthen till they resembled those of an ass. Apollo apparently brooked no rivalry in his musical accomplishments, for when Marsyas boasted that he excelled Apollo in flute playing, the latter had him flayed alive.

As a mighty warrior Apollo distinguished himself in the Trojan war when he took part against the Greeks. His fury was irresistible, and it is said whole ranks of fighting men fell as he charged into their midst.

Being possessed of eternal youth, and the most accomplished of athletes, Apollo came to be regarded as the patron of youthful athletic contests, and the Pythian games he instituted to commemorate his victory over the Python were celebrated in all lands.

Space does not permit of a complete recital of the many deeds of this famous sun hero. His favourite animals were the hawk and the swan; his tree, the bay. He was represented in the perfection of united manly strength and beauty. His long hair hangs loose, his brows are wreathed

[p. 69]

with bay, and in his hands he bears his bow and lyre.

The wonderful and famous Apollo Belvedere shows at the same time the conception which the ancients had of this benign deity, and the high degree of perfection to which they had attained in sculpture.

Few deities had more appellations than Phoebus Apollo. He was called Delian, Delphian, Clarian, etc., from the places of his worship. He was also referred to as "the Loxian God," from the ambiguity of many of his oracular predictions. Another appellation which the god bore was "Lycius" which means either the Wolf-God, or the Golden God of Light. He is also called "the Mouse-God," because he was regarded either as the protector or as the destroyer of mice. Other names for Apollo were "Silver-bowed," "Far Shooter," "Light Producer," "Well haired," "Gold-haired," "Gold-sworded."

"The likeness between Apollo and Achilles scarcely needs to be pointed out," says Keary. [*1] "Each is the ideal youth, the representative of young Greece, that which was to become in after years Hellas."

In contrasting the character of the Sun-Gods, Helios and Apollo, we note a striking similarity.

[p. 70]

[paragraph continues] Both are conspicuous for their brilliant appearance, both possess powers of producing and destroying life, and weapons that are invulnerable. They are endowed alike with inexhaustible powers of creating happiness or sorrow, pleasure or torment, health or sickness. The exercise of these versatile faculties furnishes the theme for the major portion of that great mass of legends which constitute the essential elements of Aryan Mythology.

In the figure of Herakles we have a Sun-God and hero whose fame has gone afar into all lands, and every age since his time has likened its greatest deeds to the power and might he displayed in the accomplishment of his superhuman deeds.

Even to-day, the construction of the Panama Canal is often alluded to as a deed worthy of Hercules, and the adjective herculean has a firm place in the literature and phraseology of modern times.

The key to the sun myths that relate to the life and deeds of Hercules is found in the idea of the sun's subservience to nature's immutable laws. The sun has a daily task which it must perform. It has a path to travel from which it must not deviate. It has ever before it a life of toil from which it cannot swerve. "Nowhere," says Cox, [*1] "is the unutterable toil and scanty reward of the sun brought out so prominently as in the whole

[p. 71]

legend, or rather in the mass of unconnected legends which is gathered round the person of Herakles."

Herakles was a son of Zeus and Alcmene. Through the malignant hate of Hera he was doomed from his birth to serve Eurystheus, and, not content by thus consigning him to a life of servitude, the goddess sent serpents to strangle him while he was but an infant. The hero, however, possessed godlike strength even in his tender years, and easily destroyed the serpents, much to the amazement of those in charge of him.

This struggle and triumph of the god over the serpents, is very like the successful combat Apollo waged against Python. It represents the great battle that the mythology of all lands presents, the subduing of the powers of darkness by the might of the omnipotent sun, the regent of light. This irresistible power, which is the chief attribute of the sun, is the predominant element in the character of the sun hero Herakles, and enables him to perform at the bidding of his master the twelve stupendous tasks that brought him endless and imperishable fame.

It is unnecessary to recite in detail these various labours. Every mythology does justice to the subject, and allusions to them appear in the arts and letters of every subsequent age. It remains,

[p. 72]

however, to point out the solar significance of these mighty deeds, and how, even in many details, they represent the sun's triumph over the obstacles that nature ever imposes.

The first labour was that of the conquest of the Nemean lion. The myth relates that, after slaying the ferocious beast, Herakles tore its skin off with his fingers, and thereafter it figured as his shield in many a fierce contest. The lion's skin has been likened to the "raiment of tawny cloud which the sun seems to trail behind him as he fights his way through the vapours whom he is said to overcome."

Herakles is next called upon to subdue the hideous Lernean hydra. This creature was possessed of many heads, one of which was immortal. The hero succeeded in this task by burning off the heads whenever they were raised to attack him. The immortal head he buried beneath a stone. As the beast was possessed of many heads, so the stogy nu-wind must continually supply new clouds to vanquish the sun; but the lighter vapour and mist, the immortal head, is only conquered for a time. The sun easily burns up the heavy clouds, the mortal heads, but only hides temporarily the immortal head which rises again and again to daunt him. In this fight Herakles was attended by his friend Iolaus,--this name recalls that of

[p. 73]

[paragraph continues] Iole, signifying the violet-tinted clouds, the attendants of the sun in its serene moments.

"In the third month the sun enters the sign Libra, when the constellation of the Centaur rises, and in his third labour Herakles encountered and slew the Centaur. These comparisons are traceable throughout the year." For a detailed treatment of these myths the reader is referred to Anthon's Classical Dictionary.

In the madness of Herakles we see a further proof that he personifies the sun, for, as the sun rises, it increases in power until its heat destroys the fruits of the earth it loves. Herakles in his insanity kills his own children.

The marriage of Herakles with Hebe, the Goddess of youth, which took place after the performance of his twelve labours, denotes the renewal of the year at the end of each solar revolution.

It is in the last act of his life that Herakles best portrays his solar character. The poisoned coat presented by his wife Dejaneira is donned. It represents the clouds which rise from the waters and surround the sun like a dark raiment. Soon the poison infects the hero's system, inflicting pangs of anguish. Herakles tries in vain to cast it off, but the " fiery mists embrace him, and are mingled with the parting rays of the sun, and the dying hero is seen through the scattered clouds

[p. 74]

of the sky, tearing his own body to pieces till at last his bright form is consumed in a general conflagration."

In this death scene of the solar hero, and in the glories of his funeral pyre, we have the most famous sunset scene that has ever been presented for our contemplation. All the wondrous colouring that adorns the western sky at set of sun illuminates the canvas, and the reflection of the scene streams afar, lighting the waves of the Aegean with its clustering isles, and painting in enduring hues a scene that all nations proclaim the sublimest that nature offers to man's vision.

Anthon thus writes of the sun hero: "If Herakles be regarded as having actually existed, nothing can be more monstrous, nothing more at variance with every principle of chronology, nothing more replete with contradictions than the adventures of such an individual as poetry makes him to have been. But considered as the luminary that gives light to the world, as the god who impregnates all nature with his fertilising rays, every part of the legend teems with animation and beauty, and is marked by a pleasing and perfect harmony."

The Latin Hercules is indubitably identified with the Greek Herakles, and the legend of his life is identical with that of the Hellenic hero. It sets forth the same great struggle between the

[p. 75]

powers of light and darkness that we find in the primitive Hindu myth of Indra and Ahi, the source from which it sprang.

One of the solar legends which has come down to us in the simplest form is that of Sisyphus, who, so the myth relates, was condemned to spend his days in laboriously rolling a great stone to the summit of a hill. No sooner was the task accomplished than the stone rolled of its own volition to the base of the hill and his task began anew.

If we regard this as a sun myth, we see how closely the details of the legend apply to the daily course of the sun. It appears as a great sphere or ball which gradually mounts to the zenith each day as if laboriously propelled upward, on reaching the meridian it immediately begins its descent to the horizon.

Again, the sun by reason of its penetrating rays and its commanding position, suggests a power and a light from which nothing can be hid. The personification of this all-seeing eye would therefore be an all-wise being. "The Greek name Sisyphus," says Cox, "is simply a reduplicated form of Sophos, the wise, and so we have the image of a wise being compelled to ascend the heaven or mountain, and obliged in spite of his wisdom, his strength, and his power to come down as he had gone up. The idea of compulsion may soon pass into that of toil,

[p. 76]

and the latter into the thought of punishment, and thus the sun becomes a criminal under sentence."

In the myth of Ixion we have another solar legend. Ixion was condemned to a life of torture, being bound to a four-spoked and ever-revolving wheel. The name Ixion probably means "visitor," an appropriate name for the sun deity. The wheel revolves ceaselessly as the sun, and the condemned one is alternately raised into the high heavens, and lowered into the depths of the underworld. Cox [*1] points out a curious but well-known characteristic of solar myths. "It is the identification of the sun both with the agent or patient, and with the thing or object by which the act is exercised. Ixion is the sun, and so is Ixion's wheel. Hercules is the sun who expires in the flames on the summit of Mount Oeta, but the fiery robe which scorches him to death is the sun cloud."

The legend of Tantalus again reveals the fact that at one stage in the history of man, anthropomorphic ideas concerning the sun were prevalent. Tantalus was another victim of his misdeeds and consigned to eternal torture. It is related that he stood immersed in water to his chin, and yet dying of thirst, for as he lowered his head to drink, the water withdrew from him, and the earth appeared

[p. 77]

under his feet. To add to his torment luscious fruits hung alluringly from branches almost within his grasp, but no sooner did he stretch out his hands to pluck them than the wind blew them out of his reach, and their sight and that of the water only served to tantalise him.

The figure of the tortured Tantalus standing with his head alone exposed above the surface of the water clearly represents the sun setting in the western sea.

"The ancients speculated," says Paley, "on the hissing and steaming caused by the red hot orb being cooled down and extinguished in the sea. Fire and water could not co-exist, but in this myth the sun has the mastery, and it is the water that retires before the fire. Hence Homer says it was dried up by the god to punish Tantalus."

The word "Tantalus" means "the Poiser," the suspender in air of the huge disk of the sun, and one myth concerning Tantalus relates that, as a punishment for his evil deeds, he was suspended in mid air with a huge stone hanging over his head ever ready to fall and crush him, like a sword of Damocles. The ancients believed that the sun and earth were connected by a chain, and this fact reveals clearly the solar significance of the myth.

It is further related that Tantalus had had the honour of dining with Zeus. This signifies that

[p. 78]

the sun ascended from the mundane sphere to the upper regions.

Primitive man believed as the Bible teaches that all that exists will come to an end in a mighty conflagration, and that some day Tantalus himself would be hurled from his throne in the heavens and consume the earth. Paley says: "If Sisyphus and Tantalus do not represent the Sun-Gods, the deeds and sufferings attributed to them have no intellectual point or meaning, the origin of such wild fables is quite incapable of explanation. On the other hand, if they do, every detail in the narrative becomes simple and significant. And if it can be shown even by a single example that the sun must be meant, then the doctrine of the solar myth is established."

Another beautiful myth of solar significance is that of Kephalos and Prokris of which the following is a brief version:

"Kephalos, a Phocian chief, coming to Athens won the love of Prokris, and plighted his faith to her. But Kephalos was loved also by Eos, who sought to weaken his love for Prokris with a purpose so persistent that at last she induced him to make trial of her affection. He therefore deserts Prokris to whom after a time he returns in disguise. When in this shape he has won her love, he reveals himself, and Prokris in an agony of grief

[p. 79]

and shame flies to Crete where she obtains from Artemis the gift of a spear which shall never miss its mark, and of a hound which can never fail to seize its prey. With these gifts she returns to Kephalos, who after seeing her success in the chase longs to possess them. But they can be yielded only in return for his love, and thus Prokris brings home to him the wrong done to herself, and Eos is for a time discomfited.

"But Prokris still fears the jealousy of Eos, and watches Kephalos as he goes forth to hunt, until one day while she lurked among the thick bushes, she was fatally wounded accidentally by the unerring dart hurled by Kephalos.

"This myth explains itself. Kephalos is the head of the Sun, and Kephalos loved Prokris, in other words the Sun loves the dew, but Eos also loves Kephalos, i.e., the dawn loves the Sun, and thus at once we have the groundwork for her envy of Prokris. So again when we are told that though Prokris breaks her faith, yet her love is still given to the same Kephalos different though he may appear. We have here only a myth formed from phrases, which told how the dew seems to reflect many suns which are yet the same sun. The gifts of Artemis are the rays which flash from each dewdrop, and which Prokris is described as being obliged to yield up to Kephalos, who slays her as

[p. 80]

unwittingly as Phoibos causes the death of Daphne. The spot where she dies is a thicket in which the last dewdrops would linger before the approach of the mid-day heats." [*1]

In the legend of Phaeton we have a more familiar sun myth. Phaeton, the son of Apollo, obtains his father's reluctant consent to drive for one day the chariot of the Sun. Hardly does he start upon his course, however, when the fiery steeds, realising that the reins are in inexperienced hands, run away, and the destruction of the world was threatened. Zeus hurled a thunderbolt at the unfortunate youth, and precipitated him into the river Eridanus.

"This myth reveals," says Cox, "the plague of drought, which made men say: 'Surely another, who cannot guide the horses, is driving the chariot of the sun.'"

The legend of Orpheus is akin to that of Daphne in its solar significance, as in this case Eurydice, although loved by the Sun, falls a victim to his radiancy, as he seeks to embrace her.

The myth of Meleagros reveals the capricious nature of the sun, its variations of light and shade being expressed by the alternate succession of swift deeds and moody fits of the hero when he retires sullenly from the sight of men.

[p. 81]

In the legend of Niobe the consuming power of the sun is manifested as aimed at those who have the temerity to face his dazzling brightness.

The tale of Althaia, regarded as a solar myth, relates to the destiny of the sun. In spite of its power and glory, it must die when the twilight hours usher in the night, but in the legend of Perseus we see once more in the slaying of the Medusa the victory of the sun over the powers of darkness. Perseus, the sun hero, is another Sun-God like Apollo, and Herakles. He has laborious tasks to perform for a tyrant master, invincible weapons, and a victorious career.

In the figure of Oedipus, the national hero of the Thebans, we have another Sun-God whose life and deeds were identical in many respects with those of the great sun heroes already referred to.

Orion, the mighty hunter, immortalised with Perseus and Herakles in the constellations, is also a personification of the sun, and in the splendour of his deeds exhibits the characteristics that made his predecessors famous.

The ancients attributed sudden deaths by sunstroke to the shafts of the angered Sun-Gods, and the sun was thought to seek the sea each night for the purpose of bathing, so that thus purified it would rise to shine the next day with renewed lustre.

Paley tells us that there is a well-known legend,

[p. 82]

the subject of the Homeric Hymn to Hermes, which is considered to have a solar significance. "That cunning god, the patron of rogues and thieves of every description, the Mercurius of the Romans, is said to have stolen and driven off a herd of cows while yet an infant. To prevent the theft being discovered by the traces of the animals, he fixed bundles of brushwood to their feet so that none could tell the direction they had taken. Now these cows are the clouds, the 'oxen of the sun' which figure so conspicuously in the Odyssey. It is a question of interest whether the Roman legend of the fire-breathing monster and robber Cacus, who stole the oxen of Hercules (the Sun-God), on his return from the west, is not in its origin identical. The story is told by Virgil, Propertius, and Ovid. It is said that one of the cows confined in the cave suddenly lowed, and led Hercules to the spot where he killed the robber and released the herd. The return of the lost sun after a thunder-storm explains the whole story very simply. The fire-breathing Cacus is the lightning, and the voice of the cow is the muttering of the thunder."

Space does not permit us to examine and discuss in detail the argument for the solar origin of the two great Homeric epics, the Iliad and the Odyssey. The prayer of Thetis to Zeus to do honour to her son, on which much of the action of the Iliad 

[p. 83]

turns, is clearly the ascent of the Sun-God to heaven. "The might, the invincible prowess, the unwearied strength of the hero, and his powers of destruction and devastation, nay, even his divinely made shield, are merely attributes of the sun in his midday splendour."

The very fact that the sun myths have been so prolific is significant, and this is probably due to the fact that, as Fiske [*1] points out, "the dramatic types to which they have given rise are of surpassing human interest." Thus they have endured through the ages, and in these myths and legends which adorn the rich pages of Grecian mythology we see man's effort to explain natural phenomena in human terms, to endow deity with man's heroic attributes, and to translate physical laws in the light of man's comprehension.

As for proofs that most of the Greek legends about the gods and heroes are of solar origin, it is pointed out that the same actions are attributed to them all. As Paley puts it: "They are all slayers of monsters or powerful foes; all court, or carry off, or return a bride; all grow up brave, all perform some wonderful feat, all go in quest of some lost treasure; generally they are exposed in infancy but survive to cause the death of their own parents. They perform set tasks or labours.

[p. 84]

[paragraph continues] They are faithless to their first loves, they are reunited to them in the end. The simple fact, as it appears to the sense, that the sun leaves the east, and yet is found there again on the very next day, was spoken of under the figure of a bridegroom torn from his bride, soon to be reunited. In the childhood of mankind the daily death of the sun was regarded as a reality. If he was born again it was not from any astronomical necessity so to say, but from the sufferance of nature or of Varuna, the sky god, or from his own benevolence to men, either of which might fail, and the casual eclipses and obscurations might become perpetual.

"The birth and death of the sun, his connection with the dawn, and his tremendous and victorious efforts to regain it were the one theme and topic of regard. He was talked about (though in a different sort of language) just as we are always talking and are never tired of talking of the weather. Hence it is that solar myths seem all in all."

Grecian mythology in its solar aspects is reflected in the legends and traditions of the Latins. Perhaps the most typical instance of this, and certainly the most familiar Roman myth that has come down to us of this nature, is portrayed in Guido Reni's beautiful fresco of Aurora. Properly it should have been designated "Apollo," for the central figure is that of the noble Sun-God, and

[p. 85]

he dominates the scene. "Surrounded by all the light tripping Hours, each a very queen of loveliness, Aurora the goddess of the dawn leads the throng."

The Romans actually believed that the sun was the wheel of Apollo's chariot. Each morning the god rose from the eastern sea, and drove his four spirited steeds across the sky, and in the evening he descended into the western sea. At night, he reposed in a golden boat which was borne along the northern edge of the earth to the rising point in the east.

"Antiquity," says the Abbe Banier, [*1] "has transmitted to us the names of the four horses that drew the chariot of the sun. They were Erythous or the red, Acteon, the luminous, Lampos the resplendent, and Philogoeus, the earth loving. The first denotes the sun rising, whose rays are then reddish. Acteon represents the time when the same rays shot through the atmosphere are more clear, that is about the ninth or tenth hour of the morning. Lampos figures noonday when this luminary is in all his strength and glory, and Philogoeus represents the setting sun that seems to kiss the earth."

In the sun myths of all nations we find allusions to the capricious nature of the sun. Now it

[p. 86]

smiles and gladdens the earth with its golden light, and, presently, displeased at man, shuns his presence, and hides sullenly for a time in gloomy solitude.

In a famous Japanese legend we have a description of the efforts of man to appease the Sun-Goddess when for a time she had absented herself from the sky.

The Sun-Goddess had taken refuge in a cave, and the earth knew not her light, and was dark and gloomy. The eight hundred of lesser deities took counsel as to the best means to propitiate the Goddess, and win once more her favour and her light. A great round copper mirror was procured to represent the sun's disk, and this was surrounded by a circle of saplings that indicated the rays of the radiant sun.

In the upper branches of the trees were hung balls representing the sacred jewel, and in the lower branches, blue and white pendants. A prayer was then recited by the chief priest who acted for the Emperor, and the service ended with a dance and the lighting of many fires. After a time, the Sun-Goddess yielded to the entreaties of man and left her gloomy cave for her heavenly throne, where her presence ever brings joy to the hearts of all mankind.

In another version of this myth the Sun-Goddess

[p. 87]

is said to have waxed inquisitive at the noise of the singing and dancing at the entrance of her retreat, and ventured forth to see what was taking place. Beholding her beautiful self in the mirror, she stepped forth into the world once more, and "her glory filled the air with rosy radiance."

The propitiatory service is akin in many respects to the ceremonial, common among many primitive tribes, of producing sunshine. The first requisite of this rite was a mock sun, and the idea seems to have been that, by instituting an unusual ceremony, the curiosity of the hidden Sun would be aroused and she would come forth to see what was taking place.

Footnotes

^54:1 Ancient Myths in Modern Poets, Helen A. Clarke.

^56:1 The Mythology of the Aryan Nations, Sir George Cox.

^57:1 Mythology Among the Hebrews, Ignaz Goldhizer.

^59:1 Mythology Among the Hebrews, Ignaz Goldhizer.

^66:1 Manual of Mythology, Alexander S. Murray.

^67:1 Outlines of Primitive Belief, Charles F. Keary.

^69:1 Outlines of Primitive Belief, C. F. Keary.

^70:1 The Mythology of the Aryan Nations, Sir George W. Cox.

^76:1 The Mythology of the Aryan Nations, Sir George W. Cox.

^80:1 The Mythology of the Aryan Nations, Sir George W. Cox.

^83:1 Myths and Myth Makers, John Fiske.

^85:1 The Mythology and Fables of the Ancients, Abbe Banier.

Sun Lore of All Ages, by William Tyler Olcott, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 88] [p. 89]

[p. 90] [p. 91]

  

Chapter IV

  

Solar Mythology (Continued)

IN Norse mythology we find, as we might expect, many solar myths and sun heroes, whose knightly qualities and redoubtable prowess enable them to accomplish seemingly impossible tasks, and vanquish the most formidable of foes.

Odin governs the high heavens, and the sun is referred to as Odin's eye. Thor rules in the clouds. He is identified as a Sun-God, and, like Hercules, distinguished himself as the enemy of the powers of cold and darkness. He conquers the frost giants. Heimdal's realm is the rainbow, and Balder rules the realm of light, but the sun affects them all. "It is," says Anderson, [*1] "Odin's eye, Balder's countenance; Heimdal needs it for his rainbow, and still the sun itself rides as a beaming maid with her horses from morning until evening."

In the following graceful Finnish myth we find the sun represented as a lamp illuminating the halls of Vanna Issa, the Supreme Deity, and entrusted

[p. 92]

by him to the care of two immortal servants, a youth and a maiden. "To the maiden who is called 'Evening Twilight,' the ancient Father saith: 'My daughter, unto thee I entrust the Sun, extinguish him and hide away the fire that no damage may ensue.' Then to the Dawn: 'My son, it is thy duty to rekindle the light for a new course. On no day is the light to be absent from the arch of heaven.'

"In winter he resteth a great while, but in summer his repose is short, and Evening Twilight gives up the dying light into the very hands of Dawn who straightway kindles it into new life. At such times they each take one look deep into the other's dark brown eyes; they press each other's hands, and their lips touch. Once a year only for the space of four weeks they come together at midnight. Then Evening Twilight layeth the dying light into the hands of Dawn, and a pressure of hands and a kiss make them happy, and the cheeks of Evening Twilight redden, and the rosy redness is mirrored in the sky till Dawn rekindles the light."

The following myth of the "Witch and the Sun's Sister" reveals another type of sun myth involving the actions of members of the Sun's family. In some of these myths the Sun's son figures, and however capricious the Sun may act, the legends

[p. 93]

that relate to his family indicate that they were kindly disposed toward humankind, and in many of the myths they act the part of benefactors.

In a country far remote there were once a king and a queen, who had a son named Prince Ivan, who was dumb from birth. A groom told the Prince that he was destined to have a sister who would prove to be a terrible witch, and advised him to flee lest harm befall him, He took the advice, and his father provided him with a swift horse on which he took his flight.

After wandering far he sought a dwelling-place in vain, first with two women, then with a giant who was uprooting trees, and lastly with a giant who was levelling mountains. Finally, he came to the dwelling of the Sun's sister, and she received him just as if he had been her own son. After a time, Prince Ivan longed to return to his old home, and persuaded the Sun's sister to allow him to depart. On his homeward journey he was enabled, by magic bestowed on him by the Sun's sister, to assist the two women and the giants who had refused to take him in because of trials which beset them.

On his home-coming his sister, the wicked witch, laid plans to destroy him; but he was warned in time by a mouse, and though closely pursued by the witch he escaped her clutches through the

[p. 94]

aid of those he had befriended and the Sun's sister.

The mythology of the North American Indians contains many examples of the solar myth. One of their Sun-Gods was Michabo, whose name signifies the Great Hare, the Great White One, or the God of the Dawn, and the East. It is said that he slept through the winter months, and in the fall when he was about to seek repose, he filled his great pipe, and the blue clouds of smoke that he exhaled drifted over the landscape filling the air with the veil-like haze of Indian Summer.

Michabo was regarded by the Indians as their common ancestor, and the ruler of the numerous tribes, the founder of their religious ritual and the inventor of their art of picture-writing. He controlled the weather, and was the creator and preserver of heaven and earth. The totem or clan which was dedicated to him was revered with the greatest respect.

In Myths and Myth Makers, by John Fiske, we read the following poetical description of Michabo, the Indian solar deity:

"From a grain of sand brought from the bottom of the primeval ocean he fashioned the habitable land, and set it floating on the waters till it grew to such a size that a strong young wolf running

[p. 95]

constantly died of old age ere he reached its limits. He was also like Nimrod a mighty hunter. [*1] One of his footsteps measured eight leagues. The Great Lakes were the beaver dams he built, and when the cataracts impeded his progress, he tore them away with his hands. Sometimes he was said to dwell in the skies with his brother, the Snow, or like many great spirits to have built a wigwam in the far north in some floe of ice in the Arctic Ocean. In the oldest accounts of the missionaries he was alleged to reside toward the east. He is the personification of the solar life-giving power, which daily comes forth from its home in the east making the earth to rejoice."

A Modoc Indian myth relates that every day the Sun is utterly destroyed, and reduced to a heap of ashes, but inasmuch as the Sun is immortal, the disk lies dormant in the ashes waiting its summons to renewed life. Some one must, therefore, rouse the slumbering Sun each morning, as a slave is called to daily labour, and this office is performed by the morning star. At the summons to awake, the golden disk springs from the ashes rejuvenated, and goes forth to run his course. Here we have

[p. 96]

a legend similar to that of the Phoenix, the mythical bird which rose from lifeless ashes once in five centuries.

The following Cherokee legend is one of the most interesting solar myths related by the Indians:

"The Sun lived on the other side of the sky vault but her daughter lived in the middle of the sky directly above the earth, and every day as the Sun was climbing along the sky arch to the west, she used to stop at her daughter's house for dinner.

"Now the Sun hated the people of the earth because they could never look straight at her without screwing up their faces. She said to her brother, the Moon: 'My grandchildren are ugly, they grin all over their faces when they look at me.' But the Moon said: 'I like my younger brothers.' They always smiled pleasantly at him when they saw him in the sky for his rays were milder. The Sun was jealous and planned to kill all the people. So every day when she got near her daughter's house she sent down such sultry rays that there was a great fever, and the people died by hundreds. They went for help to the Little Men who said the only way to save themselves was to kill the Sun. The Little Men made medicine, and changing two men to snakes sent them to bite the old Sun when she came next day, but the light of the Sun blinded them, and they were unable to harm the Sun.

[p. 97]

[paragraph continues] Again the Little Men were appealed to, and changing a man into a rattlesnake they sent him to bite the Sun, but instead of the Sun the snake bit the Sun's daughter, and she died from the bite. Now was the Sun sad and people did not die any more, but now the world was dark all the time because the Sun would not come out. Again they appealed to the Little Men who told them they must appease the Sun by bringing back her daughter from the ghost country. Seven men were chosen to seek the daughter, and bring her back in a box. They were charged not to open the box after she was put into it. They succeeded in their quest, and started home with the daughter safe in a box. She pleaded so hard to be let out that when they were almost home they opened the box only a little way, but this was enough, and something flew past them into a thicket, and they heard a red bird cry, 'Kwish,' 'Kwish,' in the bushes. They shut down the lid but when they got home the box was empty. The Sun had been glad when they started for the ghost country, but when they came back without her daughter she grieved and cried and wept until her tears made a flood upon the earth, and people were afraid the world would be drowned.

"They held another council and sent their handsomest young men and women to amuse her

[p. 98]

so that she would stop crying. They danced before the Sun and sang their best songs, but for a long time she kept her face covered and paid no attention until at last the drummer suddenly changed the song, when she lifted up her face and was so pleased at the sight that she forgot her grief and smiled." [*1]

It is a significant fact that we find here a legend in respect to the propitiation of the sun identical with the Japanese myth related above, where, because of the retirement of the Sun-Goddess into her cave, men made every effort to conciliate her, and, finally, by a ceremony of singing and dancing, they won her back to her place in the sky.

Another Cherokee Indian myth relates that several young warriors once set out on a journey to the sunrise land. On the way they had many strange adventures, and finally they came to the sun's rising place, where the sky touches the ground. They discovered that the sky was an arch of solid rock hanging above the earth, and it seemed to swing slowly up and down, so that as it rocked it left a little opening at its base through which the sun rose each morning.

The adventurers waited for the sun to come out and presently it appeared. It had a human figure, but it was too bright to permit of their seeing its

[p. 99]

features clearly. As soon as it had emerged through the opening they tried to leap through the narrow orifice before it was closed, but just as the first warrior was passing through, the rock rim of the sky closed and crushed out his life. The others were afraid to make the attempt after this fatality, and returned home, and the return trip took them such a long time that when they at length reached the end of their journey they were all old men.

In another version of this myth, three brothers undertook the journey, and the two younger ones succeeded in leaping through the opening. The older brother attempted to follow, but he was crushed by the great rock rim of the sky. The two successful brothers continued journeying in a land where everything is different, and presently met their elder brother. They all proceeded to the house of the Supreme Deity, whose messenger the Sun was, and were purified and built over. They now possessed magic qualities which enabled them to perform wonderful feats of speed and strength. After a time they returned to their native village, but, like Rip Van Winkle, no one knew them save an old woman.

One of the most beautiful of the solar myths of the Indians is the Algonquin "Legend of the Red Swan" which is as follows: [*1]

[p. 100]

"The hunter Ojibwa had just killed a bear, and begun to skin him when suddenly something red tinged all the air around. Reaching the shore of a lake the Indian saw it was a beautiful red swan whose plumage glittered in the sun. In vain the hunter shot his shafts, for the bird floated unharmed and unheeding, but at last he remembered three magic arrows at home which had been his father's. The first and second arrows flew near and nearer, the third struck the swan, and flapping its wings it flew slowly towards the sinking of the sun."

Longfellow has adapted this beautiful episode as a sunset picture in one of his Indian poems:

Can it be the sun descending
 O'er the level plain of water?
 Or the Red Swan floating, flying,
 Wounded by the magic arrow,
 Staining all the waves with crimson
 With the crimson of its life-blood
 Filling all the air with splendour
 With the splendour of its plumage?

The story goes on to tell how the hunter speeds westward in pursuit of the Red Swan. "At lodges where he rests, they tell him she has often passed there, but those who followed her have never returned. She is the daughter of an old magician who has lost his scalp which Ojibwa succeeds in

[p. 101]

recovering for him and puts back on his head, and the old man rises from the earth no longer aged and decrepit but splendid in youthful glory. Ojibwa departs and the magician calls forth the beautiful maiden, now not his daughter, but his sister, and gives her to his victorious friend. It was in after days when Ojibwa had gone home with his bride that he travelled forth and coming to an opening in the earth descended and came to the abode of departed spirits, there he could behold the bright western region of the good, and the dark cloud of wickedness. But the spirits told him that his brethren at home were quarrelling for the possession of his wife, and at last after long wandering this Red Indian Odysseus returned to his mourning, constant Penelope, laid the magic arrows to his bow, and stretched the wicked suitors dead at his feet.

"Thus savage legends from Polynesia and America may well support the theory that Odysseus visiting the Elysian fields and Orpheus descending to the land of Hades to bring back the wide-shining Eurydike are but the Sun himself descending to and ascending from the world below."

The Algonquin deity Manabozho was a personification of the sun, for, in an Ottawa myth, he is referred to as the elder brother of the Spirit of the West, God of the country of the dead in the region

[p. 102]

of the setting sun, and his solar character is further revealed in the legend of his vain pursuit of the West, his brother, to the brink of the world.

According to a Peruvian myth, Viracocha, the Supreme God of the Peruvians, rose from the bosom of Lake Titicaca, and journeying westward overcame all the foes that opposed him, and disappeared at length into the western sea, thus portraying his true solar character.

Faber [*1] tells us that the ancient Mexicans believed that the world was made by the gods, but professed ignorance as to the precise mode in which it was formed. "They imagined that since the creation four suns had successively appeared and disappeared, and they maintained that that which we now behold is the fifth. The first sun perished by a deluge of water, and with it all living creatures. The second fell from heaven at a period when there were many giants in the country and by the fall everything that had life was again destroyed. The third was consumed by fire and the fourth was dissipated by a tempest of wind. At that time mankind did not perish as before but were changed into apes, yet when the fourth sun was blotted out there was a darkness which continued twenty-five years. At the end of the fifteenth

[p. 103]

year their chief god formed a man and a woman who brought forth children, and at the end of the other ten years appeared the fifth sun then newly born. Three days after this last sun became visible all the former gods died, then in process of time were produced those whom they have since worshipped."

The Egyptians had a legend which in some respects is so similar to that of the Mexican myth related above that it would almost appear as if the two originated from the same source. They told Herodotus that, according to their records, the sun had four times deviated from his regular course, having twice risen in the west, and twice set in the east. This change, however, had produced no alteration in the climate of Egypt, neither had a greater prevalence of disease been the consequence.

Among the Maoris of New Zealand we find a myth that depicts dramatically the setting sun as it goes to its death through the western portals of the night. Because of its interest as a pronounced type of the solar myth it is given in detail:

"Maui, the New Zealand cosmic hero, at the end of his glorious career came back to his father's country and was told that here perhaps he might be overcome, for here dwelt his mighty ancestress 'Great-Woman-Night,' whom you may see flashing,

[p. 104]

and as it were opening and shutting there where the horizon meets the sky. What you see yonder shining so brightly red are her eyes, and her teeth are as sharp and hard as pieces of volcanic glass. Her body is like that of a man, and as for the pupils of her eyes they are jasper. Her hair is like the tangles of long seaweed, and her mouth is like that of a barracouta.

"Maui boasted of his former exploits, and said: 'Let us fearlessly seek whether men are to die or live forever.' But his father called to mind an evil omen that when he was baptising Maui he had left out part of the fitting prayers and therefore he knew that his son must perish, yet he said: 'O my last born, and the strength of my old age, . . . be bold, go and visit your great ancestress who flashes so fiercely there where the edge of the horizon meets the sky.' Then the birds came to Maui to be his companions in the enterprise, and it was evening when they went with him, and they came to the dwelling of his mighty ancestress, and found her fast asleep. Maui charged the birds not to laugh when they saw him creep into the old chieftainess, but when he had got altogether inside her, and was coming out of her mouth, then they might laugh long and loud. So Maui stripped off his clothes and crept in. The birds kept silence, but when he was in up to his

[p. 105]

waist the little tiwakawaka could hold its laughter no longer, and burst out loud with its merry note, then Maui's ancestress awoke, closed on him, and caught him tight and he was killed. Thus died Maui, and thus death came into the world.

"The New Zealanders hold that the sun descends at night into his cavern, bathes in the water of Life, and returns at dawn from the underworld; hence we may interpret their thought that if Man could likewise descend into Hades and return, his race would be immortal.

"It is seldom that solar characteristics are more distinctly marked in the several details of a myth than they are here. Great-Woman-Night who dwells on the horizon is the New Zealand Hades. The birds are to keep silence as the sun enters night, but may sing when he comes forth from her mouth, the mouth of Hades. The tiwakawaka describes the cry of the bird which is only heard at sunset." [*1]

 

One of the most wide-spread and best-known sun myths relates to the devouring of the day by the night monster at set of sun, and the disgorging of the victim by the devourer in the morning. A Zulu legend describes the maw of this sun-devouring monster as a land teeming with human life,

[p. 106]

and its environment, and when the monster is cut open, all the creatures issue forth from the state of darkness, the cock leading, exclaiming: "I see the world."

The well-known fairy tale of "Little Red Riding-Hood" is a sun myth of this type, and in Germany there is added to the tale the fact that, after the wolf had devoured his victim, a hunter slew the wolf, ripped him open, when out stepped the little maiden in her red cloak, safe and sound.

There is a legend current in Germany that relates to a frog that wooed the daughters of a queen. The youngest daughter consented to become his bride, and this gracious act on her part freed the frog from a magic spell, and he was transformed into a handsome youth.

"This tale," says Professor Max Muller, [*1] "is solar in its character, and but another version of the Sanscrit story of Bheki the frog who became the wife of a king only to vanish at the sight of a glass of water, a legend that grew out of a phrase which was possibly, 'the sun dies at the sight of water.'"

Another ancient myth that has come down to us relates to the mystic meeting of the sunlight and moonlight. The light of the sun was a king's daughter who, on a certain day asked to be allowed

[p. 107]

to walk unattended in the streets of a great city. The king consented, and ordered all the citizens to remain indoors behind closed shutters on that day and refrain from looking out. A minister, who was really the moonlight, could not restrain his curiosity. He stepped out on his balcony and was seen by the king's daughter, who beckoned to him and he joined her at the foot of a tree. Thus did the sunlight and moonlight mingle their beams of light. The king was told of their meeting and set out for the trysting-place, but before his arrival the minister's wife, realising her husband's peril, sought him and so disguised him that he resembled a monster. When the king finally found his daughter, and saw no one near her but a monster, he was convinced that he had been misinformed, and that his daughter had met no one.

The association of the sun with a floating island is revealed in many legends, and in solar symbolism we find the sun depicted as seated on a floating lotus leaf.

Herodotus tells us that near Buto there was a deep and broad lake in which was a reputed floating island. In this island was a large temple dedicated to the sun. The island was once firm, but it is said when Typhon, who was the sea, was once roaming round the world in pursuit of the solar deity Horus, Latona, who was one of the

[p. 108]

primitive eight gods who dwelt in the city of Buto, received him in trust from Isis and concealed him in the island of Chemmis, which then first began to float. Afterwards he became sufficiently powerful to leave his place of refuge and to expel Typhon who had usurped his dominions, and his own reign then commenced.

The myth of Phoebus Apollo is substantially identical with this, and the island of Delos, the birthplace of the Sun-God, corresponds to the floating island Chemmis.

There is another parallel legend among the Peruvians. When all mankind were swept away by the waters of the Deluge, a personage named Viracocha emerged from Lake Titicaca and became the founder of the sacred city of Cuzco. Viracocha was the Sun-God of the Peruvians, and the common ancestor of the race of Incas.

In Lake Titicaca, which is considered sacred by the Peruvians, there is a small island where they claim the Sun-God hid himself and saved his life when the world was destroyed by the waters of the Deluge. On this island there was a temple dedicated to the sun, as there was on the island of Chemmis, the Egyptian island, and the Greek island Delos. These islands were considered holy places.

Faber [*1] tells us: "The sun is further represented

[p. 109]

as peculiarly delighting to haunt the sacred mountain which first raised its head above the retiring waters, and which received the ark. This mountain top, therefore, had the appearance of a floating island which doubtless gave rise to the many myths that represent the sun as navigating the deep.

"The favourite residence of the Greek solar deity was Parnassus. In the Zend Avesta the sun is described as ruling over the world from the top of Mount Albordi which is said to have been the first land that appeared above the waves of the retreating flood.

"The old Orphic poet, the priests of Egypt, and the Brahmas of Hindostan agree in maintaining that the sun was born out of an egg which had floated on the ocean, and which had been tossed about at the mercy of the elements."

The following extremely interesting solar myth of Irish extraction is related in Myths and Myth Makers by John Fiske:

"Long before the Danes ever came to Ireland, there died at Muskerry a Sculloge, or country farmer, who by dint of hard work and close economy had amassed enormous wealth. His only son did not resemble him. When the young Sculloge looked about the house, the day after his father's death, and saw the big chests full of gold

[p. 110]

and silver, and the cupboards shining with piles of sovereigns, and the old stockings stuffed with large and small coin, he said to himself, 'Bedad, how shall I ever be able to spend the likes o' that?' And so he drank, and gambled, and wasted his time in hunting and horse-racing, until after a while he found the chests empty and the cupboards poverty-stricken, and the stockings lean and penniless. Then he mortgaged his farmhouse and gambled away all the money he got for it, and then he bethought him that a few hundred pounds might be raised on his mill. But when he went to look at it, he found the dam broken and scarcely a thimbleful of water in the mill-race, and the wheel rotten, and the thatch of the house all gone, and the upper millstone lying flat on the lower one, and a coat of dust and mould over everything. So he made up his mind to borrow a horse and take one more hunt to-morrow and then reform his habits.

"As he was returning late in the evening from his farewell hunt, passing through a lonely glen he came upon an old man playing backgammon, betting on his left hand against his right, and crying and cursing because the right would win. 'Come and bet with me,' said he to Sculloge. 'Faith, I have but a sixpence in the world,' was the reply; 'but if you like, I'll wager that on the right.'

[p. 111]

[paragraph continues] 'Done,' said the old man, who was a Druid; 'if you win I'll give you a hundred guineas.' So the game was played, and the old man, whose right hand was always the winner, paid over the guineas and told Sculloge to go to the Devil with them.

"Instead of following this bit of advice, however, the young farmer went home and began to pay his debts, and next week he went to the glen and won another game, and made the Druid rebuild his mill. So Sculloge became prosperous again, and by and by he tried his luck a third time, and won a game played for a beautiful wife. The Druid sent her to his house the next morning before he was out of bed, and his servants came knocking at the door and crying, 'Wake up, wake up, Master Sculloge, there's a young lady here to see you.' 'Bedad, it's the vanithee [*1] herself,' said Sculloge; and getting up in a hurry, he spent three-quarters of an hour in dressing himself. At last he went downstairs, and there on the sofa was the prettiest lady ever seen in Ireland. Naturally, Sculloge's heart beat fast and his voice trembled, as he begged the lady's pardon for this Druidic style of wooing, and besought her not to feel obliged to stay with him unless she really liked him. But the young lady, who was a king's daughter from a far country, was wondrously

[p. 112]

charmed with the handsome farmer, and so well did they get along that the priest was sent for without further delay, and they were married before sundown. Sabina was the vanithee's name; and she warned her husband to have no more dealings with Lassa Buaicht, the old man of the glen. So for a while all went happily, and the Druidic bride was as good as she was beautiful. But by and by Sculloge began to think he was not earning money fast enough. He could not bear to see his wife's hands soiled with work, and thought it would be a fine thing if he could only afford to keep a few more servants, and drive about with Sabina in an elegant carriage, and see her clothed in silk and adorned with jewels.

"'I will play one more game and set the stakes high,' said Sculloge to himself one evening, as he sat pondering over these things; and so, without consulting Sabina, he stole away to the glen, and played a game for ten thousand guineas. But the evil Devil was now ready to pounce on his prey, and he did not play as of old. Sculloge broke into a cold sweat with agony and terror as he saw the left hand win. Then the face of Lassa Buaicht grew dark and stern, and he laid on Sculloge the curse which is laid upon the solar hero in misfortune, that he should never sleep twice under the same roof, or ascend the couch of the dawn-nymph,

[p. 113]

his wife, until he should have procured and brought to him the sword of light. When Sculloge reached home, more dead than alive, he saw that his wife knew all. Bitterly they wept together, but she told him that with courage all might be set right. She gave him a Druidic horse, which bore him swiftly over land and sea, like the enchanted steed of the Arabian Nights, until he reached the castle of his wife's father, who, as Sculloge now learned, was a good Druid, the brother of the evil Lassa Buaicht. This good Druid told him that the sword of light was kept by a third brother, the powerful magician Fiach O'Duda, who dwelt in an enchanted castle, which many brave heroes had tried to enter, but the dark sorcerer had slain them all. Three high walls surrounded the castle, and many had scaled the first of these, but none had ever returned alive. But Sculloge was not to be daunted, and taking from his father-in-law a black steed, he set out for the fortress of Fiach O'Duda. Over the first high wall nimbly leaped the magic horse, and Sculloge called aloud to the Druid to come out and surrender his sword. Then came out a tall, dark man, with coal-black eyes and hair and melancholy visage, and made a furious sweep at Sculloge with the flaming blade. But the Druidic beast sprang back over the wall in the twinkling of an eye and rescued his rider, leaving,

[p. 114]

however, his tail behind in the court-yard. Then Sculloge returned in triumph to his father-in-law's palace, and the night was spent in feasting and revelry.

"Next day Sculloge rode out on a white horse, and when he got to Fiach's castle, he saw the first wall lying in rubbish. He leaped the second, and the same scene occurred as the day before, save that the horse escaped unharmed. The third day Sculloge went out on foot, with a harp like that of Orpheus in his hand, and as he swept its strings the grass bent to listen and the trees bowed their heads. The castle walls all lay in ruins, and Sculloge made his way unhindered to the upper room, where Fiach lay in Druidic slumber, lulled by the harp. He seized the sword of light, which was hung by the chimney sheathed in a dark scabbard, and making the best of his way back to the good king's palace, mounted his wife's steed, and scoured over land and sea until he found himself in the gloomy glen where Lassa Buaicht was still crying and cursing and betting on his left hand against his right.

"'Here, treacherous friend, take your sword of light'; shouted Sculloge in tones of thunder; and as he drew it from its sheath the whole valley was lighted up as with the morning sun, and next moment the head of the wretched Druid was

[p. 115]

lying at his feet, and his sweet wife, who had come to meet him, was laughing and crying in his arms."

Some authorities claim that the legend of William Tell is a sun myth. He is admittedly a skilful navigator, a practised archer, and, as the myth relates, after he had successfully emerged from the storm and tempest he leaps at dawn, rejoicing in his freedom on the land, and slays the tyrant who had enslaved him. These facts are all well in accord with those predominating in the typical solar myth.

It is quite impossible in a volume treating of sun lore in all its phases to discuss the solar myth exhaustively. An attempt has been made to indicate that primitive man, wherever he was situated, strove to interpret natural phenomena in the familiar language of his daily existence, and to attribute to the manifestations of physical laws a human agency. The result of this close observation of nature led to the deification of its powers and paved the way for a wealth of imagery, a treasure of myth and legend, which lends colour and brightness to the more sombre pages of the early history of man.

Footnotes

^91:1 Norse Mythology, R. B. Anderson.

^95:1 In this connection it is interesting to note the unexplained association of Orion, the personification of Nimrod, the mighty hunter, and the timid hare. In the constellations we find Orion and Lepus contiguous. That they were designed to be thus closely associated in the heavens cannot be doubted.

^98:1 From the 19th Report of the Bureau of Ethnology.

^99:1 Primitive Culture, Edward B. Tylor.

^102:1 The Origin of Pagan Idolatry, George Stanley Faber.

^105:1 Primitive Culture, Edward B. Tylor.

^106:1 Chips from a German Workshop, Professor Max Muller.

^108:1 The Origin of Pagan Idolatry, G. S. Faber.

^111:1 Lady of the house.

Sun Lore of All Ages, by William Tyler Olcott, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 116] [p. 117]

[p. 118] [p. 119]

  

Chapter V

  

Solar Folk-Lore

THE distinction between mythology and folklore is an extremely fine one, and though there is such a distinction, still the two subjects are so essentially analogous it will not be strange if portions of the material in this chapter would, according to some authorities, seem misplaced, and more properly included in the chapter on Solar Mythology, and vice versa. In view of the difficulties of an absolutely correct classification, the author makes no claim that his is the correct one.

In the early stages of the history of man, every act of nature and the movements of the heavenly bodies was attributed to the machinations of some one, a mysterious personage, an all-powerful being, an unseen god. The sun, as the chief luminary, commanded man's attention from the earliest days, and it was but natural for primitive man to speculate on the phenomena of his daily appearance and disappearance in terms that seem to us now childish and puerile.

[p. 120]

To men who looked to the west across a vast expanse of sea, the sun at nightfall seemed to sink directly into the waves, and, as they were confident that the sun was an extremely large and hot body they were convinced it would give out a hissing noise when the waters closed over it.

From the expression of the thought to the actual fact was but a step, and so we find Posidonius recording that the inhabitants of Cape St. Vincent, the westernmost point of Europe, claimed that the sun disappears each night into the sea with a great hissing noise.

We find the same idea current in the islands of Polynesia, in Iberia, and Germany, where the people claim to have heard the mighty hissing of the sea-quenched sun.

The Egyptians regarded the sun as a child when it was rising, and as an old man when it was setting in the evening. These ideas were also transferred to the annual motion of the sun. Macrobius states that the Egyptians compared the yearly course of the sun with the phases of human life; thus, a little child signified the winter solstice, a young man the spring equinox, a bearded man the summer solstice, and an old man the autumnal equinox. They also thought that Hercules had his seat in the sun, and that he travelled with it round the moon.

[p. 121]

The Hindus often referred to the sun as "the eye of Mithra, Varuna, and Agni," and at sunrise or sunset, when the sun appeared to be squatting on the water, they likened it to a frog. This simile gave rise to a Sanscrit story, which is found also in German and Gaelic.

"Bheki (the frog) was a beautiful maiden. One day when she was sitting near a well, a king rode by, and fascinated by her beauty, asked her hand in marriage. She consented on the condition that he would never show her a drop of water. He accepted, and they were married. One day being tired and thirsty she asked the king for a glass of water, and forgetting his promise, he granted her request, and his bride immediately vanished. That is to say, the sun disappeared when it touched the water."

The sun was also regarded as a well, and in the Semitic, Persian, and Chinese languages the words "well" and "eye" are synonymous. Considered as a well, the rays of the sun were likened to the moisture that flows from the well.

In different parts of Africa we find the sun variously regarded. In Central Africa, where it is extremely hot, the rising of the sun is always dreaded, and the orb of day is a common enemy. It was the custom, among certain tribes, to curse the sun at his rising for afflicting the people with burning heat.

[p. 122]

In Southern Africa, on the contrary, the natives believed that they were descended from the Sun; and if, by chance, the rising of the sun was obscured by clouds, they thought the Sun purposely hid his face from them because their misdeeds offended him, and straightway they performed acts of propitiation. Work at once ceased, and the food of the previous day was given to the old women. The men of the tribe then went in a body to the river to purify themselves by washing in the stream. Each man threw into the river a stone from his hearth, and replaced it with a new one from the bed of the river. On returning to the village the chief kindled a fire in his hut, and the members of the tribe all gathered embers from it to light their individual hearth fires. The ceremony concluded with a dance in which the whole tribe joined. The idea seems to have been; that the lighting of the flame on earth would serve to rekindle the dead solar fire. When the sun set, these people said "The Sun dies."

The early inhabitants of Polynesia called the sun "Ra," which was also the Egyptian sun name. They believed that it was endowed with life, and the offspring of the gods. To account for its rise in the east each morning, after its disappearance in the west each night, they said that during the night it passed through a passage under the seas,

[p. 123]

so as to rise in its appointed place in the eastern sky each day.

In some of the islands the sun was thought to be a substance resembling fire, and they regarded its disappearance each night as a falling of the orb into the sea, and, as we have seen, the inhabitants of the westernmost islands were confident that they had heard the hissing occasioned by the sun's plunge into the ocean.

The early tribes seemed to think they could control the light of the sun and s Lay or hasten its setting. "The Melanesians make sunshine by means of a mock sun," says Frazer. [*1] "A circular stone is wound about with red braid and stuck with owl's feathers to represent the rays of the sun, or the stone is laid on the ground with white rods radiating from it to imitate sunbeams." A white or red pig is sacrificed in the sunshine-making ceremony, and a black one when rain is desired.

In New Caledonia they burnt a skeleton to make sunshine, and drenched it with water if they wished for rain. They also had a more elaborate ceremony for producing sunshine, which Frazer [*2] thus describes: "When a wizard desires to make sunshine he takes some plants and corals to the burial ground, and makes then into a bundle, adding two locks of hair cut from the head of a living child

[p. 124]

[paragraph continues] (his own child if possible), also two teeth, or an entire jawbone from the skeleton of an ancestor. He then climbs a high mountain whose top catches the first rays of the morning sun. Here he deposits three sorts of plants on a flat stone, places a branch of dry coral beside them, and hangs the bundle of charms over the stone. Next morning he returns to this rude altar, and at the moment when the sun rises from the sea, he kindles a fire on the altar. As the smoke rises he rubs the stone with the dry coral, invokes his ancestors and says: 'Sun: I do this that you may be burning hot, and eat up all the clouds in the sky.' The same ceremony is repeated at sunset."

The sun, according to many traditions of primitive man, spent a part of its time in the underworld, or in a submarine passage beneath the seas, and if it did not go of its own volition, it was carried there by some enemy. Thus in Servia a tale is told, that when the devils fell, their king carried off the sun from heaven affixed to a lance. This was a great calamity, and the Archangel St. Michael was selected to try to recover it. He therefore set out for the underworld and succeeded in making friends with the archfiend. As they stood together by a lake, St. Michael proposed to the devil that they engage in a diving contest. The latter consented, and thrusting the lance

[p. 125]

which held the sun into the ground, he dived in. This was St. Michael's opportunity, and making the sign of the cross, he grabbed the lance and made off, hotly pursued by the Evil One. Being fleet of foot he outdistanced him, but his pursuer was so close to him at one time that he managed to scratch his foot. In honour of St. Michael and his valiant deed, men, from that time on, were destined to have indented soles.

The old Germans called the sun "Wuotan's eye," and there is a German legend that reveals the sun as the punisher of evil thinkers: It appears that a prisoner was once on his way to execution, an object of pity to all whom he passed, but one woman, who was engaged in hanging up her linen to dry in the sun, remarked that he well deserved his fate. Immediately her linen fell to the ground, nor was she able to hang it up in this drying-place thereafter. It is further related that, at her death, she was taken up to the sun to remain there as long as the world endures, as a punishment for her lack of pity.

The peasants in various parts of Germany call the Milky Way the "Mealway" or the "Millway," and say that it turns with the sun, for it first becomes visible at the point where the sun has set. It leads, therefore, to the heavenly mill, and its colour is that of the meal with which it is

[p. 126]

strewed. This brings us to the Norse story of "The Wonderful Mill," [*1] I an exceedingly interesting bit of folk-lore of solar significance. "The peasants of Norway to this day tell of the wondrous mill that ground whatever was demanded of it. The tradition is of great antiquity. The earliest version known is as follows: Of all beliefs, that in which man has at all times of his history been most prone to set faith, is that of a golden age of peace and plenty which has passed away, but which might be expected to return. Such a period of peace and plenty, such a golden time, the Norsemen could tell of in his mythic Frodi's reign, when gold, or Frodi's meal, as it was called, was so plentiful that golden armlets lay untouched from year's end to year's end on the King's highway, and the fields bore crops unsown. In Frodi's house were two maidens of that old giant race, Frenja and Menja. These daughters of the giant he had bought as slaves, and he made them grind his quern or hand-mill Grotti, out of which he used to grind peace and gold. Even in that golden age one sees there were slaves, and Frodi, however bountiful to his thanes and people, was a hard taskmaster to his giant handmaidens. He kept them to the mill, nor gave them longer rest than the cuckoo's note lasted, or they could sing a song. But that quern

[p. 127]

was such that it ground everything that the grinder chose, though until then it had ground nothing but gold and peace. So the maidens ground and ground, and one sang their piteous tale in a strain worthy of Aeschylus, as the other rested. They prayed for rest and pity, but Frodi was deaf. Then they turned in giant mood, and ground no longer peace and plenty, but fire and war. Then the quern went fast and furious, and that very night came Mysing the sea-rover and slew Frodi and all his men, and carried off the quern, and so Frodi's peace ended. The maidens, the sea-rover took with him, and when he got on the high seas he bade them grind salt, so they ground, and at midnight they asked if he had not salt enough, but he bade them grind on. So they ground till the ship was full and sank. Mysing, maids, mill, and all, and that's why the sea is salt."

This wonder-working mill once stood in heaven, it is said, for Frodi its owner was no other than the Sun-God Freyr. The flat circular stone of Frodi's quern is the disk of the sun, and its handle is the pramantha with which Indra or the Aswins used to kindle the extinguished luminary.

To explain the circular motion of the sun, the Incas of Peru believed that it was hung in space by a cord, and that each evening it entered the sea, and being a good swimmer it pierced through the

[p. 128]

waves, and reappeared next morning in the east.

The Incas claimed that the Sun was their own elder brother, and ruled over the cohorts of heaven by divine right. Their legends relate that the Sun took pity on the children of men, who, in primitive times, lived in a state of savagery, and he therefore sent his son and daughter to enlighten them, and teach them to live properly. They are said to have risen from the depths of Lake Titicaca, that marvellous sheet of water twelve thousand feet above the sea. They taught the Peruvians the essentials of culture and education.

According to another tradition, the Peruvians traced their origin from the first Inca, the Sun and his wife, who came from the island of the sun in Lake Titicaca, and founded the city of Cuzco, the sacred city of the sun. This island in the lake is therefore sacred to the Peruvians, and many ruins of the Incas are to be found there.

The Peruvians paid particular attention to the daily meridian passage of the sun, and observed that when it was in the zenith, it cast no shadow.

The early natives of Brazil believed that the sun was a ball of light feathers, which some mysterious being exhibits during the day, and covers at night with a pot.

The folk-lore of the North American Indian

[p. 129]

tribes is rich in legends respecting the sun. The Indians believed that the sun was an animated being endowed with human attributes. The following tales are related by the Thompson River Indians:

There was once a most mischievous and incorrigible youth who one morning strolled away from his home. On his return, he found that his parents had deserted him, but his old grandmother, who was unable to travel, was left behind. She taught the boy how to make a bow and arrows, and with these he was able to provide a daily supply of food. She also made blankets for him out of the skins of many coloured birds. These were of such beauty that they attracted the attention of the Sun. It had always been the custom of the Sun to travel about naked during the day, and clothe himself only in the dark hours. [*1] But when the Sun saw these beautiful blankets, he purchased them from the boy, and wrapped them about his body, and soon disappeared, so that at set of sun you may see the gorgeous colouring of these robes in the western sky, especially the blue tint of the blue-jay blanket.

Another tale relates that originally the Sun lived much nearer the earth than now, [*2] and preyed

[p. 130]

upon mankind. It was his custom to kill people every day on his travels, and carry them off to his home at night-fall to eat. His son lived quietly at home clad in fine garments of many colours. There was once an Indian who in gambling was most unlucky. One day, while much depressed, he set out on a journey in search of adventure, and finally came to the Sun's abode in the absence of the owner. The son received him kindly, but fearing that his guest would be discovered by his cannibal father, he hid him under a heap of robes. The Sun arrived in the evening carrying a man on his back, and as he came near the house, he said: "Mum, Mum, Mum. [*1] There must be a man here," but his son persuaded him that he was mistaken. The next day the Indian was glad to leave this dangerous locality, and returned to his home laden with gifts from his benefactor. Out of gratitude he returned later to the Sun's house and made his friend the present of a wife and one for his father. This pleased the Sun so much that he gave up the killing and eating of human beings. In the foregoing legend we find expressed the idea, current in the traditions of many primitive people, that celestial beings feed on human bodies.

[p. 131]

The following tale is told of the Sun and his daughter: [*1]

Originally the Sun was an eminent chief, possessed of great power and wealth. He was also blessed with a beautiful daughter, and the fame of her beauty spread afar. A powerful magician, entranced with the maiden, sought her hand, and though at first repulsed, finally won the Sun's favour and married his daughter. The Sun implored his daughter to visit him frequently. This, however, she neglected to do, and, finally, when she did go to her father with her two children, he transformed her into the present Sun. This is why the Sun travels each day from east to west in search of her father. Her children are occasionally seen as sun-dogs closely following their mother.

The Indians of Northern California relate the following story:

Once the sun fell by accident down from the sky just about sunrise, but the quick little mole was watching, and caught it before it touched the earth, and succeeded in holding it up until others arrived, when, by exerting all their strength, they

[p. 132]

succeeded in replacing it where it belonged in the sky, but ever thereafter the mole's hands were bent far back to show how he had worked to hold up the sun.

As evidence of the Indian belief in the Sun's solicitude in their affairs, and his protecting and saving influences, the Cheyenne tale of "The Eagle Hunter" is told:

There was an Indian who once set out to catch an eagle. Digging a hole in the ground he crept in, covered it over with brush, and cleverly baited it with a skinned buffalo calf. Presently an eagle espied the prey, flew down, and began to eat of it, when the Indian laid hold of its feet, and held it captive; but he had underestimated the power of the bird, which had strength enough to carry the man up to a mountain crag, where it was impossible for him to descend. The Indian realising his desperate plight, prayed to the Sun for deliverance, and the Sun, taking pity on him, sent a great whirlwind which swept the hunter from his lofty perch, and safely deposited him on the ground.

In a Maidu legend it is related that the Sun dwells in an impregnable house of ice into which she retreats after killing people on the earth. Once she abducted the Frog's children, and was closely pursued by their angry mother, who finally overtook the Sun and swallowed her, but the Sun

[p. 133]

burst her open and transformed her into a Frog again.

There are many Indian tales wherein the sun figures as a target. The Shoshone Indians believed that, in the beginning, the sun did not shine till the Rabbit shot at him with his magical arrow (the fire drill).

In the following Mewan Indian legend, [*1] the sunlight is extinguished by the arrow shot: "There was once a poor worthless Indian boy who got his living by begging. At length, finding people loath to assist him, he threatened to shoot out the sun, and as this had no effect, he made good his threat, and shot the sun, thus letting its light out, and the whole world became dark. It was dark for years, and every one was starving for want of light, when the Coyote-Man discovered a dim light a long distance off, and sent the Humming-bird to investigate. The bird, finding its way to the sun, pecked off a piece, and returned with it under its chin, and making repeated trips finally succeeded in restoring the full light of the sun, and to this day you can see the marks of its burden beneath the chin of the Humming-bird." This association of the Humming-bird with the sun is found in the traditions of the Aztecs. In their temples was enthroned a deity known as "the Humming-bird

[p. 134]

to the left," and this bird was considered by them to be a divine being, the emissary of the sun. In the Aztec language it is often called "Sunbeam," or "Sun's hair."

Among the Indians there seems to have been an almost universal tradition that originally men lived in a world of darkness, or semi-darkness, before the sun was placed in the heavens. A Mewan legend relates that, in the early days, the land was shrouded in fog, and was cold and dark. It was such a poor place to live in that Coyote-Man was not satisfied with the conditions, and set out on a journey to seek some way to better it. He finally came to a pleasant land of sunshine, and, charmed with it, returned to tell his people of the delightful land he had visited. They suggested that he offer to buy the sun, so he returned to the land of light and made this proposition, but it was rejected, so Coyote-Man resolved to steal the sun as his people were in sore need of it.

This was a difficult matter as the sun was carefully watched by the Turtle, who slept with one eye always open. Coyote-Man, resorting to magic, took the form of a big oak log, and the Turtle, when out seeking for wood, took him and threw him on the fire. But the fire did not even singe him, and seeing the Turtle asleep, he resumed his form, seized the sun and ran off with it to his own land.

[p. 135]

The people, however, did not understand it, and bade Coyote-Man make it go, and, as he was sorry for the people he had deprived of the sun, he arranged a plan so that the sun could light up both lands. He carried the sun west to the place where the sky joins the earth, and found the place for the sun to crawl through, and where it could go down under the earth, and come up in the eastern sky in the morning through the hole in the east. The sun did his bidding, and thus both lands thereafter rejoiced in the blessedness of sunshine.

The Natchez of Mississippi, the Apalachees of Florida, the Mexicans and Peruvians, all believed that the sun is the bright dwelling-place of their departed chiefs and warriors.

A primitive Mexican prayer offered in time of war embodies this idea: "Be pleased, O our Lord, that the nobles who shall die in the war be peacefully and joyously received by the sun and the earth, who are the loving father and mother of all."

It is said that General Harrison once called the Shawnee chief, Tecumseh, for a conference: "Come here, Tecumseh, and sit by your father," he said. "You my father?" replied the chief with a stern air, "No, yonder sun [pointing toward it] is my father, and the earth is my mother, so I will rest on her bosom," and he sat upon the ground.

The Kootenay Indians speak of the sun as a

[p. 136]

blind man who is cured by his father-in-law, Coyote-Man. Here we have another reference to the Coyote's service to mankind in bringing sunshine to his people.

Among the New Zealanders the sun is regarded as a great beast whom the hunters thrashed with clubs. His blood is supposed to be used in some of their incantations, and according to an Egyptian tradition, the sun's blood was kneaded into clay at the making of man.

We have seen how the sun was metaphorically regarded in India and other lands not merely as a human creature, but as the eye of a supreme and all-seeing deity. In like manner the inhabitants of Java, Sumatra, and Madagascar called the sun "the eye of day." This metaphor has been used extensively even in modern poetry.

When the astronomers Galileo, Scheiner, and Fabricius discovered the spots on the sun, the Aristotelians indignantly insisted that they were mistaken, and that the phenomenon was due to defects in the optical properties of their telescopes or eyes. They argued that it was quite incompatible with the dignity of the Eye of the Universe that it should be afflicted with such a common ailment as ophthalmia.

Tylor [*1] tells us that the Rev. Tobias Snowden,

[p. 137]

in a book published in the last century, proved the sun to be Hell, and the dark spots, gatherings of damned souls.

In Greece there was a general protest when the astronomers denied not only the divinity, but the very personality of the sun, and declared it to be nothing but a huge fiery globe. These statements were regarded as blasphemous, and, in fact, Anaxagoras was punished with death for having taught that the sun was not animated, and that it was nothing but a mass of iron, about the size of the Peloponnesus.

Such a state of affairs strikes us in this enlightened age as decidedly extraordinary, and yet in the history of the early settlers of this country we have in the trials for witchcraft an equally absurd and foolish state of affairs.

Every age, therefore, to be judged fairly on its merits, must be viewed in the light of its state of progress, and, grotesque as many of the foregoing legends related of the sun may seem, it behooves us to withhold our mirth, and endeavour to realise how much these traditions were a serious part of the lives of the people of unenlightened ages.

Footnotes

^123:1 The Golden Bough, J. G. Frazer.

^123:2 Ibid.

^126:1 From Dasent's Popular Tales from the Norse.

^129:1 This may have been the Indian way of accounting for the invisibility of the sun at night.

^129:2 It is strange that the nebular hypothesis conforms with this idea, that the sun and earth were close together at one time.

^130:1 We are almost tempted to add, "I smell the blood of an Englishman," for here we have a tale identical in many particulars with the popular fairy tale of "Jack the Giant Killer," which some authorities claim is of solar origin.

^131:1 This myth is typical of many that may well be styled Evaporation and Rainfall myths that are thus interpreted. The water is enamoured of the cloud, the beautiful daughter of the Sun. The Sun does not favour the suitor, and strives to kill him by subjecting him to a number of tests. The Water achieves success in all of these, and then receives the Sun's permission to marry his daughter.

^133:1 The Dawn of the World, C. Hart Merriam.

^136:1 Primitive Culture, Edward B. Tylor.

Sun Lore of All Ages, by William Tyler Olcott, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 138] [p. 139]

[p. 140] [p. 141]

  

Chapter VI

  

Sun Worship

THE pre-eminence of the Sun, as the fountain-head of life and man's well-being, must have rendered it at a date almost contemporaneous with the birth of the race, the chief object of man's worship.

"It was," says Karnes, [*1] "of all the different objects of idolatry the most excusable, for upon the sun depend health, vigour, and cheerfulness, and during its retirement all is dark and disconsolate." Hence, as we shall see, the chief masculine deity of every nation which was the chief object of their idolatrous worship, is in every case to be identified with the sun.

The Abbe Banier wrote in like vein: [*2] "Nothing was more capable of seducing men than the Heavenly Bodies, and the sun especially. His beauty, the bright splendour of his beams, the rapidity of his course, exultavit ut Gigus ad currendam viam,

[p. 142]

his regularity in enlightening the whole earth by turns, and in diffusing Light and Fertility all around, essential characters of the Divinity who is Himself the light and source of everything that exists, all these were but too capable of impressing the gross minds of men with a belief that there was no other God but the sun, and that this splendid luminary was the throne of the Divinity. God had fixed his habitation in the heavens, and they saw nothing that bore more marks of Divinity than the sun." In the words of Diodorus Siculus: "Men in earlier times struck with the beauty of the Universe, with the splendour and regularity which everywhere were in evidence, made no doubt that there was some Divinity who therein presided, and they adored the sun as expressing the likeness of the Deity."

The worship of the sun was inevitable, and its deification was the source of all idolatry in every part of the world. It was sunrise that inspired the first prayers uttered by man, calling him to acts of devotion, bidding him raise an altar and kindle sacrificial flames.

Before the Sun's all-glorious shrine the first men knelt and raised their voices in praise and supplication, fully confirmed in the belief that their prayers were heard and answered.

Nothing proves so much the antiquity of solar

[p. 143]

idolatry as the care Moses took to prohibit it. "Take care," said he to the Israelites, "lest when you lift up your eyes to Heaven and see the sun, the moon, and all the stars, you be seduced and drawn away to pay worship and adoration to the creatures which the Lord your God has made for the service of all the nations under Heaven." Then we have the mention of Josiah taking away the horses that the king of Judah had given to the sun, and burning the chariot of the sun with fire. These references agree perfectly with the recognition in Palmyra of the Lord Sun, Baal Shemesh, and with the identification of the Assyrian Bel, and the Tyrian Baal with the sun.

Again, we have good evidence of the antiquity of Sun worship in the fact that the earliest authentic date that has been handed down to us was inscribed on the foundation stone of the temple of the Sun-God at Sippara in Babylon by Naram-Sin, son of Sargon. There has also been recovered an ancient tablet, an inscribed memorial of the reign of one of the early kings of Babylon, on which is sculptured a representation of the worship of the Sun-God by the king and his attendants. In the sculpture, the Sun-God appears seated on a throne beneath an open canopy shrine. He has a long beard and streaming hair, like most conceptions of the Sun-God, and in his hand he holds a ring, the

[p. 144]

emblem of time, and a short stick too small for a sceptre, which some archaeologists think represents the fire-stick which was so closely associated with the Sun-God. On a small table-altar, which stands before him, is a large disk ornamented with four star-like limbs, and four sets of wave-like rays, while above the group is the inscription: "The Disk of the Sun-God, and the rays (of his) eyes."

The scene clearly indicates the fact that the priests of Sippara were worshippers of the solar disk, and solar rays, and their creed seems to bear a close resemblance to that in vogue in the 18th Egyptian dynasty. The inscriptions on this memorial tablet are a valuable record of the religious life and ceremonial of the Babylonian temples.

he Babylonians, whose deity Shamash, the Sun-God, was worshipped at Sippara and Larsa, believed that in the firmament there were two doors--one in the east, and the other in the west. These were used by the Sun-God in his daily journey across the sky. He entered through the eastern door, and made his exit through the western portal. One tradition records that he rode in a chariot on his daily course drawn by two spirited horses.

In the representations of the Sun-God on the ancient cylinder seals, however, he is generally

[p. 145]

depicted journeying on foot. Each evening when the Sun-God disappeared in the west, he feasted and rested from his exertions in the abode of the gods, the underworld.

The authorities do not agree as to the place where the worship of the Sun was introduced, but perhaps those who claim Chaldea as the birthplace of Sun worship have the best of the argument, as it is well known that the Chaldeans were the first who observed the motion of the heavenly bodies, and astrology flourished in this reign in the earliest times. The principal deities worshipped by the Chaldeans were arranged in triads of greater and less dignity, nearly all the members of these being personifications of the heavens or the heavenly bodies.

The first triad comprised Ana, the heavens, or the hidden Sun, Father of Gods, Lord of Darkness, Lord of Spirits. Next in order came Bil, also a Sun-God, the Ruler, the Lord, the source of kingly power. His name has the same significance as Baal, and he personifies the same aspect of nature, the Sun ruling in the heavens.

The gods of the Canaanite nations, Moloch, Baal, Chemosh, Baalzebub, and Thammuz, were all personifications of the sun or the sun's rays, considered under one aspect or another. These cruel gods, to whom human sacrifices were offered, represented the strong fierce summer sun.

[p. 146]

Solar worship was the predominant feature of the religion of the Phoenicians, and the source of their mythology. Baal and Ashtoreth, their chief divinities, were unquestionably the Sun and Moon, and a great festival in honour of the Sun-God, called "the awakening of Herakles," was held annually at Tyre, in February and March, representing the returning power of the Sun in spring. The Phoenician Sun-God, Melkarth, belonged to the line of Bel or Baal, and was the tutelary divinity of the powerful city of Tyre. Melkarth personified the Sun of spring, gradually growing more and more powerful as it mounts to the skies; hence the Phoenicians regarded him as a god of the harvests, and of the table, the god who brings joy in his train. Quails were offered as sacrifices at his altars, and as it was supposed that he presided over dreams, the sick and infirm were sent to sleep in his temples that they might receive in their dreams some premonition of their approaching recovery. The white poplar was particularly dedicated to his service. His votaries celebrated his worship with fanatical rites, invoking him with loud cries, and cutting themselves with knives. Strangely enough, in the North American Indian worship of the sun, a similar custom of self-mutilation is undergone in the sun-dance ceremonial.

The hardy Tyrian navigators soon spread this

[p. 147]

solar worship from island to island even as far as Gades, where a flame burned continually in his temples. His name signifies, according to some, "the King of the City" or "the powerful King."

The Phoenicians also adored the Supreme Being under the name of Bel-Samen, and it is a remarkable fact that the Irish peasants have a custom, when wishing a person good luck, to say, "the blessing of Bel, and the blessing of Sam-hain be with you," that is, of the Sun and Moon.

The Israelites found the worship of Baal already prevailing in the interior of Palestine, and the adjacent countries on the east, when they came out of Egypt.

We know little of the ritualistic worship of Baal save that high places and groves were especially devoted to his honour, and regarded as sacred. He had a numerous priesthood, and a passage in Jeremiah reveals that human beings were sacrificed to his worship.

The ancient Persians were Sun worshippers, and Mithras, their Supreme Deity, represented the orb of day. Among these people, however, Fire worship soon became the predominating religion, which flourished under the guiding hand of Zoroaster.

The early inhabitants of Armenia likewise worshipped the Sun, and on festival occasions

[p. 148]

they were wont to sacrifice a horse to the object of their worship.

One of the most interesting evidences of ancient Sun worship has been brought to light in Syria, during the last few years, by German excavators who have been engaged in exposing the wonderful and imposing ruins at Baalbeck. Chief among these in importance is the Great Temple of the Sun, dedicated to Jupiter, and identified with Baal and the Sun. With him were associated both Venus and Mercury, under whose triple protection the ancient city of Heliopolis was placed. Unfortunately, the Great Temple has been almost entirely destroyed. All that remains are six columns of the peristyle, capped with Corinthian capitals, and joined by an elaborately decorated and massive entablature. An inscription on the great portico states that the temple was erected to the Great Gods of Heliopolis by Antonius.

In Egypt we find Sun worship exalted to the highest degree, and the Sun may well be regarded as the central object of the Egyptian religion. Diodorus says: "The first generation of men in Egypt, contemplating the beauty of the superior world, and admiring with astonishment the frame and order of the universe, imagined that there were two chief gods, eternal and primary, the Sun and Moon, the first of whom they called 'Osiris,' the

[p. 149]

other 'Isis.' They held that these gods governed the whole world cherishing and increasing all things."

The Egyptian priests taught that all their great deities were once men, but that after they died their souls migrated into some one or other of the heavenly bodies. As Osiris was declared to be the Sun, it is evident that, according to this system, the soul of the man was thought to have been translated into the solar orb, so that "when" says Faber, [*1] "the pagans worshipped the sun as their principal divinity they did not worship him simply and absolutely as the mere chief of the heavenly luminaries, but they adored in conjunction with him and perpetually distinguished by his name the patriarch Noah, whose soul after death they feigned to have migrated into that orb, and to have become the intellectual regent of it. The person worshipped in the sun was not simply Noah but Noah viewed as a transmigratory reappearance of Adam. The setting and rising of the sun really meant the entrance into and the quitting of the Ark, or his death and resurrection."

The setting of the sun in the west at night, and its rising again in the east the following morning, presented a mystery to which the Egyptians attached great importance. To them the disappearance

[p. 150]

of the sun signified the end of a contest, the Sun-God vanquished by the demons of the darkness, descended to the realm of death. "In the Book of the Dead" says Tylor, [*1] "it is written that the departed souls descend with the Sun-God through the western gate and travel with him among the fields and rivers of the underworld."

The war that the Sun waged with his enemies did not, however, end with his disappearance in the west at eve of day. All through the hours of darkness the battle went on in the underworld, until, finally, the sun gained the upper hand, and emerged victorious in the east, all glorious and triumphant to gladden the hearts of men, and proclaim the immortality of his soul; for, to the Egyptians, the soul as wholly identified with the Sun-God, and partook of all the vicissitudes that befell him. It died with him at nightfall, fought with him against the powers of darkness in the underworld, and renewed its life with him in the glories of the dawn.

The Egyptians, in the deification of the sun, considered the luminary in its different aspects, separating the light from the heat of the sun, and the orb from the rays. Egyptian Sun worship was therefore polytheistic, and several distinct deities were worshipped as Sun-Gods. Thus,

[p. 151]

there were Sun-Gods representing the physical orb, the intellectual Sun, the sun considered as the source of heat, and the source of light, the power of the sun, the sun in the firmament, and the Sun in his resting-place.

It is quite impossible in a work of this nature to adequately treat the subject of Egyptian Sun worship. Volumes have been written on  subject and space forbids more than a brief account of the worship of the more important of the Egyptian solar deities.

The worship of the Sun-Gods Ra and Osiris was the most ancient religion mentioned on the oldest monuments of Egypt. "They are those," says Tiele, [*1] "which in after times prevailed most generally and may be said to have formed the foundation of the national religion."

Undoubtedly the most important of the Egyptian Sun-Gods was Ra, and there appear to have been few gods in Egypt who were not at one time or another identified with him. As far back as Egyptian history reaches this Sun-God appears, as where in the pictures on the mummy cases, Ra, the Sun, is seen travelling in his boat through the upper and lower regions of the Universe, and his worship appears to have been universal throughout Egypt.

[p. 152]

Ra personified the physical sun, the glorious mid-day sun ruling the firmament, and symbolised to the ancient Egyptians the majesty and power of kings. He was worshipped as an omnipotent and all-powerful god under the names Ra and Amen-Ra. [*1]

Wilkinson [*2] tells us that the name of this deity was pronounced Ra, and with the definite article Pi prefixed it was the same as Phrah, or, as we erroneously call it, Pharaoh of the Scriptures. The Hebrew word Phrah is no other than the Memphitic name of the sun.

The hawk and globe emblems of the sun are placed over the banners or the figures of the Egyptian kings in the sculptures to denote this title. This adoption of the name of the sun as a regal title was probably owing to the idea that, as the Sun was the chief of the heavenly bodies, he was a fit emblem of the king who was the ruler over all the earth. In many of the kingly titles the phonetic nomen commenced with the name of Ra, as the Rameses, and others, and the expression "living forever like the sun, the splendid Phre," are common on all the obelisks and dedicatory inscriptions.

[p. 153]

The Sun-God Ra was usually represented as a man with a hawk's head, surmounted by a globe or disk of the sun, from which an asp issued. His figure, and that of the disk were generally painted in red colour, appropriately suggesting the heat of the mid-day sun. He is sometimes accompanied by a scarabaeus or sacred beetle, which was an emblem of the sun throughout Egypt.

Pa-ra, the city of the Sun, or, as the Greeks called it, Heliopolis, was the small but celebrated city of Lower Egypt where Ra was especially worshipped. It lies a little east of the Nile and is not far from the spot where Memphis was built. Its usual name among the Egyptians was An or On. Plutarch has this reference to the Sun worship at Heliopolis: "Those who minister to the god of Heliopolis never carry any wine into the temple, looking upon it as indecent to drink it during the day when under the immediate inspection of their Lord and King."

The priesthood of the Sun were noted for their learning. They excelled in their knowledge of astronomy and all branches of science.

The rat was sacred to Ra, and his votaries were forbidden to eat the rodent.

The best loved of all the Egyptian Sun-Gods, and the first object of their idolatry was Osiris (the one who sees clear), personifying the setting

[p. 154]

sun. The mysterious and daily disappearance of the orb of day exercised over the Egyptians a phenomenal power. The sun then appeared to them, as Keary beautifully describes it in his Dawn of History "to veil his glory and sheathe his dazzling beams in a lovely many-coloured radiance which soothed and gladdened the weary eyes and hearts of men, and enabled them to gaze fearlessly and lovingly on the dreaded orb from which during the day they had been obliged to turn their eyes."

Osiris was distinctly a god of the life eternal. The Egyptians believed that when he sank from sight behind the western hills the souls of the departed were in his retinue, and that, in his nightly sojourn in the underworld, he held high court and judged the dead. Thus, in the inscriptions on the Egyptian temples, we see Osiris in his character as Judge figured in the sacred blue, holding in one hand a sceptre, and in the other the emblem of life, his head surmounted with the double crown of Upper and Lower Egypt.

"In the judgment scenes," says Keary, [*1] "he appears seated on a throne at the end of a solemn hall of trial, to which the soul has been arraigned, and in the centre of which stands the fateful balance, where in the presence of the evil accusing spirit and of the friendly funeral gods and genii

[p. 155]

who stand around, the heart of man is weighed against a symbol of Divine Truth."

The Sun-God Osiris was therefore to the Egyptians a deity of the living, and a god of the dead, a link connecting the earthly life with the life eternal, the upper and the under worlds, and consequently was personified as two distinct characters. One, as we have seen, depicts him as Judge of the Dead. In his capacity as an earth dweller, Osiris was worshipped under the form of a bull, the Apis, who by successive incarnations never abandoned his home land, and the sight of those who worshipped him through successive ages.

The Egyptians regarded the bull as the living representation of the deity, and believed that the soul of the god tenanted the body of the animal, thence deeming the bull the very same as Osiris himself.

The seat of Osiris worship in Egypt was at Thinis (Teni) in Upper Egypt, on the west bank of the Nile between Thebes and Memphis. Osiris is frequently alluded to as "Lord of Abydos," a city in the immediate vicinity of Thinis, and at this place there have been discovered many temples dedicated to his worship.

That Osiris was a Sun-God is clearly indicated by a number of expressions used regarding him taken from the inscriptions. In the hymns his

[p. 156]

accession to the throne of his father is compared to the rising of the sun, and it is even said of him in so many words: "He glitters on the horizon, he sends out rays of light from his double feather, inundates the world with it as the sun from out the highest heaven." Like the sun he is called in the sacred songs, "Lord of the length of time." One of his usual appellations is, "Mysterious soul of the Lord of the Disk," or simply "Soul of the Sun."

The Egyptians often called Osiris "Unefer," that is, the good being, representing the beneficent power of the sun that triumphs always over the powers of darkness. In conclusion, the story of the death of Osiris agrees closely with the solar sunset phenomenon, and renders the personification of Osiris as the setting sun a true one.

The most venerable of all the Egyptian Sun-Gods, if not the most popular, was Atum or Amum, personifying the sun after it had set, and was hid from view.

There are two derivations of the name Amum, one meaning, "that which brings to light," the other simply expressing the invitation or greeting of welcome, "Come." In deifying Amum the Egyptians worshipped the unrevealed and unseen Creator of all things, the source of all things, the Ruler of Eternity, whence everything came, and to which all things would return.

[p. 157]

On the inscriptions, the figure of Amum was coloured blue, the sacred colour of the source of life; the figure was that of a man with either a human head, or a man's head concealed by the head and horns of a ram. The word "ram" meaning concealment in the Egyptian language.

In the Sun-God Horus we see the dawn personified, and the triumphant conqueror of the shades of darkness and the demons of the underworld emerges in the glorious light of victory each morning. He was figured as the eldest son of Osiris, a strong vigorous youth, who avenged his father by waging a successful war against the monster who had swallowed him up.

Horus is depicted in the inscriptions as sailing forth from the underworld up the eastern sky at dawn, piercing the great python, born of night, as he advances.

"The ultimate victory of life over death, of truth and goodness over falsehood and wrong," says Keary, [*1] "were the moral lessons which this parable of the sun's rising read to the ancient Egyptians."

The resemblance of lions to the sun is borne out by the fact that the Egyptians placed the figures of lions under the throne of Horus. This deity was sometimes regarded as the God of Silence,

[p. 158]

and represented as a child with his finger held up to his lips.

In addition to the previously mentioned personifications of the Sun, Egyptian Sun worship included a worship of the actual disk of the Sun. This form of worship was in vogue in the reign of Amenophis III., its first appearance on the monuments being in the 11th year of that monarch's reign.

The worship of the solar disk, or Aten, became the sole object of adoration in the reign of Amenhotop IV. This monarch, in fact, forbade the worship of any god save this, the "great living disk of the sun," and caused the names of all other gods to be erased from the monuments, and their images to be destroyed.

In the hymns, this deity is referred to as he who created "the far heavens and men, beasts and birds; he strengtheneth the eyes with his beams, and when he showeth himself all flowers live and grow, the meadows flourish at his up-going, and are drunken at his feet, all cattle skip on their feet, and the birds that are in the marsh flutter for joy. It is he who bringeth the years, createth the months, maketh the days, calculateth the hours of time by whom men reckon."

In his zeal to make the god of the disk preeminent, King Amenhotop IV changed his name

[p. 159]

to one which signified "gleam of the sun's disk." The death of this monarch resulted in a great reaction, the old gods being restored to their original favour.

Although the solar personifications alluded to would appear to include all the Sun deities worshipped by the Egyptians, there were several minor Sun-Gods that had a place in their religion, chief among these being the god Ptah, personifying the life-giving power of the sun. This god was worshipped with great magnificence at Memphis.

The Sun-God Mandoo personified the power of the sun's rays at mid-day in summer. He was regarded as a god of vengeance and destruction, and a leader in time of war.

The rays of the sun were personified in the gods Gom, Moni, and Kons, who are always referred to as the sons of the Sun-God. The sun's rays, personified in the deity Sekhet or Pasht, had a feminine significance. This goddess was figured with the head of a lioness, and it is said she was at once feared and loved. Her name Pasht means the lioness, and was perhaps suggested by the fierceness of the sun's rays, answering to the lioness's ferocious strength, or the angry light in her eyes. Another name for this goddess was "the Lady of the Cave," and her worship, though common throughout Egypt, had its seat at Bubastis.

[p. 160]

Tiele considers that Set, the enemy and brother of Osiris, was also a Sun-God, as he is sometimes called "the Great Lord of Heaven," and "the Spy." He personified the fierce and terrible desolation wrought by the sun's power.

Footnotes

^141:1 History of Man, Hon. Henry Home of Kames.

^141:2 The Mythology and Fables of the Ancients, Abbe Banier.

^149:1 The Origin of Pagan Idolatry, George Stanley Faber.

^150:1 Primitive Culture, Edward B. Tylor.

^151:1 History of the Egyptian Religion, Dr. C. P. Tiele.

^152:1 It is a singular fact that the great Polynesian name for the Sun-God is also Ra.

^152:2 Manners and Customs of the Ancient Egyptians, Sir J. Gardner Wilkinson.

^154:1 Dawn of History, C. F. Keary.

^157:1 Dawn of History, C. F. Keary.

Sun Lore of All Ages, by William Tyler Olcott, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 161]

[p. 162] [p. 163]

  

Chapter VII

  

Sun Worship (Continued)

Sun Worship in India

IN India, a land teeming with mythology, we find as we might expect, Sun worship a predominant feature of the Hindu religion. All the myths prove that the fancied combat between light and darkness, waged daily in the spacious field of the firmament, is of solar origin. As we have seen Osiris, the Sun-God of the Egyptians, triumphing over the demons of darkness, so in India we find Indra, the great solar deity of the Hindus, successful in his combat with Vritra the serpent of night.

The worship of Indra constitutes the very essence of the Vedic religion, although he was by no means the only Sun-God worshipped in India, for the Hindus worshipped the sun in its various aspects after the manner of the Egyptians. The rising sun was called "Brahma, "on the meridian it was known as "Siva," and in the west at nightfall, "Vishnu."

"In regard to Vishnu," says Keary, "the great

[p. 164]

epic of the Hindus relates that when he was armed for the fight Agni gave him a wheel with a thunderbolt nave. This can only mean a wheel that shoots out thunderbolts from its nave when it turned." [*1] The wheel has throughout the ages symbolised the sun.

In Central India, Sun worship still prevails among many of the hill tribes, and the Sun is invoked as the Holy One, the Creator, and Preserver. White animals are sacrificed to him by his votaries.

One of the early and most important Sun-Gods was Surya. He is represented as moving daily across the sky in a golden chariot drawn by seven white horses. Perhaps the most holy verse in the Veda is the following short prayer to the Sun-God Surya taken from the Rig Veda, an invocation powerful in expression, and beautiful in thought:

"Sing praises unto Surya, to the son of Dyaus,
  May this my truthful speech guard me on every side wherever heaven and earth and days are spread abroad.
  All else that is in motion finds a place of rest. The waters ever flow, and ever mounts the sun.
  No godless man from time remotest draws thee down when thou art driving forth with winged dappled steeds.
  He turns him to an alien region of the east, and Surya thou ariseth with a different light. [p. 165]
  O Surya: with the light whereby thou scatterest gloom, and with thy ray impellest every moving thing,
  Keep far from us all feeble worthless sacrifice, and drive away disease and every evil dream.
  Sent forth, thou guardest well the path of every man, and in thy wonted way ariseth free from wrath.
  When, Surya, we address our prayers to thee to-day, may the gods favour this our purpose and desire.
                .         .         .         .         .         .         .
  Ne'er may we suffer want in presence of the sun, and living happy lives may we attain our age.
  Cheerful in spirit, evermore, and keen of sight, with store of children, free from sickness and from sin.
                .         .         .         .         .         .         .
  O Surya, with the golden hair, ascend for us day after day, still bringing purer innocence.
  Bless us with shine, bless us with perfect daylight, bless us with cold, with fervent heat and lustre.
  Bestow on us, O Surya, varied riches to bless us in our home, and when we travel."

The ancient Sun worship of India is reflected in the daily religious rites and festivals of the modern Hindus. Thus, the time-honoured formula repeated daily since long past ages by every Brahman, indicates clearly the divine element in the sun: "Let us meditate on the desirable light of the divine sun, may he rouse our minds." Here is a direct appeal to a solar deity, and every morning the Brahmans may be seen facing the east, standing on one foot, and stretching out

[p. 166]

their hands to the sun as they repeat this prayer which has come down unchanged from remote ages.

The Zoroastrians, and the modern exponents of that faith, the Parsees, saw in the sun fire and light, a manifestation of a divine and omnipotent power, and regarded them in a measure as symbols of the deity; but there can be little doubt that this distinction was not always borne out, and that the sun, and fire itself, were literally worshipped by them.

In the Parsee temples burns a fire which, it is said, has never been extinguished since it was kindled by Zoroaster four thousand years ago. In praying, the Parsees are admonished to stand before the fire, and turn their faces toward the sun, and when a young Brahman's head is tonsured, he is to this day so placed that he has the sacred fire to the east whence comes the sun of which it is a type.

Sun Worship in Greece

The ancient Sun-God of the Pelasgians, displaced by the later worship of Apollo, was Ares. "There can be no question," says Keary, [*1] "that in prehistoric times the worship of Ares was

[p. 167]

widely extended. Traces of his worship are to be found in the Zeus Areios who was honoured at Elis, and in the name of Areiopagus of Athens." Little actual knowledge of this early worship however has come down to us.

The two great solar divinities of Greece were Helios or Hyperion, and Phoebus Apollo. Just as the Egyptians regarded their Sun-Gods Ra and Osiris as distinct aspects of the sun, so the Greeks distinguished the orb from the rays of the sun.

Helios represented to the Greeks the physical phenomenon of light, the orb of the sun which throughout the seasons rises and sets daily. Phoebus Apollo, on the contrary, was the beneficent divinity who not only created the warmth of spring-tide, but protected mankind from the dangers and diseases of the more desolate seasons. He was essentially human in his sympathies and yet wholly godlike in dignity.

Some writers, notably Hesiod, regard Hyperion as the father of the sun, moon, and dawn, and therefore the original Sun-God, and the father of Phoebus Apollo, but Homer identifies Helios with Hyperion as "he who walks on high."

The worship of the Sun-God Helios, the counterpart of the Latin Sol, was imported into Greece from Asia, but by no means gained a high degree

[p. 168]

of popularity. The number seven was sacred to Helios, and in the island of Trinacria (supposed to be Sicily), it was said he had seven herds of cows, and seven herds of lambs, fifty in each herd, which never increased or diminished in numbers. The god delighted to watch them peacefully grazing when he rose in the morning, and as he left the sky at night-fall. As we shall see later in the chapter on the solar mythology of Greece, and as related in the Odyssey, the sacred herds of Helios were ruthlessly slaughtered by the misguided companions of Ulysses. Incensed by this insult the Sun-God threatened to descend into Hades and shine among the dead. He contented himself, however, by complaining to Jove, who, acknowledging the justice of his claim for vengeance, roused up a mighty storm which well-nigh destroyed the miscreants, and completely disabled their ship. Tylor [*1] tells us that the Greek Sun-God Helios, to whom horses were sacrificed on the mountain top of Taygetos, was that same personal Sun to whom Socrates, when he had stayed rapt in thought till daybreak, offered a prayer before he departed. An annual festival in honour of Helios was celebrated at Rhodes with musical and athletic contests.

The Greeks believed that the Sun rose out of

[p. 169]

the ocean on the eastern side, and drove through the air in a chariot giving light to gods and men. The poet Milton in his Comus thus refers to the daily journey of the Sun-God:

"The star that bids the shepherd fold
  Now the top of heaven doth hold,
  And the gilded car of Day
  His glowing axle doth allay
  In the steep Atlantic stream,
  And the slope Sun his upward beam
  Shoots across the dusky pole,
  Pacing toward the other goal
  Of his chamber in the east."

In Lucian's time the Greeks kissed their hands as an act of worship to the rising Sun.

Shakespeare frequently alludes to Hyperion, and Keats wrote of his downfall, and of the accession of his successor Phoebus Apollo.

We come now to a consideration of the preeminent feature of Hellenic Sun worship, the worship of the Sun-God Phoebus Apollo, the god who is more especially the deity of the later Greeks, the Dorians and Ionians.

The authors of this religion were probably the Dorians, who inhabited the northern portion of Greece, and who founded their first kingdom in Crete. Before the Doric invasion, however, there was in Crete a species of Sun worship, for the bull-

[p. 170]

headed Minotaur, according to the authorities, could hardly have been anything else than a Sun-God of the Asiatic stamp.

With the coming of the Dorians to Crete, Apollo worship was established, and through the migrations of these people (about the tenth century before our era), the cult of Phoebus Apollo spread on every side, until this religion was in favour wherever the Greek language was spoken.

In Homer, Apollo is easily the greatest of all the Sun-Gods, and superior in character to almost every other deity. In the Iliad he is the central and most majestic figure.

Phoebus Apollo, or "Far-Darter" as he is sometimes called, was the son of Jupiter and Latona, and brother of Diana, the Moon Goddess. He was born on Delos, the smallest and most desolate of all the Aegean Islands, after all other places had rejected him. Delos, however, was a most appropriate birthplace for a Sun-God, as the ancients believed that the Sun was born from the sea. His name, Phoebus, signifies the glorious nature of the light of the sun, while the name Apollo probably had reference to the devastating effects of the sun's rays at mid-day.

At the birth of the Sun-God on the seventh day of the month, we are told that sacred swans made the circuit of the island seven times, and all the

[p. 171]

attendant goddesses gave a shout, and Delos was radiant in golden light. We have here, it is said, the echo of an old belief, that at the hour of sunrise the horizon sends forth a sound.

Zeus bestowed on the infant Apollo a cap, a lyre, and a car drawn by swans. Soon after his birth the swans carried Apollo off to the land of the Hyperboreans, where for six months of the year the climate is marked by sunshine and gentle breezes. Here the Sun-God thrived and waxed vigorous. It is not within the scope of this chapter to dwell on the myths that tell of the mighty deeds of the Far-Darter, as they come properly under the chapter on solar mythology. The establishment, however, of the Delphinian oracle, perhaps the most important event in the life of the Sun-God, is related here, as Delphi was, properly speaking, the seat of Apollo worship.

At an early date Apollo developed the attributes of a warrior, and set out in the quest of adventure. Searching for a suitable place in which to establish an oracle, he came to Delphi, a peaceful vale in Crissa, in the heart of Greece. Its solitude and sublimity completely charmed him and he chose it as the site of his oracle. His advent was not peaceable, however, as Hera had set in his path the great serpent Pytho, and a terrific combat ensued from which Apollo emerged victorious. Some

[p. 172]

authorities claim that this contest with Pytho signifies the war which, according to many mythologies, the Sun-God wages with the River God. The great river is the earth which flows all around the world, and which the Greeks knew by the name "Oceanus."

Perhaps, in the widest significance, this battle between Phoebus Apollo and the serpent represents the contest between the Sun-God and the earth river, for the Sun, although seemingly conquered by Oceanus each night, and smothered in his coils, emerges triumphant in the morning.

From his victory over Pytho, Apollo obtained the title of "Pythius, "and in commemoration of the event the Pythian games were instituted, in which contests the victors were crowned with wreaths of beech leaves.

His foes vanquished, the first requisite of an oracle, a priest was sought, and it is related that Apollo cast his eyes seaward and beheld a Cretan ship sailing for Pylos. Assuming the form of a dolphin he plunged into the sea, and boarded the ship to the great amazement of the crew. Under his guidance they came to the bay of Crissa, and the god in the form of a blazing star left the ship and descended into his temple. Assuming the form of a handsome youth with wavy locks, he greeted the crew as strangers, and invited them to

[p. 173]

land, and worship him as Apollo Delphinus, as he had met them in the form of a dolphin, and hence Delphi derived its name.

 

The resemblance between the lives of the Sun-God Phoebus Apollo, and Jesus Christ, the central figure and Exemplar of the Christian religion, is striking. The circumstances of their birth were in many respects similar, in that they were born in comparative obscurity. The mother of Apollo sought in vain for a suitable place to bring forth her offspring, and had recourse at last to a desolate and barren island in the midst of the sea. The Virgin Mary found her only refuge in a comfortless and humble shelter for the beasts of the field. Three gifts were presented the Far-Darter at his birth by Zeus, and the Magi presented the same number of gifts to the infant Jesus. Further, the infant Apollo was hurried away to a peaceful land soon after his birth, and in like manner the child Jesus was conveyed to a place of safety to escape a threatened danger.

For a while Phoebus Apollo hid his greatness in a beggar's garb, bearing with patience the gibes and sneers of his comrades, preferring to bide his time when all men should acknowledge his greatness. This mode of existence was in every way similar to the life of Christ.

[p. 174]

Again, as personifying the sun, Phoebus Apollo must necessarily be born weak and suffer hardships, he must wander far and lead a life of strife and action, but above all it was imperative that he should die. It is this last act which makes the character of the Sun-God approach the nearest to human nature.

Although the Sun-God's death at night-fall is ignominious, akin in this respect to the crucifixion, still its predominant feature is one of glory, and the reappearance of the triumphant sun after death is in every way typical of the resurrection, thus portraying in a startling manner the completeness of the analogy between the lives of Christ and Apollo.

In the Homeric hymn to Apollo we read that the Far-Darter took the shape of a dolphin, and guided men from Crete to Crissa. "This plunging of the god into the water, and his taking the shape of a fish," says Keary, [*1] "is the setting of the sun, and the birth of Apollo in the mid-Aegean is his rising. Both are alike parts of the sun's daily journey."

Again, the sun is essentially nomadic in its character, a continual wanderer in the firmament and this characteristic is borne out in the life of Phoebus Apollo, who in his infancy started upon his

[p. 175]

travels, his life being one of ceaseless wandering and activity.

Apollo brought not only the blessings of the harvest to mankind, but he was the god of music and song. He founded great cities, and promoted colonisation, gave good laws, and in a word, was "the ideal of fair and manly youth, a pure and just god requiring clean hands of those who worshipped him." To him were sacred the wolf, the roe, the mouse, the he-goat, the swan, the dolphin, and the ram. Traces of his solar nature are revealed in some of the statues, which represent him with a full and flowing beard, typifying the sun's rays. Generally he is represented as having the figure of a youthful athlete.

It remains to mention the different titles conferred on Phoebus Apollo. The many festivals inaugurated in his honour are referred to in another chapter. As there is a beneficent side to the sun's character, displayed in its genial warmth, so there is a destructive and desolating force in its rays at mid-day. As a destroyer and producer of plagues Phoebus Apollo was styled "Carneius," and worshipped with particular zeal at Sparta. In this capacity he was also worshipped under the title "Hyacinthus," a worship that was for the most part peculiar to the Peloponnesus.

As a beneficent god the Far-Darter was styled

[p. 176]

[paragraph continues] "Thargelius." The most noted of the temples dedicated to his worship was situated at Amyclae.

Apollo was regarded as the patron of herdsmen, and in this capacity was called "Nomius." He was also styled "Delphinius," and worshipped in a temple at Athens which bore the name "Delphinian."

From the fact that the number seven was sacred to Apollo he was called "Hebdomeius." As a god of light he was styled "Lycius," the original centre of this worship being Lycia, in the southwest of Asia Minor. Apollo was regarded as the father of Aesculapius, the god of medicine, and those afflicted with disease had recourse to him, for through his kind offices their bodies were purified, and health regained.

In Rome, the worship of Apollo was not established until 320 B.C., a temple being raised to him in that year in consequence of a pestilence that had swept the city. Afterwards a second temple was dedicated to his worship on the Palatine Hill.

To the poets of all ages Phoebus Apollo has been a source of inspiration, and the symbol of poetry. Callimachus, an Alexandrine Greek, who lived about 250 B.C., wrote a hymn in honour of the Sun-God Apollo. In later times, however, no distinction was made by the Greek poets between Apollo and the Sun-God Helios.

[p. 177]

The poet Keats wrote an ode and a hymn to Apollo, and Shelley's Hymn to Apollo is considered one of the finest and most sublime poems in our language. It is the Sun-God's description of his divine attributes, and because of its beauty is quoted in full:

"The sleepless Hours who watch me as I lie,
  Curtained with star-inwoven tapestries
  From the broad moonlight of the sky,
  Fanning the busy dreams from my dim eyes.
  Waken me when their mother, the grey Dawn,
  Tells them that dreams and that the moon is gone.

"Then I arise, and climbing Heaven's blue dome,
  I walk over the mountains and the waves,
  Leaving my robe upon the ocean foam;
  My footsteps pave the clouds with fire; the caves
  Are filled with my bright presence, and the air
  Leaves the green earth to my embraces bare.

"The sunbeams are my shafts with which I kill
  Deceit, that loves the night and fears the day;
  All men who do or even imagine ill
  Fly me, and from the glory of my ray
  Good minds and open actions take new might
  Until diminished by the reign of night.

"I feed the clouds, the rainbows, and the flowers
  With their ethereal colours; the moon's globe
  And the pure stars in their eternal bowers
  Are cinctured with my power as with a robe;
  Whatever lamps on Earth or Heaven may shine
  Are portions of one power, which is mine.[p. 178]

"I stand at noon upon the peak of Heaven,
  Then with unwilling steps I wander down
  Into the clouds of the Atlantic even;
  For grief that I depart they weep and frown.
  What look is more delightful than the smile
  With which I soothe them from the western isle?

"I am the eye with which the Universe
  Beholds itself and knows itself divine;
  All harmony of instrument or verse,
  All prophecy, all medicine are mine,
  All light of Art or Nature; to my song
  Victory and praise in their own right belong."

The Dorians, as they migrated and founded new kingdoms, found the worship of the Sun-God Herakles flourishing in other lands, and gradually this form of religion became popular and supplanted the worship of Apollo.

Herakles was, however, considered more in the light of a solar hero than a Sun-God. In Herakles we behold the Sun, loving and beloved, wherever he goes seeking to benefit the sons of men; yet, as was the case with Apollo, sometimes bringing destruction and desolation down upon them through the fierce heat of his noonday rays.

The twelve labours of Herakles are supposed to refer to the sun's passage through the Zodiacal signs, as they suggest forcibly in many cases the successive conquests of the Sun hero. Herakles was represented on coins of Cyzicus about 500-450 B.C.

[p. 179]

[paragraph continues] The death of Herakles is the most impressive incident of his varied career. "No one," says Keary, [*1] "who reads the account of it, can fail to be struck by the likeness of the picture to an image of the setting sun. . . . The flame of his pyre shines out far over the sea, and the sun's last rays shine out in the light of the fiery sky." The many myths related of the Sun hero, Herakles, are referred to in the chapter on solar mythology.

Japanese Sun Worship

In the spirit religion of Japan we find the worship of the Sun-God is supreme. He is regarded as the "heaven-enlightening great spirit,--below him stand all the lesser spirits through whom as mediators, guardians, and protectors, worship is paid by men."

Among the Shinto deities, however, the Sun-Goddess was the central figure. To reconcile Buddhism and Shintoism the chief priests claimed that the Sun-Goddess had been merely an incarnation of Buddha.

The shrine of the Sun-Goddess stood in the Mikado's residence, and was reverenced by that monarch as one of his family gods. Her emblem was the mirror, which is to the present day considered

[p. 180]

one of the sacred treasures of the Japanese sovereigns.

A temple of the Sun-Goddess was established at Watarahi in the province of Ise, and the shrine of the Goddess of Food was placed in the temple. These two deities henceforth occupy together the chief place in the Japanese Pantheon. They were honoured above all other gods by festivals and ceremonies held annually. Offerings and sacrifices were presented to these goddesses on the seventeenth day of the sixth moon, and the ritual of the invocation was in part as follows: "Hear, all you ministers of the gods, and sanctifiers of offerings, the great ritual declared in the presence of the From-Heaven-Shining-Great Deity."

At the harvest festival thanksgiving was offered to the Sun-Goddess for bestowing upon her descendants dominion over land and sea.

Sun Worship in Peru and Mexico

From Japan we cross the Pacific to find the indigenous tribes of the western continents reverencing and worshipping the Sun in ancient times. The Sun worship of Peru first claims our attention, as it easily overshadows in importance and magnificence the solar worship of any other of the western tribes.

[p. 181]

It has been shown that Sun worship prevails, for the most part, where the sun is welcomed for his genial warmth, and where nature suffers at his departure. Thus, in the lowlands of South America, Sun worship attained little prominence, but on the high plateaus, such as those in Peru, it flourished vigorously, and was the dominant feature of the life of the natives.

The Peruvians believed that the Sun was at once the ancestor and the founder of the Inca dynasty, and that the Incas reigned as his representatives and almost in his person. The Sun, therefore, was the sovereign lord of the world, the king of heaven and earth, and was called by them "Inti," which signifies Light.

The Peruvian villages were so built that the inhabitants could have an unobstructed view of the east, in order that each morning the nation might unite in saluting the rising Sun, and rejoice in the advent of the Lord of Light. The Sun alone of all the deities had a temple in every large town in Peru.

The Peruvian Sun temples probably exceeded in magnificence those of any other nation on the earth. In Peru, as elsewhere, a certain relationship was thought to exist between the substance of gold, and that of the sun. In the nuggets dislodged from the mountain sides they thought they

[p. 182]

saw the Sun's tears, consequently, in the Peruvian edifices dedicated to the worship of the Sun, we find gold used lavishly to beautify and embellish the structure.

The following description of the Great Temple of the Sun at Cuzco, the grandest ecclesiastical edifice in the empire, gives some idea of the beauty and grandeur of these places of worship:

The temple consisted of a vast central auditorium surrounded by a number of smaller buildings and was built with an elegance of masonry rarely, if ever, equalled.

The roof was formed by timberworks of precious woods plated with gold, and the precious metal was so prodigally lavished on the interior that the temple bore the name of "The Place of Gold" or "Golden Palace." A thick sheet of gold six inches wide ran round the outside of the edifice as a frieze, and there was a similar decoration in every apartment. The doors opened to the east, and at the far end above the altar was a golden disk with human countenance shaped and graven to represent the sun, and studded with precious stones. It was so placed as to reflect, at certain seasons, the first rays of the rising sun on its brilliant surface, and, as it were, reproduce the likeness of the great luminary.

Around the sacred disk was arranged in a semi-circle

[p. 183]

the mummies of the departed Incas seated on golden thrones, so that the morning sun rays came day by day to bless the remains of the rulers of bygone ages.

The adjacent buildings were the abodes of the deities who formed the retinue of the Sun. The principal one was sacred to the Moon, the Sun's consort, who had her disk of silver, and arranged around her were the mummies of the ancient queens. Other chambers in the temple were dedicated to the stars, to lightning, and to the rainbow. Outside the temple was a great garden filled with rare and beautiful plants, which contained, also, exquisite imitations of trees, bushes, and flowering shrubs, and animals all wrought in solid gold. The vases and temple ornaments, all the utensils used by the priests in the temple, and even the conductor pipes, were composed of the precious metal.

In the Peruvian ceremonials of Sun worship, drink offerings were presented to the deity in a golden vessel, and the people believed that if the liquid disappeared the Sun partook of it, which might be truly said of it, as it soon vanished by evaporation.

Under the Incas, Sun worship became the state religion of Peru, and the central idea of the life of the people. It is evident, however, that Sun

[p. 184]

worship was not acceptable to all the Incas, for there is on record a protest made by an Inca that the Sun could not be a supreme and all-powerful deity, constrained as he was to pursue one fixed course in the firmament. If he was supreme he should be a free agent, argued this wise sovereign.

Columns in honour of the Sun were erected in Peru as in other lands where Sun worship prevailed, level at the top, so as to form a seat for the sun who, the Peruvians said, "loved to rest upon them." At the equinoxes and solstices they placed golden thrones upon them for the Sun-God's further convenience. Surrounding the city of Cuzco there were twelve stone columns dedicated to the sun, which represented the twelve months in the year.

Human sacrifices to the sun were common in Peru, and the rising sun looked down on sacrificial altars reddened by the blood of thousands of victims. The holiest sacrifice was the blood of a captive youth, smeared on a rock that crowned a mountain top, so that the sun's first rays would light up the gory sacrifice.

Sun worship thrived in Peru until the Spanish Conquest, when Pizarro ruthlessly overthrew the temples, and stifled the religion. It is said that the great golden disk representing the sun, that was the chief object of worship in the Great Temple

[p. 185]

at Cuzco, was secured as booty by one of the rough adventurers of the conquering army, and became the stake in a subsequent drunken gambling bout that the plunderer engaged in.

Although the Sun worship of the Peruvians reached a higher state of exaltation, and perfection than that of any other South American people, still the pre-eminence of the Sun, and its deification, was the very essence of the early religion of Central America, and particularly Mexico. The ancient Mexicans called themselves "Children of the Sun," and daily greeted the rising sun with hymns of praise, and offered to the solar deity a share of their meat and drink. Even to this day, the inhabitants of the interior of Mexico, as they go to mass, throw a kiss to the Sun before entering the church.

Four times by day and night the priests of the ancient Sun temples addressed their invocations and prayers to the Sun, and all the temples were dedicated to his worship. In the ceremonial of the temple worship, blood drawn from the ears of the high priest was offered to the Sun, as was also a sacrifice of quails. The priest invoked the Sun saying: "The Sun has risen, we know not how he will fulfil his course, nor whether misfortune will happen. Our Lord do your office prosperously."

The temples of the ancient Toltecs, who inhabited Mexico as far back as the year 674 of the

[p. 186]

[paragraph continues] Christian era, were dedicated to the Sun. The Moon they worshipped as his wife, and the Stars as his sisters. No image was allowed within these temples, and their offerings were perfumed flowers, and sweet-scented gums. They reared in adoration of the Sun and Moon great pyramids which have endured to this day and examples of which may be seen at San Juan, Teotihuacan.

The highest "El Sol" is 216 feet in height, has a base about 761 feet square, and the summit is reached by a flight of sixty-eight steps. Many strange idols have been found in this region embellished and ornamented with designs of solar significance, the sun's rays being especially noticeable in the carvings.

The supreme god of the early Mexicans was Quetzalcohuatl, who personified to them the Sun of to-day; his father was Camaxtli, the great Toltec conqueror, whom the Mexicans regarded as the Sun of yesterday:--while the god Tetzcalipoca signified to them the Sun of to-morrow.

Quetzalcohuatl is described as being regal of stature, of white complexion, and of pleasing countenance. His face was fair, and his beard bushy, and he was clothed in flowing robes. It is related that the clouds, or cloud snakes, bear down the old Sun, and choke him, but the young Quetzalcohuatl rushes up in the midst of them from

[p. 187]

below, and destroys them. As we shall see, the Sun-God Hercules, the solar deity of the Greeks, was famed even in his infancy for his triumph over the serpents sent to destroy him.

Quetzalcohuatl reigned over the Toltecs peaceably for many years, but finally his enemies brought about his downfall, and deposed him. Legend says he embarked in his ship and sailed down a river to the sea, where he disappeared and was no more seen. When Montezuma beheld Cortez and the Spanish ships approaching the land, he thought that the great Sun-God was returning to his beloved land.

Sun Worship of the North American Indians

Proceeding northward, we find the worship of the Sun that anciently existed and flourished in the far east, equally prominent in the life of the early Indian tribes of North America.

The chiefs of the Huron tribe claimed descent from the Sun, and believed that the sacred pipe was derived from this luminary. It was, they thought, first presented to the Pawnees, and by them transmitted to the other tribes. Many of the Indian tribes have a similar tradition.

The Iroquois regarded the Sun as a god, and offered him tobacco, which they termed "smoking the Sun." On important occasions the braves

[p. .188]

gathered together in a circle, squatting on the ground, the chief then lighting the calumet, and offering it thrice to the rising Sun, imploring his protection, and recommending the tribe to his care. The chief next took several puffs and passed the pipe on for all the others to smoke in turn. As in many Christian churches to-day, the prayers of the people mingle with the smoke of incense, so were the invocations of the early Indians addressed to their Sun deity, supposed to be wafted to him by the smoke that wreathed upward from the sacred calumet.

Certain tribes offered to the Sun the first game they despatched when they were out on a hunting expedition. The Apalachees of Florida, in their sacrifices to the Sun, offered nothing that had life. They regarded the Sun as the parent of life, and thought that he looked with displeasure on the destruction of any living creature. They saluted the Sun at the doors of their wigwams as he rose and set, and in the sacred hut or cave where they worshipped, the Sun's rays were permitted to enter so as to illuminate the altar at certain times of ceremonial importance. This accords closely with the ideas of orientation which played such an important part in the Sun temple worship of the Egyptians. In the course of their service of Sun worship, the Apalachees released the sacred Sun

[p. 189]

birds through a crevice in the roof of the cave temple. These, as they winged their way upward, were thought to convey their expressions of adoration to the Sun, the supreme deity.

To the Creeks the Sun represented the Great Spirit, toward him they directed the first puff of smoke from the calumet, as they sat in solemn council, and to him they bowed reverently in their discussions. The early Indian tribes of Virginia prostrated themselves before the rising and setting Sun and Tylor [*1] tells us that the Pottawotomies would climb sometimes at sunrise to the roofs of their huts to kneel, and offer to the luminary a mess of Indian corn.

The powerful Sioux tribe regarded the Sun as the Creator and Preserver of all things and to him they sacrificed the best of the game they killed in the hunt. The Shawnees believed that the Sun animated everything, and therefore must be the Master of Life or Great Spirit.

The Sun worship of the Indian tribes dwelling in the southern portions of North America seems to have been on a more elaborate scale than that in vogue in the north. Doubtless it was influenced by the widely extended and exalted Sun worship of the South American tribes. Among the tribes inhabiting what is now the state of Louisiana, it

[p. 190]

was customary for the chief to face the east each morning, and prostrate himself before the rising Sun. He also smoked toward it, and then toward the three other cardinal points of the compass. These Indians even erected to the Sun a rude temple, a circular hut some thirty feet in diameter. In the midst of it was kept burning a perpetual fire, prayers were offered to the Sun three times each day, and the hut was the repository of images and religious relics. Following the Inca custom, the bones of their departed chiefs were also placed in the sacred structure. Their highest and most powerful chief was regarded as the Sun's brother, and he conducted as high priest the temple service of worship to the Sun.

The Dakota Indians called the Sun "the mysterious one of day," and believed that this deity watched over them in time of need. The following translation from portions of an Indian hymn to the Sun indicates the attitude of the worshippers toward their deity:

Great Spirit, master of our lives,
 Great Spirit master of all things visible and invisible, and who daily makes them visible and invisible,
 Great Spirit master of every other Spirit good or bad,
 Command the good to be favourable unto us, and deter the bad from the commission of evil.
                .         .         .         .         .         .         . [p. 191]
 O Great Spirit, when hidden in the west protect us from our enemies who violate the night, and do evil when thou art not present,
 Make known to us your pleasure by sending to us the Spirit of Dreams.
                .         .         .         .         .         .         .
 O Great Spirit, sleep not longer in the gloomy west, but return and call your people to light and life.

Brinton [*1] tells us that the Algonquins did not regard the Sun as a divinity but merely as a symbol. They called the Sun "Wigwam of the Great Spirit," and they prayed not to the Sun but to the old man who dwelt in the Sun.

Fire worship is closely related to Sun worship, and in many cases the North American Indians regarded fire, and not the Sun, as the Creator of all things, and the Supreme Deity.

The Choctaws refer to fire as "the greater chief," and speak of it as "he who accompanies the Sun, and the Sun him." In preparing for war they invoke the aid of both the Sun and Fire.

The following Ottawa legend [*2] is of much interest as showing clearly the motives with which savage animists offer sacrifices to their deities, and the spirit in which they believe the gods accept them:

"Onowuttokwutto, the Ojibwa youth who has followed the moon up to the lovely heaven prairies,

[p. 192]

to be her husband, is taken one day by her brother the Sun to see how he gets his dinner. The two look down together through the hole in the sky upon the earth below. The Sun points out a group of children playing beside a lodge, at the same time throwing a tiny stone to hit a beautiful boy. The child falls, they see him carried into the lodge, they hear the sound of the rattle, and the song and prayers of the medicine man that the child's life might be spared. To the entreaty of the medicine man the Sun makes answer: 'Send me up the white dog.' Then the two spectators above could distinguish on the earth the hurry and bustle of preparation for a feast, a white dog killed and singed, and the people who were called assembling at the lodge. While these things were passing the Sun addressed himself to his youthful companion saying:--'There are among you in the lower world some whom you call great medicine men, but it is because their ears are open, and they hear my voice, when I have struck any one, that they are able to give relief to the sick. They direct the people to send me whatever I call for, and when they have sent it I remove my hand from those I have made sick.' When he had said this the white dog was parcelled out in dishes for those that were at the feast, then the medicine man, when they were about to begin to eat said, 'We send

[p. 193]

thee this, Great Manito.' Immediately the Sun and his companion saw the dog, cooked and ready to be eaten, rising to them through the air, and then and there they dined upon it."

Of all the Indian customs and forms of worship of solar significance, the great ceremonial of the Sun dance best exemplified their worship of the Sun. Although it partook of the nature of a solar festival, and might properly be included in the chapter on Solar Festivals, still the deep religious significance of this rite, and the fact that it was essentially an act of Sun worship, renders it in accord with the subject under discussion. The following description of the Sun dance of the Senecas is taken from volume xxiii., of the Journal of American Folk-Lore:

"The Seneca sun dance is called by any individual who dreams that the rite is necessary for the welfare of the community. It begins promptly at high noon, when three showers of arrows or volleys from muskets are shot heavenward to notify the sun of the intention to address him. After each of the volleys the populace shout their war cries 'for the sun loves war.' A ceremonial fire is then built, and the sun priest chants his thanksgiving song, casting from a husk basket handfuls of native tobacco upon the flames as he sings. This ceremony takes place outside of the

[p. 194]

[paragraph continues] Long House where the rising smoke may lift the words of the speaker to the sun. Immediately after this the entire assemblage enters the Long House where the costumed feather dancers start the Ostowa###779###''gowa. Among the Onondaga of the Grand River Reserve in Ontario the leader of the sun ceremony carries an effigy of the sun. This is a disk of wood ten inches in diameter, fastened to a handle perhaps a foot long. The disk is painted red, and has a border of yellow. Around the edge are stuck yellow-tipped down feathers from some large bird to represent the sun's rays."

The great tribal ceremony of the Kiowas was the Sun dance, which was generally celebrated each year about the middle of June. It lasted four days, and during this time the sacred image representing a human figure, and supposed to possess magical qualities, was exposed in the medicine lodge. It was the only time in the year that the sacred image was revealed to the people, and the veneration of the object was similar in many respects to the worship paid to the alleged relics of the saints that are now extant.

The Kiowas considered even the accidental shedding of blood at a Sun dance an evil omen, and their ceremonies were free from the horrible acts of self-torture that made the Sun dances of many of the Indian tribes especially revolting.

[p. 195]

A description of the Sun dance of the Sioux follows. [*1] This is given in much detail as the subject is of prime importance in any discussion of the solar ceremonials of the Indian tribes.

After the day for the Sun dance had been appointed by the medicine men, a straight and tapering pine, forty or fifty feet high, was selected for the sun pole. This was chosen by the oldest woman in the camp, and the task of stripping it of boughs and foliage, and clearing a passage about it, was left to the gaily dressed maidens. This work was performed on the second day of the ceremony. Before sunrise the next day a long line of naked young warriors was formed, gorgeous in war paint and feathers, bearing their weapons. This line was drawn up facing the east, and the sun pole which was five or six hundred yards away.

Overlooking the scene, on a high hill, stood an old medicine man, whose sole duty was to signal the moment of the sun's rising. Suddenly the signal was given, and with a great shout the Indians mounted their ponies and rode straight at the pole, discharging their weapons at it as they advanced. Chips from the pole flew in all directions, and if it fell a new pole must be selected. Later in the day the pole was cut down, and set up in the centre of

[p. 196]

a great plain, guy ropes of buffalo thongs, diverging from its top, being used to steady it. These ropes were fastened at the lower end to the tops of stakes which were driven in the ground at regular intervals about the sun pole, forming a circle about it.

Early on the morning of the third day the true worship of the Sun was begun, and a number of young warriors who had prepared for the ordeal by fasting for a number of days, presented themselves, being placed facing the sun. They were arrayed in full war paint and feathers, with fists clenched across their breasts; jumping up and down in measured leaps they circled about, keeping time to the monotonous beating of the tom-toms. Now and then a similar group of young maidens would appear in another part of the arena, and take up a song. The dancing continued for intervals of from ten minutes to a quarter of an hour, broken by rests of about equal length, and lasted from sunrise to sunset. During the day horses were brought into the arena, and the medicine men, after many incantations, dipped their hands into coloured earth, and smeared it on the flanks of the animals.

On the fourth day of the Sun dance the self-torture began, the male dancers of the previous day participating in this rite. The row of dancers took their places promptly at sunrise, but it was not before nine or ten o'clock that the torture

[p. 197]

began. Each of the young men presented himself to a medicine man who took between his thumb and forefinger a fold of loose skin of the breast, and a skewer, which had been previously fastened to the lower end of a guy rope which supported the sun pole, was then passed through the victim's flesh. The object of the devotee was to break loose from this fetter which bound him to the sun pole without using his hands. This could only be accomplished by so straining against his bonds that the skewer was torn free from the skin through which it passed. The torture was frightful, and frequently the victims fainted under the ordeal. All the while the beating of the tom-toms and the weird chanting of the singers continued. When the day was about over the survivors of the ordeal of torture filed from the arena one by one, and just outside of it they knelt with arms crossed over their bleeding breasts, and with bowed heads faced the setting sun. They rose only when it had disappeared from view.

It remains to refer briefly to evidences of Sun worship in various parts of the world, and the survivals of this cultus in the religious observances and ceremonials of to-day.

In Rome, in the fifth century, it was the custom to bow to the sun before entering a church, and to salute the rising sun from the summit of a hill.

[p. 198]

[paragraph continues] The Emperor Constantine was an ardent votary of the sun, and it was a great triumph for Christianity when he forsook this form of idolatry.

In Armenia forms of Sun worship exist to-day, and the Bedouins of the Arabian Desert constantly practise the adoration of the rising Sun, in spite of the Prophet's command against such observances.

In the Upper Palatinate it is the custom to take off the hat to the rising sun, and in Pomerania the fever-stricken patient is admonished to face the rising sun, and invoke the sun thrice as follows: "Dear Sun, come down soon, and take the seventy-seven fevers from me, in the name of the Holy Trinity."

The rude Tartar tribes sacrificed their horses to the Sun-God, whom they say frees them from the miseries of winter, and Mongol hordes may still be met with whose high priest prays to the sun, and throws milk up into the air as an offering to the Sun-God.

In Australia and Polynesia solar mythology overshadows the deification of the sun, and the early history of these regions is rich in legends and tales of the mighty deeds of the sun hero.

No chapter on Sun worship would be complete without some reference to Stonehenge, for Druidical worship embraced, even if it was not entirely governed by, the sacred rites of solar worship.

[p. 199]

[paragraph continues] The position and location of the group of stones on the wide plain commanding an unobstructed view of the horizon, reveal the character of the worship of those who placed them there as solar in its nature. Those who annually meet at Stonehenge in the present day, at dawn on the twenty-first of June, note that the sun rises exactly over the centre of the stone known as "the Pointer." It has been thought by some students that the Sun worship of the Druids was introduced into England and Ireland by Egyptian colonists, as the rites of the Druids conform in a remarkable degree with those attached to Sun worship in ancient Egypt. A list of the Sun-Gods of the various nations follows, with the authorities that establish their respective claims to solar deification. [*1]

          Deities Declared to   be the Sun

       Authorities

     
      Saturn or   Cronus

       Macrobius,   Nonnus

     
      Jupiter

            "         "

     
      Pluto or   Aidoneus

       The Orphic Poet

     
      Bacchus or   Dionysus

       Virgil, Ausonius,   Macrobius, Sophocles

     
      Priapus

       The Orphic Poet

     
      Apollo

       All authorities

     
      Janus

       Macrobius [p. 200]

     
      Deities Declared to   be the Sun

       Authorities

     
      Pan

       Macrobius

     
      Hercules

            "       Nonnus

     
      Vulcan

       The Orphic Poet

     
      Aesculapius

       Macrobius

     
      Mercury or   Hermes

            "

     
      Osiris, Horus,   Serapis

       Diodorus   Siculus, Macrobius, Eusebius.

     
      Belus or Baal

       Nonnus

     
      Adonis

       Macrobius

     
   The following list indicates the principal titles given to the Sun-Gods by the ancient nations.

          Title

       Nation

     
      Baal or Belus

       Chaldeans,   Assyrians, Moabites

     
      Shamash

       Babylonians

     
      Moloch

       Ammonites

     
      Moloch, Baal,   Chemosh, Baal-Zebub, Thammuz

       Canaanites

     
      Hammon

       Libyans

     
      Saturn

       Carthaginians

     
      Adonis, Baal,   Melkarth, Bel-Samen

       Phoenicians

     
      Asabinus

       Ethiopians [p. 201]

     
      Title

       Nation

     
      Ra, Osiris,   Horus, Atum, Ptah, Mandoo, Gom, Moni, Kons, Sekhet, Pasht, Set

       Egyptians

     
      Mithras

       Persians

     
      Brahma, Vishnu,   Siva, Indra, Surya

       Hindus

     
      Adonis,   Dionysus, Urotal

       Arabians

     
      Belenus

       Gauls

     
      Ares,   Herakles, Apollo, Bacchus, Liber, Dionysus

       Greeks, Romans

     
      Hu

       Druids

     
      Viracocha

       Peruvians

     
      Vitzliputzli

       Mexicans

     
   In conclusion, no claim is made that the subject of Sun worship has been treated exhaustively in the foregoing fragmentary account of this ancient form of idolatry in many lands. The main purpose has been to indicate how widespread solar deification was, and how, at one time or another, it has been the central and predominant feature of the religious life of all people.

Again, the similarity of the ceremonials and forms of Sun worship, the sacrifices and rituals

[p. 202]

of the various and widely separated nations of the earth, provide features that cannot fail to interest the student of history and ethnology.

Some of these points of resemblance are so striking as to suggest that at an early date in the world's history there was some means of communication between, or link that joined, the eastern and western continents.

Because of the far-reaching influences of Sun worship--influences that exist to-day--and by reason of its importance in the life and history of the ancient nations, the subject must ever remain one of the most interesting and absorbing that the life pages of the race record.

Footnotes

^164:1 Curiosities of Folk-Lore, C. F. Keary.

^166:1 Dawn of History, C. F. Keary.

^168:1 Primitive Culture, Edward B. Tylor.

^174:1 Outlines of Primitive Belief, C. F. Keary.

^179:1 Dawn of History, C. F. Keary.

^189:1 Primitive Culture, Edward B. Tylor.

^191:1 Myths of the New World, Daniel G. Brinton.

^191:2 Primitive Culture, Edward B. Tylor.

^195:1 T F. Schwatka in vol. xvii., Century Magazine.

^199:1 The Origin of Pagan Idolatry, G. S. Faber.

Sun Lore of All Ages, by William Tyler Olcott, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 203]

[p. 204] [p. 205]

  

Chapter VIII

  

Sun-Catcher Myths

IN the mythology of every land there may be found legends relating to the snaring of the sun, or the retarding of its daily course. The regularity and the steadfastness of the sun's apparent diurnal motion, and its undeviating and deliberate journey across the sky, was such a peculiar and obvious circumstance that it was a matter of conjecture and speculation at a very early date in the world's history. The cause of this phenomenon was naturally attributed to compulsion; for why should the sun mount the sky each morning with absolute regularity, and pursue the same path always unless compelled to do so?

Some time or other the Sun probably did as he liked, and doubtless he was caught in a trap, and beaten into submission; or, perhaps formerly he went rapidly across the heavens, but, being caught he was forced to proceed at a more leisurely gait. Thus the ancients speculated regarding the daily apparent movement of the sun, and these notions gave rise to a wealth of tradition, myth, and legend

[p. 206]

that have come down to us in many devious ways. The tales that relate especially to the snaring and trapping of the Sun have been termed by mythologists "Sun-Catcher Myths."

In a pass of the Andes there stand, on the cliffs that rise high on either side, two ruined towers. Into their walls are clamped iron hooks, which tradition relates held fast a net that was stretched across the pass to catch the rising Sun. According to an Indian legend, the Sun was once caught and bound with a chain which only permitted him to swing a little way to one side or the other.

It is said that Jerome of Prague, when travelling among the heathen Lithuanians, early in the fifteenth century, found a tribe who worshipped the Sun, and idolised a large iron hammer. The priests informed him that once the Sun had been invisible for many months because a powerful king had imprisoned him in a strong tower, but the signs of the zodiac had broken open the tower with this very hammer, and released the Sun, therefore they worshipped it.

A Japanese myth relates that in early times the Sun, displeased at men's misdeeds, retired into a cave, and left the world in darkness. [*1] This caused

[p. 207]

great distress, but finally the wise men devised a plan to lure her from her retreat, which plan was successful. When the Sun discovered the ruse, she desired to forsake the world once more, but, before she could do so, she was bound by cords, and held fast by eight hundred thousand gods, who have ever since restrained her from leaving the world.

As we have seen, the worship of the Sun was abandoned for a time in Peru, as one Inca denied that the Sun was a supreme deity because he followed a circumscribed course. "If he were free," said the Inca, "he would visit other parts of the heavens where he had never been. As he follows one path, he must be tied like a beast who goes ever round and round in the same track."

Both in the Orient and Occident we find myths relating to the subjection of the Sun, but whereas the culture of the East invented the beautifully adorned legends of Phoebus Apollo, and the mighty Herakles, who, although all-powerful, was doomed to a life of servitude at the behest of another, in the West the crude imagination of the barbarians conjured up the mental picture of the snaring of the Sun by an artfully contrived net or trap.

The association of the Sun with cords or ropes in the myths is clearly derived from the phenomenon in evidence when the sun's rays filter

[p. 208]

through a broken mass of clouds; then the long streams of light that seem to radiate from the sun and touch the earth are in imagination not unlike strands of gold which, as the legend related, held the Sun fast bound to earth. Thus did they appear to the Polynesians, who call these rays of the sun the ropes by which the Sun is fastened. They say the Sun once drove swiftly through the sky, but a god subdued him, and now bound by ropes and cords he goes humbly along his daily appointed path.

The Polynesian myth [*1] that tells of this snaring of the Sun is one of the most interesting legends in solar mythology, and it is therefore given in much detail:

Maui, the Polynesian hero god, after performing many great exploits, returned home to dwell with his brothers. He soon became restless, however, and, looking about for adventure, he decided that the Sun's daily course across the sky was altogether too rapid, and night-fall followed dawn too quickly to suit him.

"So at last one day he said to his brothers: 'Let us now catch the sun in a noose, so that we may compel him to move more slowly, in order that mankind may have long days to labour in to procure subsistence for themselves.' But they

[p. 209]

answered him: 'Why, no man could approach it on account of its warmth and the fierceness of its heat.' But nothing daunted, Maui persisted that he could snare the sun, and with the aid of his brothers spun and twisted ropes to form a noose. After they had sufficient ropes with which to bind the sun, Maui and his brothers journeyed a long distance eastward to the very edge of the place out of which the sun rises. Then they set to work, and built on each side of this place a long high wall of clay with huts of boughs of trees at each end to hide themselves in. When these were finished, they made the loops of the noose, and the brothers of Maui then lay in wait on one side of the place out of which the sun rises, and Maui himself lay in wait upon the other side.

"The young hero held in his hand his enchanted weapon, the jaw bone of his ancestress, and said to his brothers: 'Mind now, keep yourselves hid, and do not go showing yourselves foolishly to the sun, if you do you will frighten him; but wait patiently until his head and forelegs have got well into the snare, then I will shout out, haul away as hard as you can on the ropes on both sides, and then I'll rush out and attack him, but do you keep your ropes tight for a good long time (while I attack him), until he is nearly dead, when we will let him go, but mind now, my brothers, do not let

[p. 210]

him move you to pity with his shrieks and screams.'

"At last the sun came rising out of his place like a fire spreading far and wide over the mountains and forests. He rises up, his head passes through the noose, and it takes in more and more of his body until his fore-paws pass through, then are pulled tight the ropes, and the monster began to struggle and roll himself about, whilst the snare jerked backwards and forwards as he struggled. Then forth rushed that bold hero Maui with his enchanted weapon. Alas, the sun screams aloud, he roars; Maui strikes him fiercely with many blows; they hold him for a long time. At last they let him go, and then weak from wounds the sun crept slowly along its course. Then was learnt by men the second name of the sun, for in its agony the sun screamed out: 'Why am I thus smitten by you? Oh man: Do you know what you are doing? Why should you wish to kill Tama-nui-te-ra?' Thus was learnt the second name. At last they let him go, and the sun went very slowly and feebly on his course.

"Maui, however, took the precaution to keep the ropes on him, and they may still be seen hanging from the sun at dawn and eve."

It is also related that in snaring the Sun, Maui injured it, and thus deprived it of half its light,

[p. 211]

and since then the days have been longer and cooler and men have been able to work in peace.

The following Sun-catcher myth [*1] refers more to a temporary staying of the Sun in its daily course, than to a permanent change in its rate of speed such as Maui effected:

"There was once a man who, like the white people, though it was years before pipes, muskets, or priests were heard of, never could be contented with what he had. Pudding was not good enough for him, and he worried his family out of all heart with his new ways and ideas. At last he set to build himself a house of great stones to last forever. So he rose early and toiled late, but the stones were so heavy, and so far off, and the sun went around so quickly, that he could get on but very slowly. One evening he lay awake, and thought, and thought, and it struck him that as the sun had but one road to come by, he might stop him, and keep him till the work was done. So he rose before the dawn, and pulling out in his canoe, as the sun rose, he threw a rope around his neck, but no, the sun marched on, and went his course unchecked. He then put nets over the place where the sun rose, he used up all his mats to stop him, but in vain, the sun went on, and laughed in the hot winds at all his efforts. Meanwhile the house stood still,

[p. 212]

and the builder fairly despaired. At last the great Itu, who generally lies on his mats, and cares not at all for those he has made, turned round and heard his cry, and because he was a good warrior sent him help. He made the facehere creeper grow, and again the poor man sprang up from the ground near his house, where he had lain down in despair. He took his canoe, and made a noose of the creeper. It was a bad season when the sun is dull, and heavy, so up he came half asleep and tired, nor looked about him, but put his head into the noose. He pulled and jerked, but Itu had made it too strong. The man built his house, the sun cried and cried till the island of Savai was nearly drowned but not till the last stone was laid was he suffered to resume his career. None can break the facehere creeper. It is the Itu's cord."

A study of North American mythology reveals in the traditions of the Ojibways a myth similar in many respects to the Polynesian Sun-catcher myth. This legend [*1] relates that in primitive times the animals ruled the earth, having killed all of humankind except a girl and her small brother. They lived in fear and seclusion:

"The boy never grew bigger than a little child, and his sister used to take him out with her when she went to get food for the lodge-fire, for he was

[p. 213]

too little to leave alone. A big bird might have flown away with him. One day she made him a bow and arrows, and told him to hide where she had been chopping, and when the snow birds came to pick the worms out of the wood, he was to shoot one. That day he tried in vain to kill one, but the next, toward night-fall, she heard his little footsteps on the snow. He brought in a bird, and told his sister she was to take off the skin, and put half the bird at a time into the pottage, for till then men had not begun to eat animal food, but had lived on vegetables alone. At last the boy had killed ten birds, and his sister made him a little coat of the skins. 'Sister,' said he one day, 'are we all alone in the world? Is there nobody else living?' Then she told him that those they feared, and who had destroyed their relatives, lived in a certain part, and he must by no means go that way, but this only made him more eager to go, and he took his bow and arrow and started. When he had walked a long while, he lay down on a knoll, where the sun had melted the snow, and fell fast asleep, but while he was sleeping the sun beat so hot upon him, that his bird-skin coat was all singed and shrunk. When he awoke and found his coat spoilt, he vowed vengeance against the sun, and bade his sister make him a snare. She made him one of deer's sinew, and then one of

[p. 214]

her own hair, but they would not do. At last she brought him one that was right. He pulled it between his lips, and as he pulled it became a red metal cord. With this he set out a little after midnight, and fixed his snare on a spot just where the sun would strike the land as it rose above the earth's disk, and sure enough he caught the sun, so that it was held fast in the cord, and did not rise. The animals who ruled the earth were immediately put into a great commotion. They had no light. They called a council to debate upon the matter, and to appoint some one to go and cut the cord, for this was a very hazardous enterprise, as the rays of the sun would burn whoever came so near. At last the dormouse undertook it, for at this time the dormouse was the largest animal in the world. When it stood up, it looked like a mountain. When it got to the place where the sun was snared, its back began to smoke, and burn with the intensity of the heat, and the top of its carcass was reduced to enormous heaps of ashes. It succeeded, however, in cutting the cord with its teeth, and freeing the sun, but it was reduced to a very small size, and has remained so ever since."

In this myth we have the Sun-catcher myth of the South Sea Islands combined with part of our own fairy tale of Jack-and-the-Bean-Stalk. In this latter tale it is related that Jack, in spite of

[p. 215]

his mother's prayers, goes up the ladder that is to take him to the dwelling of the Giant who killed his father; so the boy of the Indian legend will not heed his sister's persuasion, but goes to seek the enemies who had slain his kindred.

In these myths the loosing of the imprisoned Sun is told in a story of which the European fable of the "Lion and the Mouse" might be a mere moralised remnant.

We have another version of the foregoing myth, which was told by the Wyandot Indians to the missionary Paul Le Jeune:

"There was a child whose father had been killed and eaten by a bear, and his mother by the Great Hare. A woman came and found the child and adopted him as her little brother, calling him 'Chakabech.' He did not grow bigger than a baby, but he was so strong that the trees served as arrows for his bow. When he had killed the destroyers of his parents, he wished to go up to heaven, and climbed up a tree. Then he blew upon it and it grew up and up till he came to heaven and there he found a beautiful country. So he went down to fetch his sister, building huts as he went down to lodge her in, brought her up the tree into heaven, and then broke off the tree low down, so that no one can go up to heaven that way. Then Chakabech went out, and set his snares for

[p. 216]

game, but when he got up at night to look at them, he found everything on fire, and went back to his sister to tell her. Then she told him he must have caught the sun. Going along by night he must have got in unawares, and when Chakabech went to see, so it was, but he dared not go near enough to let the sun out. By chance he found a little mouse, and blew upon her till she grew so big that she could set the sun free, and the sun released from the trap went again on his way, but while he was held in the snare, day failed down here on earth."

Still another version of the Sun-catcher myth is found among the Dogrib Indians, who dwell in the far North-west:

"When Chapewee after the Deluge formed the earth and landed the animals upon it from his canoe, he stuck up a piece of wood which became a fir-tree, and grew with amazing rapidity until its top reached the skies. A squirrel ran up this tree, and was pursued by Chapewee, who endeavoured to knock it down, but could not overtake it. He continued the chase however, until he reached the stars, where he found a fine plain, and a beaten road. In this road he set a snare made of his sister's hair, and then returned to earth. The sun appeared as usual in the heavens in the morning, but at noon it was caught by the snare

[p. 217]

which Chapewee had set for the squirrel, and the sky was instantly darkened. Chapewee's family, on this said to him: 'You must have done something wrong when you were aloft, for we no longer enjoy the light of day.' 'I have,' replied he, 'but it was unintentional.' Chapewee then endeavoured to repair the fault he had committed, and sent a number of animals up the tree to release the sun by cutting the snare, but the intense heat of that luminary reduced them all to ashes. The efforts of the more active animals being thus frustrated, a ground mole, though such a grovelling and awkward beast, succeeded by burrowing under the road in the sky until it reached and cut asunder the snare which bound the sun. It lost its eyes, however, the instant it thrust its head into the light, and its nose and teeth have ever since been brown as if burnt."

In the following Omaha myth of "How the Rabbit Caught the Sun in a Trap," [*1] we find the Sun ensnared again unwittingly. These myths differ from the Polynesian Sun-catcher myths in this respect,--that there appears to have been no deliberate intention of catching the Sun, no deliberate plan to restrain his liberty, which is a characteristic feature of the South Sea Island myths.

"Once upon a time a rabbit dwelt in a lodge

[p. 218]

with no one but his grandmother. He was accustomed to go hunting early in the morning. Inevitably a person with very long feet had preceded him, leaving a trail. The rabbit desired to find out who this party was, and got up one morning very early, but even then he had been preceded, so he laid a snare that night so as to catch this early bird, laying a noose where the footprints used to be seen. Rising early the next morning he inspected his trap, and found he had caught the sun. Now he was very much frightened, and the sun said to him: 'Why have you done this? You have done a great wrong. Come hither and untie me.' Finally the rabbit mustered up courage and bending his head down rushed at the sun and severed the rope with his knife, but the sun was so hot that the rabbit scorched the hair between his shoulders, so that it was yellow, and from that time the rabbit has had a singed spot on his back between his shoulders."

In the legends of the Bungee Indians of Lake Winnipeg, we find again a reference to the state of dissatisfaction existing in early times with the Sun's vagarious method of lighting the world, and the schemes that were suggested to bring about a change of conditions. In the following myth [*1] the Sun is ensnared as the result of a deliberate plan:

[p. 219]

"Before the Creation, the world was a wide waste of water, and there was no light upon the earth, the sun being only an occasional visitor to this world. Anxious to keep the sun from wandering away very far, the god Weese-ke-jak constructed an enormous trap to catch the sun, and the next time the sun came near the earth he was caught in the trap. In vain he struggled to get free, but the cords by which he was held were too strong for him. The near proximity of the sun to the earth caused such heat, that everything was in danger of being burned. Then Weese-ke-jak concluded to make some sort of a compromise with the sun before he would consent to give him his liberty. It was stipulated that the sun was only to come near the outer edges of the earth in the mornings and evenings, and during the day to keep farther away, just near enough to warm the earth without scorching it. But now another difficulty presented itself, the sun had not the power to unloose the band by which he was held, and the intense heat prevented either Weese-ke-jak or any of his creations from approaching the sun to cut the band and set him free. The beaver at that time was rather an insignificant creature, having only a few small teeth in his head, and being covered with bristly hair like a hog, his tail being only a small stump about two or three inches long. He

[p. 220]

offered to release the sun, and succeeded in gnawing through the cords that held the sun before being quite roasted alive. The cords being severed the sun rose from the earth like a vast balloon. Weese-ke-jak in gratitude for his deliverance from the burning rays of the sun rewarded the beaver by giving him a beautiful soft coat, and fine sharp teeth of a brown colour, as if scorched by fire. This is how the beaver came by his hatchet-like teeth and furry coat."

A feature of these legends is the stress laid on man's indebtedness to a small and insignificant animal, which, in every case, at the risk of his own life, frees the Sun from the toils into which he has been brought by man's machinations. A moral seems to be drawn from these myths, that even the lowly may effect great things, and the despised of earth may rise to heights which even the mighty cannot attain.

We come now to a brief discussion of the myths relating to the temporary retarding or accelerating of the Sun's speed in order that man might accomplish a purpose. Chief among these traditions is the Biblical story of Joshua's command to the Sun to stay its course, related in the tenth chapter of the Book of Joshua: "And he [Joshua] said in the sight of Israel, Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon; and thou, Moon, in the valley of Ajalon. And the sun stood still, and the moon stayed, until the people

[p. 221]

had avenged themselves upon their enemies. Is not this written in the book of Jasher? So the sun stood still in the midst of heaven, and hasted not to go down about a whole day. And there was no day like that before it or after it, that the Lord hearkened unto the voice of a man, for the Lord fought for Israel."

This idea that man could stay the Sun's daily course is to be met with in the Fiji Islands, where, on the top of a small hill, a patch of reeds grew. Travellers who feared that they would not reach the end of their journey before the Sun set, were wont to tie the tops of a handful of these reeds together to detain the Sun from going down. It has been thought that by this act they may have imagined they could entangle the Sun in the reeds for a time and thus stay his course.

When the Australian blackfellow desired to prevent the Sun from going down till he reached home, he placed a sod in the fork of a tree exactly facing the setting Sun. Another Australian custom is to place stones in trees at different heights from the ground, in order to indicate the height of the Sun in the sky at the moment when they passed a particular tree. Those following are thus made aware when their friends in advance passed the spot. Frazer, [*1] referring to this custom, considers

[p. 222]

that the natives who practised it may have imagined that "to mark the sun's progress was to arrest it at the point marked. On the other hand, to make the sun go faster, the Australians throw sand into the air, and blow with their mouths toward the sun."

South African natives in travelling will put a stone in a branch of a tree, or place some grass on the path with a stone over it, believing that this will cause their friends to keep the meal waiting till their arrival, as it would make the Sun go slower down the western sky.

The Indians of Yucatan, when journeying westward, placed a stone in a tree, or pulled out some of their eyelashes, and blew them toward the Sun to stay or speed the Sun's course.

The idea that the Sun's speed could be regulated may have arisen from the fact, that, under certain conditions, it really does appear to vary in its rate of motion in relation to its position in the heavens. During the first few hours succeeding sunrise, when the Sun is not far from the horizon, and can be compared with terrestrial objects, it really appears to move with greater speed than when it journeys across the meridian; and when at nightfall it seeks the west it seems in like manner to hasten with accelerated speed. From this optical illusion the fancy may have sprung born of the

[p. 223]

false reasoning that, if the Sun varied his speed to suit his will, man could also control his course, and hasten or retard his progress. This has doubtless given rise to the similarity of these legends that have come down to us from many different and widely separated lands, for primitive man the world over viewed the phenomena of nature from much the same standpoint, and wove his legends from the fabric of an imagination common to all men.

Footnotes

^206:1 Here again we encounter in a land far distant the tradition common among the American Indians, that at one time the land they dwelt in was shrouded in darkness.

^208:1 Polynesian Mythology, Sir George Gray.

^211:1 Researches in the Early History of Mankind, Edward B. Tylor.

^212:1 Researches in the Early History of Mankind, Edward B. Tylor.

^217:1 Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology, 1879-80.

^218:1 Vol. xix., Journal American Folk-Lore.

^221:1 The Golden Bough, J. G. Frazer.

Sun Lore of All Ages, by William Tyler Olcott, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 224] [p. 225]

[p. 226] [p. 227]

  

Chapter IX

  

Solar Festivals

BECAUSE of the importance of Sun worship, and its widespread influence upon the primitive inhabitants of the world, there were instituted in honour of the solar deity, in many lands, great festivals and elaborate ceremonials, the traces of which have come down to us in modified form even to this day. Our most important ecclesiastical feast days in fact are but survivals of ancient solar festivals.

Twice in the year the sun apparently changes its course. In midwinter, having reached the lowest point in its path, it turns about and begins to mount the skies; in midsummer, conversely, having attained the highest point it reaches, the sun seems to turn about once more, and descend the steeps of the firmament. These two epochs, the winter and summer solstices as they are called, that mark the sun's annual course, were regarded as supremely important by the ancients and gave rise to great national festivals that were celebrated

[p. 228]

with pomp and ceremony throughout the ancient world.

At the feast of the winter solstice men testified their gladness at witnessing the return of the all-powerful sun. To the inhabitants of Greenland it meant the early return of the hunting season, and all nations regarded it as a sign that springtime and harvests were on the way, and the dormant life of the winter season was on the wane.

In many countries this festival season was known as "Yole," or "Yuul," from the word Hiaul, or Huul, which even to this day signifies "the sun" in some languages. From this we get our word "wheel," and the wheel is one of the ancient symbols of the sun, the spokes representing the sun's rays. As we shall see later this symbol was a prominent feature in one of the great solar festivals.

Procopius describes how the men of Thule climbed the mountain tops at the winter solstice, to catch sight of the nearing sun after their thirty-five days of night. Then they celebrated their holiest feasts.

Plutarch, referring to the solar festivals of Egypt, says, that "about the winter solstice they lead the sacred cow seven times in procession around the temple, calling this the searching after

[p. 229]

Osiris, that season of the year standing most in need of the sun's warmth."

In China, the Great Temple of the Sun at Pekin is oriented to the winter solstice, and the most important of all the State observances of China takes place there December 21st, the sacrifice of the winter solstice.

In our own time a number of Christian religious observances and festivals are of distinct solar origin. Notable among these feast days is Christmas. "The Roman winter solstice," says Tylor, [*1] "as celebrated on December 25th (VIII Kal. Jan.) in connection with the worship of the Sun-God Mithra appears to have been instituted in this special form by Aurelian about A. D. 273, and to this festival the day owes its apposite name of 'Birthday of the Unconquered Sun.' With full symbolic appropriateness, though not with historical justification, the day was adopted in the western church where it appears to have been generally introduced by the fourth century, and whence in time it passed to the eastern church as the solemn anniversary of the Birth of Christ, Christmas Day. As a matter of history no valid or even consistent early Christian tradition vouches for it."

Many of the early dignitaries of the Church

[p. 230]

reveal in their writings the solar character of this festival. Augustus and Gregory discoursed on "the glowing light and dwindling darkness that follow the nativity," and Leo the Great denounced in a sermon the idea that Christmas Day is to be honoured, not for the birth of Christ, but for the rising of the new sun.

The solar origin of the great feast is attested in Europe by bonfires, and the burning of the Yule log, and in the Christmas service chant, "Sol novus oritur."

Even the sacrifices offered to the Sun in pagan times at the great solar festivals find their survival in the sacrifices of a lamb which we offer at Eastertide, and an ox at Christmas. The lighting of the Christmas tree is but the light to guide the Sun-God back to life, and the festival cakes of corn and fruit, made in honour of the Sun in ancient times, and laid on the sacred altars of the Persians as an offering of gratitude to the Lord of Light and Life, find their prototype in the plum pudding that graces the board at our Christmas feasts of rejoicing. Christmas is, therefore, nothing but an old heathen celebration of the winter solstice, the feast of rejoicing that a turning point in the sun's course has been reached, and that the life-giving orb has attained the end of its journey of dwindling hours of daylight, and has started back on a course that

[p. 231]

brings with it each day an increase of warmth and light.

Of equal importance to the solar Christmas festival celebrated at the winter solstice was the great celebration of the summer solstice recognised throughout Europe. This was preeminently a fire festival, for the ceremonies featured the lighting of huge bonfires on the hilltops, leaping through the flames, and rolling blazing wheels of fire from the summits of the hills, indicating the sun's descending course in the heavens.

According to Tylor, [*1] "These ancient rites attached themselves in Christendom to St. John's eve. It seems as though the same train of symbolism which had adapted the midwinter festival to the nativity, may have suggested the dedication of the midsummer festival to John the Baptist, in clear allusion to his words, 'He must increase, but I must decrease.'"

Durandus, speaking of the rites of the Feast of St. John the Baptist, informs us of the curious custom that prevailed of rolling fire wheels down from the hills. This practice was common in France, and many North German examples of it are on record. The following is an account of one of these festivals, which took place at Conz on the Moselle, in 1823, as described by Grimm:

[p. 232]

"Every house delivers a sheaf of straw on the top of the Stromberg, where the men and lads assemble towards evening, whilst the women and girls gather about the Burbacher fountain. A huge wheel is now bound round with straw in such a manner that not a particle of wood remains visible; a stout pole is passed through the middle of the wheel, and the persons who are to guide it lay hold on the ends of the pole, which projects three feet on either side. The rest of the straw is made up into a great number of small torches. At a signal from the mayor of Sierk (who, according to ancient custom, receives a basket of cherries on the occasion), the wheel is kindled with a torch and set rapidly in motion. Everybody cheers and swings torches in the air. Some of the men remain above, others follow the burning wheel down hill in its descent to the Moselle. It is often extinguished before it reaches the river, but if it burns at the moment it touches the water, that is held to be prophetic of a good vintage, and the people of Conz have a right to levy a fuder of white wine upon the surrounding vineyards. Whilst the wheel is passing before the female spectators, they break out into cries of joy, the men on the hilltops reply, and the people from the neighbouring villages who have assembled on the banks of the river mingle their voices in the general jubilee."

[p. 233]

There is a striking analogy between the St. John fire celebrations and the Vedic legend of Indra's fight with the midsummer demons.

"In this legend," says Keary, [*1] "the demon Vritra possessed himself of the sun wheel and the treasures of heaven, seized the women, kept them prisoners in his cavern, and laid a curse on the waters until Indra released the captives and took off the curse."

The significance of the ceremony lies in the details that enter into it, the key to which is found in the following passage from a Vedic hymn: "With thee conjoined, O Indu (Soma), did Indra straightway pull down with force the wheel of the sun that stood upon the mighty mountain top, and the source of all life was hidden from the great scather."

The German custom is therefore seen to be nothing but a dramatic portrayal of the great elemental battle as depicted in the sacred books of the ancient Hindus. The wheel of fire on the hilltop represents the sun resting on the crest of the cloud mountain. Both the wheel and the sun descend from their positions of prominence and are extinguished, the wheel by the waters of the stream at the base of the hill, the sun by the sea of clouds.

[p. 234]

The elements of strife and warfare enter into the scene. The descending wheel is pursued to the water's edge by a crowd of men brandishing torches; Indra and his hosts wage successful warfare against the army of the demon Vritra. The fact that women are excluded from the ceremonies emphasises the idea of a combat, for it is their province solely to watch the battle as spectators and cheer the victors.

Another notion associated with this rite of the blazing wheel was that, as the wheel went rolling away from them in its descending course, it symbolised a wheel of fortune, and the ill luck of the people went rolling away, a signal for great rejoicing.

This ceremony of the descent of the wheel was anciently observed on St. John the Baptist's Day at Norwich, England, and even to this day it is the custom to light huge bonfires on the hilltops in Ireland, according to the ancient pagan usage when the Baal fires were kindled as part of the ritual of Sun worship. Around these fires the peasants dance, and when the fire burns low, it is the custom to lift children across the glowing embers to secure them good luck during the year, which is similar to the custom practised by worshippers of Baal and Moloch in ancient times of passing children through the fire

[p. 235]

that burned at the feet of the cruel and insatiable god.

There was also practised in Ireland, in connection with the midsummer festival which celebrated the turning-point of the sun at the summer solstice, a strange dance which was religious in its character, and solar in its origin. The Greeks called this "the Pyrrhic dance" from "pur" meaning fire, and practised it from the most ancient times. The feature of the dance was its serpentine character, as the dancers circled about in a long line simulating the coils of a serpent. In Ireland the dance had the same characteristics, and though the esoteric meaning of the dance had been lost, it was in all probability a mystic rite symbolic of the course of the sun, for the dancers invariably circled from east to west.

In Wales, the custom of lighting bonfires on Midsummer Eve is still kept up in many villages, and the peasants gather about them dancing and leaping through the flames. The leaping through the flames is supposed to ward off evil spirits, prevent sickness, and bring good luck.

The connection of the ceremony of the bonfires with the old worship of the Sun is indisputable. Its practice was general among nearly all European nations, and in not very remote times, from Norway to the shores of the Mediterranean,

[p. 236]

the glow of St. John's fires might have been seen.

In Brittany, the custom of the Baal fires is still preserved, and the peasants dance around them all night in their holiday attire. It is said that the maid who dances round nine St. John's fires before midnight is sure to be married within the year. In many parishes the cure himself goes in procession with banner and cross to light the sacred fire, and all the ancient superstitions connected with the festival are kept alive with unabated zeal.

The Scandinavians believed that when midsummer came the death of their Sun-God Balder took place, and to light him on his way to the underworld they kindled bright fires of pine branches, and when, six months later at the winter solstice, he regains his life and mounts to greet them, they burn the yule log and hang lights on the fir-trees to illuminate his upward course.

Frazer tells us [*1] how the fern seed, the oak, and the mistletoe are closely associated as symbols with the solar festivals celebrated at the winter and summer solstices:

"The two great days for gathering the fabulous fern seed, which is popularly supposed to bloom like gold or fire on Midsummer Eve, are Midsummer Eve and Christmas, that is, the two solstices. We

[p. 237]

are led to regard the fiery aspect of the fern seed as primary, and its golden aspect as secondary and derivative. Fern seed, in fact, would seem to be an emanation of the sun's fire at the two turning-points of its course, the summer and winter solstice. This view is confirmed by a German story, in which a hunter is said to have procured fern seed by shooting at the sun on Midsummer Day at noon. Three drops of blood fell down, which he caught in a white cloth, and these blood drops were the fern seed. Here the blood is clearly the blood of the sun from which the fern seed is thus directly derived. Thus it may be taken as certain that the fern seed is golden because it is believed to be an emanation of the sun's golden fire.

"Now, like the fern seed, the mistletoe is gathered either at midsummer or Christmas, that is, at the summer and winter solstice, and, like the fern seed, it is supposed to possess the power of revealing treasures in the earth. Now if the mistletoe discovers gold, it may be in its character of the Golden Bough, and if it is gathered at the solstices, must not the Golden Bough, like the golden fern seed, be an emanation of the sun's fire? The primitive Aryans probably kindled the midsummer bonfires as sun charms, that is, with the intention of supplying the sun with fresh fire. But as the fire was always elicited by the friction

[p. 238]

of oak wood, it must have appeared to the primitive Aryan that the sun was periodically recruited from the fire which resided in the sacred oak. In other words, the oak must have seemed to him the original storehouse or reservoir of the fire which was from time to time drawn out to feed the sun. Thus, instead of saying that the mistletoe was an emanation of the sun's fire, it must be more correct to say that the sun's fire was regarded as an emanation of the mistletoe."

The Christian festival of Easter has its solar characteristics. "The very word Easter," says Proctor, "is in its real origin as closely related to sun movements as the word East," and the notion that the Sun dances on Easter morning as it rises is firmly believed to-day by superstitious people. In Saxony and Brandenburg the peasants still climb the hilltops before dawn on Easter day to witness the three joyful leaps of the Sun, as our English forefathers used to do.

Tylor [*1] tells us that "the solar rite of the New Fire, adopted by the Roman Church as a Paschal ceremony, may still be witnessed in Europe with its solemn curfew on Easter Eve, and the ceremonial striking of the new holy fire."

The two great festivals of the ancient Irish were La Baal Tinne, or May Day, the day of the Baal

[p. 239]

fires, sacred to the Sun, and La Samnah, or November Eve, sacred to the Moon. The May festival was the most important, as then it was that the Druids lit the fire of Baal, the Sun-God, and a portion of the ceremony at this festival consisted in driving cattle along a narrow path flanked by two fires, singeing them with the flame of a torch, and sometimes bleeding them, the blood being then offered as a sacrifice to the Sun-God.

Plutarch relates that among the Egyptians there were several festivals in honour of the Sun. A solar sacrifice was performed on the fourth day of every month, and so important was the deity that, as propitiatory offerings, they burnt incense three times a day, resin at its first rising, myrrh when on the meridian, and a mixture called "kuphi" at sunset. A festival in honour of the Sun was held on the thirtieth day of Epiphi, called the "birthday of Horus' eyes," when the sun and moon were supposed to be in the same right line with the earth. On the twenty-second of Phaophi, after the autumnal equinox, there was a similar ceremonial to which, according to Plutarch, they gave the name of the "nativity of the staves of the sun," intimating that the sun was then removing from the earth, and as its light became weaker and weaker, that it stood in need of a staff to support it.

[p. 240]

The most important date of the Egyptian year was the twentieth of June, that marked the summer solstice, but more especially the rise of the all-fertilising Nile. This was the New Year Day in Egypt. The greatest solar festival of the Egyptians, however, was the festival of Osiris, and the special feature of this occasion was the procession in which the sacred ox Apis appeared.

The following description of this festival is taken from Mythology and Fables by the Abbe Banier:

"The ox whom the priests nourished with so much care, and for whom all Egypt had such a veneration, was looked upon as a god. To gain some credit to this superstition, they said he represented the soul of Osiris. Herodotus tells us that this ox was to be black over all the body, with a square white mark upon the forehead. Upon the back he was to have the figure of an eagle, a knot under the tongue in the figure of a beetle, the hairs of the tail double, and according to Pliny a white mark upon the right side, which was to resemble the crescent moon. Porphyry says that all these marks had reference to the sun and moon, to whom the ox Apis was consecrated, that the black hair which was to be the colour of his body in general represented the scorching influence of the sun upon bodies, and that the white spot which he had in his forehead, and the crescent

[p. 241]

which he bore upon the side, were symbols of the moon. The eagle and beetle were also symbols of the sun.

"The festival of Apis lasted seven days. The people went in crowds to bring him from the place where he was found, the priests led the procession, and every one was desirous to receive him into his home. On the day of the Osiris festival the priests conducted the ox Apis to the banks of the Nile and drowned him with great ceremony. He was then embalmed and interred at Memphis. After his death the people mourned and made lamentation as if Osiris had been now dead. The priests cut off their hair, which in Egypt was a sign of the deepest mourning, and this mourning lasted till they got another ox to appear resembling the former in the same marks, when they began to make merry as if the Prince himself had arisen from the dead. The superstition of the Egyptians in relation to the ox Apis was carried to great excess. They honoured him as a god, and consulted him as an oracle; when he took what food was offered to him it was a favourable response, and his refusing it was looked upon as a bad presage."

In Greece there were many solar festivals inaugurated in honour of the Sun-God Phoebus Apollo. In Sparta an annual festival, known as "Carneia," was held in August. It was a religious ceremony,

[p. 242]

the purpose of which was to appease the dreaded god. This festival was celebrated in Cyrene, in the islands of Rhodes and Sicily, and in many of the Greek cities in lower Italy.

In September a festival was celebrated at which the Sun-God was invoked as an aid in battle, and in October the first-fruits were presented as a sacrifice.

At Athens there was an annual festival, held in May, to commemorate the yearly tribute of youths and maidens to Crete as sacrifices to the Minotaur. At Thebes there was a festival in honour of Apollo Ismenius, held every eighth year, called the "Daphnephoria." At this celebration branches of olives hung with wreaths, and representations of the sun, moon, and stars, were carried in procession, a feature of the festival.

A festival in honour of "Hyacinthus," one of the titles of Apollo, was celebrated annually at Sparta, in July, and lasted nine days. It began with laments, but concluded with expressions of joy and gladness. In honour of Apollo, the Sun-God, a festival called "Thargelia" was held at Athens, in May, to celebrate the harvest yield. In August the Athenians celebrated a similar festival called "Metageitnia." These celebrations and festivals bear testimony to the importance of Sun worship among the ancient Greeks.

[p. 243]

Among the Peruvians there were four solar festivals of importance celebrated throughout the year with great pomp and display. Chief among these was that of the winter solstice, which fell in June. It was the festival of the diminished and growing Sun. It lasted nine days, the first three of which were given up to fasting. On the morning of the great day the Emperor himself officiated as high priest, and all the people gathered at dawn in the public square to await the coming of the supreme deity, the Sun. At sight of him great shouts of joy rose from the multitude, who threw kisses to the orb of day, and prostrated themselves. The chief priest then offered a libation to the Sun-God, drinking of the cup himself, and then passing it on to his retinue, an act of solar communion. All then marched to the temple of the Sun, where a black llama was sacrificed, and its entrails were carefully inspected for omens affecting the coming year. A fire, produced by the focused rays of the sun from a mirror, was then lighted on the altar, and from it fire was conveyed to all the Sun temples in the city. These fires were kept burning continuously until three days before the next solstice when they were allowed to burn out.

The second great solar festival of the Peruvians was known as the "feast of purification," and fell in September. The object of this ceremonial was

[p. 244]

to invoke the Sun's aid and beneficent influence to secure the prosperity, health, and security of the people. The third festival was held in May, and was a thanksgiving harvest celebration, while still a fourth festival took place in December known as the "festival of power."

The Hopi Indians of North America, in their elaborate festivals in honour of the Sun, impersonated the Sun-God. The impersonator wore a disk-shaped mask, surrounded with eagle-wing feathers, and this was fringed with flowing strands of red horsehair to represent the sun's rays. The sun masks were a prominent feature in the solar ceremonials of many of the Indian tribes.

The curious and interesting custom of "need-fires," although not exactly to be classed as solar festivals, may very properly be treated of in this chapter, owing to the solemnity of the ceremony, the implicit faith of the people in their efficacy, and especially owing to their solar significance.

The "need-fires," or "forced-fires" as they are sometimes called, were kindled at times of great epidemics among the cattle that threatened their total annihilation, and the custom of kindling these fires is still in vogue in certain countries. Keary [*1] thus describes the custom:

"Wherever it can be traced among people of

[p. 245]

[paragraph continues] German or Scandinavian descent, the fire is always kindled by the friction of a wooden axle in the nave of a waggon wheel or in holes bored in one or two posts. In either case the axle or roller is worked with a rope, which is wound around it and pulled to and fro with the greatest possible speed by two opposite groups of able-bodied men. The wheel was beyond all doubt an emblem of the sun. In a few instances of late date it is stated that an old waggon wheel was used.

"In Marburger, official documents of the year 1605, express mention is made of new wheels, new axles, and new ropes, and these we may be assured were universally deemed requisite in earlier times. It was also necessary to the success of the operation that all the fires should be extinguished in the adjacent houses, and not a spark remain in any one of them when the work began. The wood used was generally that of the oak, a tree sacred to the lightning god Thor, because of the red colour of its fresh-cut bark. Sometimes, especially in Sweden, nine kinds of wood were used The fuel for the fire was straw, heath, and brushwood, of which each household contributed its portion, and it was laid down over some length of the narrow lane which was usually chosen as the most convenient place for the work. When the fire had burned down sufficiently, the cattle were forcibly driven through

[p. 246]

it two or three times in a certain order beginning with the swine, and ending with the horses or vice versa. When all the cattle have passed through the fire, each householder takes home an extinguished brand which in some places is laid in the manger. The ashes were scattered to the winds apparently that their wholesome influence may be spread far abroad. In Sweden the smoke of the need-fires was believed to have much virtue: it made fruit trees productive, and nets that had been hung in it were sure to catch much fish.

"The earliest account of the need-fires in England is that quoted by Kemble from the Chronicle of Lanercost for the year 1268. The writer relates with pious horror how 'certain bestial persons, monks in garb but not in mind, taught the country people to extract fire from wood by friction, and set up a "Simulacrum Priape" as a means of preserving their cattle from an epidemic pneumonia.' This 'Simulacrum Priape' was unquestionably an image of the sun-god Fro or Fricco.

"Jacob Grimm was the first to make it evident that, for the Germans at least, the wheel was an emblem of the sun, and numerous facts which have come to light since he wrote, abundantly verify his conclusion.

"He mentions among other evidence that, in the Edda, the sun is called 'fagrahvel,' 'fair, or

[p. 247]

bright wheel, 'and that the same sign sun which in the calendar represents the sun stands also for the Gothic double consonant 'hw,' the initial of the Gothic word 'hvil,' Anglo-Saxon 'hveol,' English 'wheel.'

"In the need-fires on the island of Mull, the wheel was turned, according to Celtic usage, from east to west, like the sun. Grimm has also noticed the use of the wheel in other German usages as well as in the need-fire, and he is of opinion that in heathen times it constantly formed the nucleus and centre of the sacred and purifying sacrificial flame. There was a twofold reason for this use of the emblem of the sun, for that body was regarded not only as a mass of heavenly fire, but also as the immediate source of the lightning. When black clouds concealed the sun, the early Aryans believed that its light was actually extinguished, and needed to be rekindled. Then the pramantha [*1] was worked by some god in the cold wheel until it glowed again, but before this was finally accomplished the pramantha often shot out as a thunderbolt from the wheel, or was carried off by some fire robbers. The word 'thunderbolt' itself like its German equivalents expresses the cylindrical or conical form

[p. 248]

of the pramantha. When the bolts had ceased to fly from the nave, and the wheel was once more ablaze, the storm was over."

From the foregoing, which treats merely of the more important solar festivals, it is clear that these products of paganism are as much in force at present from a symbolic point of view, as they ever were, and that Christianity countenances, and in many cases has actually adopted and practises, pagan rites whose heathen significance is merely lost sight of because attention is not called to the sources whence these rites have sprung.

In short, Sun worship, symbolically speaking, lies at the very heart of the great festivals which the Christian Church celebrates to-day, and these relics of heathen religion have, through the medium of their sacred rites, curiously enough blended with practices and beliefs utterly antagonistic to the spirit that prompted them.

The reason for the survival of many of the symbols of Sun worship and the practice of many customs peculiar to this ancient form of idolatry, lies in the fact that the early Christian teachers found the people so wedded to their old rites and usages, that it was vain to hope for the complete abandonment of these long-cherished practices. Hence a compromise was wisely effected, and the old pagan customs were deprived of the idolatry

[p. 249]

that was so obnoxious to the Christian, and transferred as mere meaningless symbols and empty forms to the Christian festivals. Old paganism died hard, and fought long and stubbornly in its struggle with Christianity, but time has fought for the Christian, and now even the meaning of symbols and forms that once played such an important part in pagan worship is lost sight of, and their former force and power is lost for evermore.

Footnotes

^229:1 Primitive Culture, Edward B. Tylor.

^231:1 Primitive Culture, Edward B. Tylor.

^233:1 Curiosities of Folk-Lore, C. F. Keary.

^236:1 The Golden Bough, J. G. Frazer.

^238:1 Primitive Culture, Edward B. Tylor.

^244:1 Curiosities of Folk-Lore, C. F. Keary.

^247:1 The pramantha was the handle of the mythical hand-mill of Frode, the regent of the Golden Age. This hand-mill was a flat circular stone which represented the sun's disk, its handle was used by Indra and the Aswins to kindle the cloud-extinguished orb of day.

Sun Lore of All Ages, by William Tyler Olcott, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 250] [p. 251]

[p. 252] [p. 253]

  

Chapter X

  

Solar Omens, Traditions, and Superstitions

THE past has bequeathed to us a wealth of lore, in the nature of omens and wise saws, superstitions and quaint fancies, the product of imaginative speculation in every phase of human existence, from the earliest times. This is especially true of the influence exerted on human affairs by the sun, moon, and stars; and though, as might be expected, less superstition is attached to the sun than to the moon, owing to the fact that the latter rules the night, when the imagination is roused to activity by the deep shadows and the mysterious gloom, still there cluster about the sun many curious ideas, that, apart from their value to the antiquarian, are interesting to the layman, affording as they do an insight into the life of ancient times.

These superstitions naturally relate to the widest possible range of subjects, for, once given the idea, prevailing at one time in the world's history, that

[p. 254]

the sun was a living being, who, if he did not rule man's destiny, still had a great share in shaping or controlling it, there is no end to the play of the imagination respecting its influence on man's daily existence. Therefore, what follows must necessarily be fragmentary in its nature, impossible of extensive classification, and consequently disconnected. The purpose is merely to place before the reader the better known and most popular of the fancies relating to the sun that primitive and simple-minded people of past ages created, and which, because of the hold which superstition has ever exerted on the race, are believed in, even in this enlightened age.

In the Aegean Islands, a land teeming with myth and legend, there are still extant many strange superstitions respecting the sun. When the Sun disappears from sight in the west each night, they say he has returned to his vast kingdom in the underworld, where he dwells in a great castle. His mother waits to receive him, and has forty loaves of bread ready to appease his appetite; but if, by any chance, this meal is not prepared, the famished Sun becomes a cannibal, and eats his entire family. When he rises red, the islanders say: "He has eaten his mother. He is crimson-hued because he yielded to his bloodthirsty inclinations, when he found no bread to eat."

[p. 255]

Others say the red colours at sunset are caused by the blood flowing from the Sun-God when he hastens to his suicide. Curiously enough, the Greeks regard the rising sun as ushered in through the portals of the east each morning by the Virgin Mary. Again, the sun was regarded by the Greeks as the symbol of perfect beauty, and they formerly painted the sun's disk on the cheeks of a bride. Churches are still dedicated to the Virgin beautiful as the sun, and there are many legends which relate to maidens who boasted that their beauty excelled that of the sun, and of the penalty they paid for making such presumptuous claims.

The Greeks regarded the orb of day as an all-seeing eye, and believed that no deed escaped its detection. The Finns believed that even the abode of the dead could be reached by the blissful rays of the sun. Because the sun looked down on all men, messages were given to the Sun that he might convey them to absent ones of a family, whom he beheld wherever they chanced to be.

We have seen how the Greeks explained the crimson hues that accompanied the rising sun. Its ruddy hue at sunset also called for an explanation, and the ancients believed that, as the sun reached its vanishing point, it gazed on the fires of hell, and these lit up its face, and the western sky.

[p. 256]

It seems to have been an almost universal belief among primitive people that the sun and moon were the abodes of departed souls. In Isaac Taylor's Physical Theory of Another Life, we read that ''the sun of each planetary system is the house of the higher and ultimate spiritual corporeity, and the centre of assembly to those who have passed on the planets their preliminary era of corruptible organisation."

One of the most popular solar superstitions, and one that has survived even to this day, is the notion that the sun dances when it rises on Easter Day. In the middle districts of Ireland the peasants rise at an early hour Easter morning to witness this phenomenon, which they say is in honour of the resurrection. Brand [*1] tells us this "is not confined to the humble labourer and his family, but is scrupulously observed by many highly respectable and wealthy families."

Sir Thomas Browne has left us the following quaint thoughts on this subject: "We shall not, I hope," says he, "disparage the Resurrection of our Redeemer, if we say that the sun doth not dance on Easter Day, and though we would willingly assent unto any sympathetical exultation, yet we cannot conceive therein any more than a topical expression. Whether any such motion there was

[p. 257]

in that day Christ arised, Scripture hath not revealed, which hath been punctual in other records concerning solitary miracles, and the Areopagite that was amazed at the eclipse, took no notice of this; and if metaphorical expressions go so far, we may be bold to affirm, not only that one sun danced, but two arose on that day; that light appeared at his nativity, and darkness at his death, and yet a light at both; for even that darkness was a light unto the Gentiles, illuminated by that obscurity. That was the first time the sun set above the horizon. That, although there were darkness above the earth, yet there was light beneath it, nor dare we say that Hell was dark if he were in it."

In some parts of England this quaint belief in the dance of the joyful Easter sun was regarded as the lamb playing for very gladness, in honour of the risen Christ.

In a rare book entitled Recreation for Ingenious Head Pieces, the Easter sun dance is thus referred to in an old ballad:

"But, Dick, she dances such a way
  No sun upon an Easter day
  Is half so fine a sight."

The Swabian people are firm believers in this superstition, and aver that the Sun leaps thrice for

[p. 258]

joy when it rises Easter morning; but at Rottenburg on the Neckar, the Sun was supposed to indulge in this dance at his setting Christmas Eve.

In England, we find this belief in the Easter sun dance still extant in parts of Yorkshire, Durham, Northumberland, and Devonshire, and it is the custom for the maidens to rise early Easter morning that they may witness the sight, and they also look for the lamb and flag in the centre of the sun's disk.

There is little doubt that the northern European nations welcomed the return of the spring sun with dancing, and the May rejoicings familiar in Cornwall are but an expression of congratulation to the spring. We have a similar custom in this country to-day, and May Day is a festival celebrated with elaborate Maypole dances by the school children of New York City. We see a striking analogy in these dances to the sun dances of the American Indians, which were part of the ritual of their Sun worship, and the radiating lines of ribbons from the Maypole represent the rays of the sun, as the thongs attached to the sun-pole in the Indians' dance did.

The old Beltane games and dances, common in Perthshire and other parts of Scotland until the beginning of the last century, had a solar significance, the word "Beltane" being a derivative of

[p. 259]

the compound word "Baal," the Phoenician word for sun, and "tein," the Gaelic word for fire.

Lady Wilde [*1] says that "the Beltane dance, where the participants circle about a bush hung with ribbons and garlands, or about a lighted bush or bonfire, celebrating the returning power of the sun, is still kept up in parts of Ireland on May Day and that those taking part always move sunwise."

This sunwise motion is found in many customs extant to-day. In the Scotch Highlands they still "make the deazil" around those whom they wish well of. This superstition consists in walking three times around the person according to the course of the sun. To circle in the opposite direction or "withershins," is productive of evil, and brings bad luck. We see a survival of this custom of circling about to bring luck in the modern superstition often practised by a card-player to-day, when he rises and walks around his chair three times to produce good luck.

According to an Icelandic saga, a woman going against the sun round a house, and waving a cloth, brought down a landslip against the house, and in Yorkshire it is said that if you walk round the room against the sun at midnight, in perfect darkness, and then look into a mirror, you will see leering out of it at you the face of the devil.

[p. 260]

In Popular Romances of the West of England, by Robert Hunt, there is the following description of a superstitious belief that the sun never shines on a perjured person: "When a man has deeply perjured himself, especially if by his perjury he has sacrificed the life of a friend, he not merely loses the enjoyment of the sunshine, but he actually loses all consciousness of its light or its warmth. Howsoever bright the sun may shine, the weather appears to him gloomy, dark, and cold. I have recently been told of a man living in the western part of Cornwall, who is said to have sworn away the life of an innocent person. The face of this false witness is said to be the colour of one long in the tomb, and he has never, since the death of the victim of his forswearing, seen the sun. It must be remembered the perjured man is not blind, all things round him are seen as by other men, but the sense of vision is so dulled that the world is forever to him in a dark vapoury cloud."

Among the Tunguses, an accused man has to walk toward the sun brandishing a knife, and crying: "If I am guilty, may the sun send sickness to rage in my bowels like this knife."

The appearance of three suns, it is said, denotes war. It is claimed that they are only visible at sunrise, and differ in size. At Herbertingen, they aver that these three suns have frequently

[p. 261]

been seen, and that they appeared just before Napoleon's disastrous campaign in Russia. The largest sun in this case was in the northern direction, and they say that is why the Russians triumphed.

The sun is also an important factor in Mexican superstition. The following cases are typical, and their injunctions closely followed by the people of that country:

The head of the bed must never be placed toward the rising sun, since it will cause the sleeper to rise with a bad headache, and even insanity may result. The sun is also appealed to whenever a tooth drops out, or is extracted. When this occurs, the loser takes the tooth and throws it with all his might at the sun.

When the sun sets on a cloudy day, the following day will be a stormy one. The Mexicans also have a belief that blondes cannot see the sun.

In Germany it is the custom on St. John's Day for hunters to fire at the sun, believing that they will thereby become infallible hunters. According to another German belief, he who on St. John's Day fires toward the sun is condemned to hunt forever afterward, like Odin, the eternal hunter.

We are all familiar with the phrase, "the sun is drawing water," used to express the appearance of the sun's rays as they filter through spaces in the

[p. 262]

clouds, and spread out like a fan over a body of water. This expression arose from the fact that primitive people fancied the sun's rays on these occasions resembled ropes that ran over the pulleys of the old-fashioned draw wells.

A very strange belief is that of the Namaqua Hottentots, that the sun is a bright piece of bacon, which the people who go in ships draw up in the evening by enchantment, and let down again after they have cut a piece off from it.

There is a curious custom found in many parts of the world, which relates to the sun's influence on young maidens entering on womanhood. According to this superstition, these maidens must not touch the ground nor permit the sun to shine upon them. In Fiji, brides who were being tattooed were hidden from the rays of the sun, and in a modern Greek folk-tale the Fates predict that in her fifteenth year a princess must be careful not to let the sun shine on her lest she be turned into a lizard. A Tyrolese story tells how it was the doom of a lovely maiden to be transported into the belly of a whale if ever a sunbeam fell on her.

The old Greek legend of Danae, who was imprisoned by her father in a dungeon, or brazen tower, is a further illustration of this strange idea relating to the sun's influence on human affairs.

The following solar superstitions show the wide

[p. 263]

play of man's fancy as relating to the power of the sun's light and indicate that there was a belief that the sun was a devout Christian, and kept the holy days prescribed by the Church:

For the sun to shine upon a bride is a good omen.

                   "While that others do divine
 Blest is the bride on whom the sun doth shine."
                             HERRICK'S Hesperides.

If the sun shines while it rains, the witches are baking cakes.

The Mexicans say when it rains, and the sun is shining, a she-wolf is bringing forth her offspring, or a liar is paying his debts.

If the sun shines on Candlemas Day (February 2d), the flax will prosper.

If women dance in the sun at Candlemas their flax will thrive that year.

As far as the sun shines in on Candlemas Day
  So far will the snow blow in before May:
  As far as the snow blows in on Candlemas Day
  So far will the sun shine in before May."

"If the sun in red should set,
  The next day surely will be wet;
  If the sun should set in grey,
  The next will be a rainy day."

[p. 264]

When the sun does not shine, all treasures buried in the earth are open.

If the sun shines on Easter Day, it will shine on Whitsunday also.

On Good Friday the sun mourns over the Crucifixion, and does not shine until three o'clock in the afternoon.

The sun is obliged to shine for a short time at least every Sunday in order that the Blessed Virgin may dry her veil.

Three Saturdays in the year, when the Virgin Mary mourns, the sun does not shine at all.

From an old Dream Book we derive the following superstitions:

To dream you see the sun shine, shows accumulation of riches and enjoying posts of honour in the state, also success to the lover.

To dream you see the sun rise, promises fidelity in your sweetheart, and good news from friends.

To dream you see the sun set, shows infidelity in your sweetheart, and disagreeable news. To tradesmen, loss of business.

To dream you see the sun under a cloud, foretells many hardships and troubles are about to befall you, and that you will encounter some great danger.

Footnotes

^256:1 Popular Antiquities, John Brand.

^259:1 Ancient Legends of Ireland, Lady Wilde.

Sun Lore of All Ages, by William Tyler Olcott, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 265]

[p. 266] [p. 267]

  

Chapter XI

  

Solar Significance of Burial Customs.
 Orientation

NOWHERE in the study of ancient rites and customs is the sun's influence on human affairs in greater evidence than in the ceremonials attending the burial of the dead.

The funeral rites of all people reveal the universal belief that the east is the source of all that men hold dear, light, life, warmth, and happiness, while the west, on the contrary, is said to be the abode of darkness, death, cold, and sorrow. The worship of the Sun cultivated and strengthened this idea, and down through the ages the influence of this belief has swept, retaining even to-day much of its ancient force and vigour.

According to Tylor [*1]: "It seems to be the working out of the solar analogy on the one hand in death at sunset, on the other in new life at sunrise, that has produced two contrasted rules of burial

[p. 268]

which agree in placing the dead in the sun's path, the line of east and west."

It is said that the body of Christ was laid with the head toward the west, that the risen Lord might face the eastern realm of eternal life and glory, and the Christian custom that sprang from this belief led to the usage of digging graves east and west, which prevailed through mediaeval times, and is common with us to-day.

In the twenty-fourth chapter of St. Matthew's gospel we read: "For as the lightning cometh out of the east, and shineth even unto the west; so shall also the coming of the Son of man be." Prom the literal interpretation of these words there arose the belief that Jesus would, at the resurrection, appear from the east, and hence that those buried with their faces upward and their heads to the west, would be in readiness to stand up with their faces toward their Judge.

Swift alludes to this custom in the account of Gulliver's voyage to Lilliput, where he says: "The inhabitants bury their dead with their heads directly downward because they hold an opinion, that in eleven thousand moons they are all to rise again, in which period the earth, which they conceive to be flat, will turn upside down, and by this means they shall at their resurrection be found ready standing on their feet."

[p. 269]

Sir Walter Raleigh referred to this superstition when he stood on the scaffold, and was about to be executed. After forgiving his executioner, there was a discussion as to the way he should face, some saying he should face the east. Raleigh then remarked: "So the heart be straight it is no matter which way the head lieth."

The east and west burial custom was practised by the ancient Greeks, and by the natives in some districts of Australia, although the latter people as a rule regarded the west as the abode of departed spirits, and therefore buried their dead facing that quarter.

The native Samoans and Fijians follow the same custom, believing that if the dead are buried with head east and feet west, the body at the resurrection would be in a position to walk straight onward to the abiding-place of the soul.

According to Schoolcraft, the Winnebago Indians buried their dead in a sitting posture with the face west, or at full length with the feet west, in order that they may look toward the happy land in the west. Other Indian tribes, notably the Indians of Kansas, practised this custom.

It was the Peruvian custom to bury the dead huddled up in a sitting posture with their faces turned toward the west, and in the funeral ritual of the Aztecs there is found a description of the

[p. 270]

first peril that the shade encountered on its journey to the abode of the dead, which they believed was illuminated by the sun when night enveloped the earth.

On the contrary, the Yumanas of South America were accustomed to bury their dead in a sitting posture facing the east, as they believed that in the east was the home of their supreme deity, who would one day take unto himself all true believers in him. The Guayanos have a similar belief and custom. The modern Ainus of Yezo bury their dead lying robed in white with heads to the east, because that is where the sun rises. The mediaeval Tartars raised a great mound over their graves, and placed therein a statue with its face turned eastward.

The Siamese believe that no one should sleep with his head to the west, as that is the position in which the dead are placed at burial. Lady Wilde calls attention to the curious customs, practised at the wake of the Irish peasants, which are derived from the ancient funeral ceremonies of the Egyptians. Particularly is this the case where, during the wake, a man and a woman appeared, one bearing the head of an ox, the other that of a cow. This strange custom is thought to represent the Egyptian gods Isis and Osiris waiting to receive the soul of the dead.

[p. 271]

In Wales the east wind is called the "wind of the dead men's feet," and the eastern portion of a churchyard was always regarded as the most honoured part. South, west, and north were next in favour, in their order, and suicides were buried with their heads to the north, as, in taking their own lives, they had forfeited the rights of the orthodox to a burial with face to the east. In rural parts of England it was the custom in ancient times to remark at the funeral service: "The dead ay go wi' the sun."

Even in our own country we see a survival of the universal belief in the proper orientation of a deceased person. Examination shows that the headstones in the old burial-grounds of Plymouth, Concord, and Deerfield, face the west, so that, at the resurrection, the dead will rise to face the Son of Man as He comes from out the east with great power and glory.

  

ORIENTATION

The subject of orientation is an extremely interesting one, and plays a prominent part in many of the customs and practices of the present day. In acknowledgment of the divinity of the Sun the Pagans turned to the east in prayer, and so constructed their temples that even the buildings themselves should pay homage to the rising sun.

[p. 272]

We learn from Josephus that as early as Solomon's time the temple at Jerusalem was oriented to the east with great care. It was open to the east, and closed absolutely to the west.

"In plan," says Keary, [*1] "it was like an Egyptian temple, the light from the sun at the equinox being free to come along an open passage to reach at last the Holy of Holies. There is evidence too that the entrance of the sunlight on the morning of the spring equinox formed part of the ceremonial; the high priest being in the naos, the worshippers with their backs to the sun could see him by means of the sunlight reflected from the jewels in his garments."

"Temples, with pillars that represented the trees of the sacred groves, had their chief portal almost universally looking toward the east. It is thought that this is due to the fact that the groves, and the temples which represented them, were both indicative of the Garden of Paradise. Again, the portals of Eden where God stationed the Cherubim to keep the way of the tree of life, was on the eastern side of the sacred grove. Not infrequently the approach to these temples was guarded by the figures of the compound sphinx." [*2]

The orientation of the Egyptian temples formed

[p. 273]

the basis first of the Greek, and later of the Latin temples of worship. Tylor [*1] tells us: "It was an Athenian custom for the temple to have its entrance east, looking out through which the divine image stood to behold the rising sun," but for the most part the Greek temples were oriented to the stars that heralded the sunrise, rather than to the orb of day itself.

In India, orientation plays an important part in the daily acts of worship of the Brahman. On rising each day he pays his devotion to the Sun. Standing on one foot, and resting the other against his ankle or heel, he faces the Sun, and stretches out his arms to it. At noon he again worships the Sun, and, sitting with his face to the east, reads his daily portion of the Veda. It is while looking toward the east that his offering of barley and water must be presented to the gods, and in consecrating the sacred fire and sacrificial implements, the east has a holy significance.

On the contrary, the worshippers of Kali, the Death Goddess, the murderous Thugs, regarded the west as sacred, and the Jews, in order that they might not seem to imitate the Pagans in their rites of orientation, placed the sanctuary of their temples toward the west.

It is in Egypt, however, that we find the custom

[p. 274]

of orientation most rigidly practised, and a conspicuous feature of temple architecture. The main idea of the builders seems to have been so to arrange them that the chief dates in the year from a solar standpoint should be clearly marked by the orientation of the building, i.e., the solstices and equinoxes.

The temples at Heliopolis and Abydos were unquestionably solstitial temples. The Pyramids of Gizeh were oriented to the equinoxes. Perhaps the most elaborate and important of all the Egyptian solar temples was the magnificent edifice erected at Karnak to the worship of the Sun-God, Amen-Ra. Sir J. Norman Lockyer has given us the following splendid description of this temple. [*1] Because it is a typical case of orientation, and one of the most interesting ruins in the world, the author takes the liberty of quoting it in full:

"The solar temple of Amen-Ra at Karnak is the finest Egyptian solar temple which remains open to our examination. It is beyond all question the most majestic ruin in the world. It covers about twice the area covered by St. Peter's at Rome, so that the whole structure was of a vastness absolutely unapproached in the modern ecclesiastical world. It is one of the most soul-inspiring temples which have ever been conceived

[p. 275]

or built by man. There is a sort of stone avenue in the centre giving a view towards the north-west, and this axis is something like five hundred yards in length. The whole object of the builder of the great temple at Karnak was to preserve that axis absolutely open, the point being that the axis should be absolutely open straight and true. The axis was directed towards the hills on the west side of the Nile where are located the tombs of the kings. From the entrance pylon the temple stretches through various halls of different sizes and details until at last at the extreme end what is called the Sanctuary, Naos, Adytum, or Holy of Holies is reached. The end of the temple at which the pylons are situated is open, the other closed.

"Every part of the temple was built to subserve a special object, viz., to limit the light which fell on its front into a narrow beam and to carry it to the other extremity of the temple into the sanctuary so that once a year when the sun set at the solstice the light is passed without interruption along the whole length of the temple finally illuminating the sanctuary in most resplendent fashion, and striking the sanctuary wall. The wall of the sanctuary opposite to the entrance of the temple was always blocked. The ray of light was narrowed as it progressed inward from the opening toward the sanctuary by a series of doors ingeniously

[p. 276]

arranged, that acted as the diaphragms of the telescope tube in concentrating the light rays. The reason for this was that the temple was virtually an astronomical observatory, and the idea was to obtain exactly the precise time of the solstice. The longer the beam of light used, the greater is the accuracy that can be obtained. The darker the sanctuary the more obvious will be the patch of light on the end wall, and the more easily can its position be located. It was important to do this two or three days near the solstice in order to get an idea of the exact time at which the solstice took place.

"We find that a narrow beam of sunlight coming through a narrow entrance some five hundred yards away from the door of the Holy of Holies would, provided the temple were properly oriented to the solstice, and provided the solstice occurred at the absolute moment of sunrise, or sunset, according to which the temple was being utilised, practically flash into the sanctuary, and remain there for about a couple of minutes, and then pass away.

"We may conclude that there was some purpose of utility to be served, and the solar temples could have been used undoubtedly among other things for determining the exact length of the solar year. The magnificent burst of light at sunset into the

[p. 277]

sanctuary would show that a new true solar year was beginning. If the Egyptians wished to use the temple for ceremonial purposes, the magnificent beam of light thrown into the temple at the sunset hour would give them opportunities and even suggestions for so doing; for instance, they might place an image of the god in the sanctuary, and allow the light to flash upon it. We should have a 'manifestation of Ra' with a vengeance, during the brief time the white flood of sunlight fell on it. Be it remembered that in the dry and clear air of Egypt, the sun casts a shadow five seconds after the first little point of it has been seen above the horizon, so that at sunrise and sunset in Egypt the light is very strong, and not tempered as with us."

An extremely interesting feature of Egyptian temple orientation, although it only pertains to temples dedicated to star worship, is found in the fact that the precession of the equinoxes necessitated an alteration of the axis of the temple at long intervals to accommodate the change of direction of the star to which the temple was originally oriented.

At Luxor, and many other places in Egypt, there are to be seen evidences of this change, a later axis having been constructed to meet the new requirements.

In the western world, in ancient times, we find

[p. 278]

the same rites of orientation observed and practised as prevailed in the Orient. Among the Sun-worshipping Peruvians the villages were so laid out that they sloped eastward so that the people when they rose each day might behold first of all the deity they worshipped. In the temple of the Sun at Cuzco, the great golden disk that represented the sun was so placed that it received the rising rays of the orb of day, and reflected its light through the edifice erected to its worship.

In ancient Mexico the inhabitants faced the east when they knelt in prayer, as their brother worshippers did in the far east, and though the doors of their temples faced westward, the altar itself was situated in the east. Even the Christianised Pueblo Indians face the east when rising, a survival of their ancient Sun worship. The Sun chief of the Natchez Indians of Louisiana always smoked toward the Sun each morning. The Comanche Indians, when about to take the warpath, present their weapons to the Sun, that their deity may bestow his blessing upon them. The ancient cave temples of the Apalachees of Florida faced eastward, and on festival days the priest waited till the rays of the sun had entered the temple before beginning the ceremonial chants.

According to Tylor, [*1] the ceremony of orientation

[p. 279]

was unknown in primitive Christianity, but it developed within its first four centuries. It became an accepted custom to turn in prayer toward the east as the auspicious and mystic region of the Light of the World, the Sun of Righteousness, not for the Pagan purpose of adoring the sun itself, and even to-day the boy choristers face the east when they chant the "Gloria."

Orientation played an important part also in the rite of baptism. In ancient times he who was about to embrace the faith faced the west and renounced Satan, with gestures of abhorrence. Then, turning to the east, he acknowledged his faith in Christ, and declared his allegiance to Him. From the fifth century to the time of the Renaissance, the orientation of Christian churches was generally carried out. According to St. John of Damascus, the mystical reasons for this practice were that the crucified Saviour of Mankind faced westward, hence it is fitting that Christians in paying their devotions to Him should face eastward. Again, in the sacred writings, Jesus is called "the east" (oriens ex alto) and the hope is expressed that Christians at the last day will see Christ descending in the east. Finally, Christians, when turning to the east during prayer, establish a difference between themselves and the Jews and

[p. 280]

heretics, for the Jews when praying face west, and certain heretics south, and others north.

In the ninth century there was a strong protest against orientation, but the custom revived later, and to-day all our churches are more or less oriented, particularly those of the Romish and English branches of the Christian Church.

"Any church," says Keary, [*1] "that is properly built, will have its axis pointing to the rising of the sun on the Saint's day, i.e., a church dedicated to St. John should not parallel a church dedicated to St. Peter.

"In regard to St. Peter's at Rome, we read that so exactly due east and west was the Basilica, that on the vernal equinox the great doors of the porch of the quadriporticus were thrown open at sunrise, and also the eastern doors of the church itself, and as the sun rose, its rays passed through the outer doors, then through the inner doors, and penetrating straight through the nave, illuminated the High Altar."

There is little doubt that the stones at Stonehenge were so arranged that at sunrise at the summer solstice the shadow of one stone fell exactly on the stone in the centre of the circle, indicating to the priests that the new year had begun. It is thought that fires were lighted on

[p. 281]

this occasion to flash the important news through the country.

Orientation plays an important part in many games and customs in vogue to-day. In the ring games of children, particularly, we see survivals of ancient Sun worship; as, for instance, in the games where the children sing, as they circle round, "Oats, peas, beans, and barley grow," and "Here we go 'round the mulberry bush." The people of early times held that going sunwise was good and lucky, while to move in the contrary direction was inauspicious. The lama monk whirls his praying cylinder in one direction on this account, and fears that some one will turn it contrariwise, in which case it would lose its virtue. These monks also build up heaps of stones in the road, and uniformly pass them on one side as they proceed in one direction, and on the opposite side in returning, in imitation of the sun's circuit.

In India and Ceylon the same circumambulatory customs were practised. As we have seen, it was an old Irish and Scotch custom to go "deazil" or sunwise round houses and graves, and to turn the body in this way at the beginning and end of journeys for luck, as well as at weddings and various ceremonies.

The Irish and Scotch peasants always went westward round a holy well, following the course of the

[p. 282]

sun, and creeping on their hands and knees, as did the ancient Persians when offering homage at sacred fountains. In the mystic dances performed at the Baal festivals the gyrations of the dancers were always westward in the track of the sun, for the dance was part of the ancient ritual of Sun worship. To turn the opposite way, that is against the sun, was considered very unlucky, and was supposed to be an act intimately connected with the purposes of the evil one. Witches were said to dance that way.

In a religious observance called "paying rounds," much practised by the Irish peasantry when they essayed to cure diseases or bodily ailments, one finds an interesting instance of the custom of going sunwise to produce auspicious results.

It is a general popular belief throughout the United States that in making cake the eggs, or indeed the whole mixture, must be stirred or beaten from beginning to end in the same direction in which the stirring began, or the cake will not be light, and that a custard will curdle if the stirring motion is reversed. Often it is said that the stirring must be sunwise, the popular expression for this motion being "with the sun." The same notion is found in Newfoundland and Scotland.

Some matrons in Northern Ohio say that, to

[p. 283]

insure good bread, the dough should be stirred with the sun, and that yeast should be made as near sunrise as possible to secure lightness. In New Harbour, Nova Scotia, it is customary in getting off small boats to take pains to start from east to west, and, when the wind will permit, the same custom is observed in getting large schooners under way.

The idea of sunwise movement often appears in the common household treatment of diseases. Before the days of massage, in rubbing for rheumatic or other pains, it was thought best to rub from left to right. It is also said that a corn or wen may be removed by rubbing "with the moon," if by night, and "with the sun," if by day. It is thought that the sun or moon, as the case may be, will draw away all pain and enlargement.

Doubtless a close study of local customs prevailing in different parts of the world will reveal many similar examples and survivals of Sun worship. The subject is an exceedingly interesting one, and reveals above all else the great hold that Sun worship once held on the peoples of the earth.

Footnotes

^267:1 Primitive Culture, Edward B. Tylor.

^272:1 The Dawn of History, C. F. Keary.

^272:2 The Origin of Pagan Idolatry, G. S. Faber.

^273:1 Primitive Culture, Edward B. Tylor.

^274:1 The Dawn of Astronomy, Sir Norman Lockyer.

^278:1 Primitive Culture, Edward B. Tylor.

^280:1 The Dawn of History, C. F. Keary.

Sun Lore of All Ages, by William Tyler Olcott, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 284] [p. 285]

[p. 286] [p. 287]

  

Chapter XII

  

Emblematic and Symbolic Forms of the Sun

THERE is much of interest in the study of the symbolic forms of the sun, derived as they are from the mythology and worship of the ancients. Many of the solar symbols enter into designs that embellish works of art of ancient and modern production, but, as symbolism and worship are closely correlated, it is in the study of ecclesiastical architecture, and the structural and artistic adornment of edifices dedicated to worship, that we find a fertile field for tracing these emblems and symbols to their sources.

A knowledge of the origin and true significance of symbolic forms lends interest to many emblems common in the everyday life of the present time, and, in some cases, reveals the curious fact and incongruity of the combination of pagan symbols of worship and anti-pagan ritual. This state of affairs is in evidence in practically all of the

[p. 288]

modern church edifices. The meaning of these symbols was lost sight of as the wave of Christianity swept onward, and yet so great was the power that these mute forms at one time possessed over men, that, in spite of the decline and the utter extinction of the worship that created them, they continued to live throughout the ages, and many of them in the light of modern times have attained an altered significance, and are as greatly revered and adored to-day as in the ancient days of heathendom.

Although the Canaanite symbol for the sun was an upright stone, the most ancient and popular solar symbol seems to have been the eye. This symbol was naturally suggested by, and in conformity to, the ancient idea that the sun was an all-seeing god, whose penetrating gaze revealed everything that was visible to man. The sun, in short, possessed to primitive minds all the attributes of a great eye gazing down upon the earth.

To the Persians the sun was the eye of Ormuzd. To the Egyptians it was the right eye of Demiurge, and in the Book of the Dead the sun is often represented as an eye provided with wings and feet.

To the ancient Hindus the sun was the eye of Varuna. To the Greeks it was the eye of Zeus, and the early Teutons regarded it as the eye of Wuotan, or Woden. Greek mythology, in fact,

[p. 289]

shows us a race of sun people, the Cyclops, huge giants possessing but one great eye in the centre of their foreheads.

Not only was the sun regarded as a symbol of the eye of the Supreme Being, but in some cases it was thought to represent his full face and countenance.

Vieing in importance with the eye symbol of the sun was the wheel symbol. This was a very ancient conception, and, in this case, the rays of the sun were represented by the spokes of the wheel. As the sun's motion was a matter of great concern to the ancients, its motive power was a subject of much conjecture, and there emerged the fancy that the sun was drawn across the sky by a number of spirited steeds. According to Hindu myth these steeds of the sun were appropriately red or golden in colour.

The symbol of the sun at Sippara was a small circle with four triangular rays, the four angles between being occupied by radiating lines, and the whole circumscribed by a larger circle. The same symbol occurs repeatedly upon the shell gorgets of the ancient Mound-Builders of the western continent. [*1]

[p. 290]

In Greece the symbols of Helios, the Sun-God, were horses' heads, a crown of seven rays, a cornucopia, and a ripened fruit; while the symbols of Apollo were a wolf, swan, stag, dolphin, laurel, and lyre. The ancient Chinese solar symbol was a raven in a circle.

Given the symbol of a wheel, and that of the Sun drawn by dashing steeds, we find in the combination of these symbols the image of the chariot of the Sun, around which so many ancient myths and legends cluster. From the vehicle it was but a step of the imagination to regard the Sun as the charioteer, the supreme deity, driving his flaming car each day across the firmament. The warlike propensities of primitive man were responsible for another very early symbol of the sun, that of a highly burnished shield, while, in a passage of the Persian national epic by Firdusi, the sun is regarded as a golden key which is lost during the night, and the lighting up of the sun each morning was looked upon as an unlocking of the imprisoned orb of day.

Egypt has probably given us more symbols of the sun than any other country. This is doubtless because the Egyptians had a more elaborate form of Sun worship than existed in any other land, in that the different aspects of the sun were, as we have seen, deified. The best-known Egyptian

[p. 291]

solar symbols were the scarabaeus, hawk and globe, lion, and crocodile.

Taking them up in order, the scarabaeus or beetle was, according to Pliny, worshipped throughout the greater part of Egypt. It was a symbol particularly sacred to the sun, and is often represented in a boat with wings extended, holding in its claws the globe of the sun. Horapollo claims it was chosen as a solar symbol, owing to the fact that the creature had thirty toes, which equals the number of days in the ordinary solar month. Frequently the claws are represented as clasping a globe, emblematic of the action of the Sun-God Ra at mid-day.

In the great temple at Thebes, a scarab has been recovered with two heads, one of a ram, the symbol of Amen or Ammon, the god of Thebes, the other of the hawk, the symbol of the  Sun-God Horus, holding in its claws a globe emblematic of the universe. This scarab has been thought to symbolise The Scarab the rising sun, and the coming of the Beetle spring sun of the vernal equinox in the zodiacal sign of the ram.

Pliny avers that the claim of the scarab as a solar symbol rests on the fact that in this insect there is some resemblance to the operations of the sun, as one species forms itself into a ball and rolls

[p. 292]

itself along. The sculptures indicate clearly that the scarabaeus represents the orb of the sun. The earliest scarabs date back to about 3900 B.C., and they were regarded as a sacred symbol for a period of over three thousand years. Inasmuch as the scarab was a solar symbol, it was likewise an emblem of immortality, and thus this symbol in its day closely resembled in its true significance the Christian symbol of the cross. The scarab was especially sacred to the Sun-God Amen-Ra, and further symbolised creative and fertilising power: It was the first life appearing after the annual inundation of the river Nile.

Of equal importance to the beetle as a symbol of the sun in Egypt was the hawk, or the hawk and globe, sacred as the emblem of the solar deity. The Sun-God Ra was generally represented as a man with a hawk's head surmounted by a globe or disk of the sun from which an asp issued, and the hawk was particularly known as the type of the sun, worshipped at Heliopolis as the sacred bird, and the representative of the deity of the place.

The winged disk was likewise a solar symbol, and highly regarded by the ancient Egyptians, who considered it an emblem of divine protection. It typified the sun's light and power, transported to the earth on the wings of a bird (possibly the hawk), and the emblem appears on many of the

[p. 293]

temple walls and over the doorway of numerous dwellings in Egypt.

Porphyry says the hawk was dedicated to the sun, being the symbol of light and spirit, because of the quickness of its motion, and its ascent to the higher regions of the air. Horapollo thinks that it was chosen as a type of that luminary from its being able to look more intently towards its rays than any other bird, whence also under the form of a hawk they depicted the sun as the Lord of Vision.

Macrobius, Proclus, Horapollo, and others state that the lion was a symbol of the sun, and this is substantiated by the sculptures. Macrobius claimed further that the Egyptians employed the lion to represent that part of the heavens where the sun was in its greatest force during its annual revolution, the zodiacal sign Leo being called the "abode of the Sun."

The Egyptians, Hindus, Chaldeans, Persians, and Celts all regarded the lion as a solar symbol. Brown [*1] tells us: "In the inscriptions of Daryavush I. at El-Khargeh, the oasis of Ammon, in the Libyan desert, the great god Amen-Ra, the Invisible god revealed in the sun god, is addressed as 'the Lion of the double lions.' These two lions, two brothers, the two lion gods, are two solar

[p. 294]

phases, as diurnal and nocturnal, Har and Set, Shu and Tefuut, and as there is but one solar orb, so he is the lion of the double lions. In the funeral ritual the Osirian, or soul seeking divine union and communion with the sun god, prays: 'Let me not be surpassed by the Lion god: Oh, the Lion of the sun, who lifts his arm in the hill [of heaven]' and exclaims: 'I am the Lions, I am the sun. The white lion is the phallus of the sun.'"

The lion and sun form the familiar national standard of Persia, and a Persian coin by Tavernier shows the sun, horned and radiate, rising over the back of a lion.

In many parts of Egypt, in ancient times, the crocodile appears to have been worshipped. This worship was intimately connected with Sun worship, and rested on the analogy between the natural habits of the crocodile and the course of the sun;--as the crocodile spends its days on the land, and at night-fall seeks the water, so the sun, after running its daily course, sinks at evening into the sea. The crocodile, therefore, came to be regarded as a solar symbol, and so figures on the sculptures.

The cat was a conspicuous solar symbol in Egypt. The female of the species was emblematic of Bast or Bubastis, a solar deity, and the male symbolised the great Sun-God Ra.

[p. 295]

The Egyptians also represented the sun by the figure of a man sailing in a ship upon the ocean. Sometimes the ship was supported on the back of a crocodile, and again the man appeared floating in the ship, but at the same time seated upon the aquatic lotus, and often the ship was omitted, and the man was supported simply by the lotus. Sometimes the man's place in the calyx of the lotus plant is occupied by the figure of a child, and in the Bembini table, a frog is figured squatting on the floating lotus leaf in place of the man or child.

The Egyptians also represented the sun and moon, Osiris and Isis, as the ox and the cow, and Lady Wilde [*1] tells us that these were used at the Irish wake ceremonials until very recently. "There is perhaps," says Faber, [*2] "no part of the Gentile world in which the bull and the cow were not highly reverenced, and considered in the light of holy and mysterious symbols. Among the Chinese, the great father Fohi, whose whole history proves him to be the scriptural Noah, is feigned to have had the head of a bull. In the neighbouring empire of Japan, this ancient personage is venerated under the title of 'ox-headed prince of heaven,' and his figure is here again that of a man having the horns of a bull."

[p. 296]

Bearing in mind the nature and meaning of these solar symbols, the Egyptian sculptures have, for those who study them, a significance that renders them doubly interesting.

The Sun-Gods of the Hindus were represented as seated on the sacred lotus, or floating on the surface of the great deep, either on a leaf, or a huge serpent coiled up in a boatlike form.

In Greece there were legends of the voyage of the solar deity over the ocean, borne in a golden cup, originated, we are told, from the circumstance of the yellow or golden cup of the lotus being employed to represent the ship of the Sun. Indeed, in Hindustan, the cup of the lotus and the ship of the Sun-God Siva mean the same thing. "So strongly," says Faber, [*1] "was the idea of a mariner sun impressed upon the minds of the ancient Pagans, that they even transferred it to the sphere. Not content with making the sun sail over the ocean in a ship, they considered the whole solar system as one large vessel in which the seven planets act as sailors, while the sun as the fountain of ethereal light presides as the pilot or captain.

"These eight celestial mariners who navigate the ship of the sphere are clearly the astronomical representatives of the eight great gods of Egypt, all of whom, including the sun as their head, were

[p. 297]

wont, according to Porphyry, to be depicted not standing on dry land, but sailing over the ocean in a ship."

The natives of Central America represented the sun by a human head, encircled by diverging rays, and with a great open mouth. This solar symbol was widely spread in all that region. In this representation the tongue is protruding, which signifies that the sun lives and speaks. This is clearly evidenced in the famous Aztec Calendar Stone (Calendario Azteco), also called "Stone of the Sun," which was recovered about the middle of the seventeenth century in the subsoil of the Plaza Major, Mexico City. Terry's Guide-Book on Mexico thus describes this interesting relic of antiquity:

"A huge rectangular parallelopipedon of basaltic porphyry, twenty-two feet in diameter, by three feet thick, which weighs twenty-four tons is one of the most interesting of the Aztec relics . . . . This immense specimen, which resembles an irregular mill-stone with a disk carved on it in low relief, evidently served the Aztecs as a calendar stone, and sun-dial. The face is carved with chronological and astronomical signs in geometrical order. The central figure, with a protruding tongue, represents the sun 'Tonatiuh'; the segments radiating toward the edge of the disk are symbolic of its rays.

[p. 298]

"Encircling this central figure are seven rings of unequal widths; from the third to the seventh they are incomplete. The inner ring represents two groups of signs, each group containing four symbols. Above the face is an arrowhead, symbolic of the wind, and beneath it a cluster of balls and hieroglyphs. In the rectangles above and below the eagle claws at the right and left are symbols representing the four elements, Air, Fire, Water, and Earth. The symbols on both sides of the upper arrowhead are supposed to represent the years. Five ornamental disks fill the spaces between the symbols. The rectangles of the second ring contain the names of the days of the Aztec month, they begin above the point of the arrowhead and continue toward the left. . . . The third ring contains forty small squares each with five balls supposed to represent days--two hundred in all. Crossing this ring and extending to the sixth are four large arrowheads. The latter ring is the largest of all, and is formed by two huge serpents whose tails terminate in arrowheads ornamented with feathers. The chronological figures between the ends of the tails are thought to correspond to the year 1479 of our era. The human heads ornamented with feathers, eagle claws, disks, ear pendants, and what not represent the gods, (at the left) Tonatiuh, the sun, and (at

[p. 299]

the right) Quetzalcoatl, god of the air. The rim of the huge stone is adorned with conical glyptics, half stars and balls symbolic of the worlds and stars. . . . By means of this Calendario the priests kept their own records, regulated the festivals and seasons of sacrifices, and made their astronomical calculations. The symbols show that they had the means of settling the hours of the day with precision, the periods of the solstices and equinoxes, and that of the transit of the sun across the zenith of Mexico."

Prescott describes this stone in his Conquest of Mexico, and it is now on exhibition in the National Museum of the City of Mexico.

In the sculptures of the ancient Toltecs, the Sun- and Moon-Gods are represented by the symbols of the tiger and the hare respectively.

Akin to the solar symbols of the Canaanites, the primitive Mexicans erected columns of stone elaborately carved. These symbolised the sun, and as Reville puts it, "The sun traces each day the shadow of these monoliths upon the soil. He appears to caress and love them, regarding them as his fellow-workers in measuring time." [*1]

Many of the mystic signs common to pagan worship are in evidence to-day, "and the High Churchman decorates the edifice in which he

[p. 300]

officiates with symbols similar to those which awed the worshippers of Ashur, Ishtar, or the sun." [*1]

Chief among these ecclesiastical solar symbols is the cross, symbol of the Christian faith, a symbol that antedated the birth of Christ, and one that found its origin in solar worship. It occurs upon the monuments and utensils of every primitive people, from China to Yucatan. It may be asked, how did the cross, symbol of the sun, originate? The following ingenious explanation has been offered:

"If any one will observe carefully a lamp, or other bright light, with partially closed eyes, the answer will be obvious. The rays which appear to proceed from the luminous point form a cross of some kind. This is due to the reflection from the eyelashes, and edges of the eyelids. The evolution of the sun symbol seems to have been as follows: He was first represented by a circle or disk as he appears when near the horizon. Observations made when he was shining brightly revealed the crossed rays. This led to a combination of the circle and cross. If this is correct the swastika is a modification of the circle and inscribed cross. Not the least remarkable feature of this subject is the fact that the most ancient and universal symbol of the physical sun should

[p. 301]

for entirely independent reasons continue in use as the sign of the Sun of Righteousness, and the Light of the World."

The simple cross, with perpendicular and transverse arms of equal length, represents the nave and spokes of the solar wheel, sending forth its rays in all directions. In the ancient parish church of Bebington, Cheshire, England, there is to be seen to this day not only the solar wheel, as one of the adornments of the reredos, but deltas, acorns, and Maltese crosses (all of which are pagan symbols) enter profusely into the decorative features of the edifice.

One of the oldest and most widely occurring forms of the cross is the cross with crampons turned to right and left, commonly known as the "swastika,"  the suavastika of India, the Thor's hammer of Western Europe. Professor Max Muller thinks that this symbol represents the vernal sun, and that it is an emblem of life, health, and creative energy. It is thought to have arisen from the conception of the sun as a rolling wheel.

The halo depicted as encircling the heads of the saints, and those endowed with holy attributes, is clearly a solar symbol, and the wheel symbol suggested by the disk of the sun was often used as an emblem of God.

[p. 302]

In the chancel of a church in New England to-day we see in the mural decorations symbols that typify the ancient deification of the Sun, and originated from that worship, such as the disk fringed  with darting rays, the sun symbol, in the centre of which is the Christ name symbol, a strange and incongruous combining of the symbols of antagonistic and widely differing cults.

In another church in the same locality is the symbol of the six-pointed star, enclosing the all-seeing eye. This double equilateral triangle is one of the most sacred of all the emblems of Pythagoras, and was revered for ages as the seal of King Solomon. It is also an important Masonic emblem.

The strange part of this study of symbolism is that the significance of these heathen emblems should be utterly meaningless to the multitudes who worship in their sight, which indicates an indifference to a knowledge of symbolism not in accord with the desire oftentimes emphasised for it, and the great number of emblems which embellish and adorn modern ecclesiastical edifices.

The emblems of heraldry perpetuate the symbolism expressive of the solar worship of primitive times. We see the Royal Arms of England, supported by the solar lion and the lunar unicorn.

[p. 303]

"These two creatures," says Brown, "are naturally antagonistic. In the ancient myth, the Unicorn, when rushing at the Lion, sticks his horn fast in a mythic Tree, behind which his opponent has taken refuge, and the Lion coming round devours him whilst thus defenceless. This is the explanation of the myth. The Lion-Sun flies from the rising Unicorn-Moon, and hides behind the Tree or Grove of the Under-world, the Moon pursues, and sinking in his turn, is caught in this mysterious Tree, and sunslain." [*1]

In many escutcheons are to be seen solar symbols already referred to, as, for instance, in the cut, the escutcheon of a Greek-letter fraternity shows the winged sun disk and the all-seeing eye.

In astrology also, solar symbolism plays an important part, such as "the rules which connect the sun with gold, with heliotrope and paeony, with the cock which heralds day, and with magnanimous animals such as the lion and bull."

There is to be found in certain old brick houses in England a curious solar symbol. It consists of a flat piece of iron five or six inches in length, shaped somewhat like the letter "S," which was placed upon the house walls about the line of division between the

[p. 304]

first and second stories. It is still used in Herefordshire. There, it is said that these irons are in the nature of talismans, and are supposed to protect the house from fire and collapse.

Brown tells us that "Masonic tradition is but one of the numerous ancient allegories of the yearly passage of the personified sun among the twelve constellations of the zodiac, being founded on a system of astronomical symbols and emblems, employed to teach the great truths of omnipotent God and immortality." [*1] Its symbolism, therefore, is closely associated with solar symbolism and interesting to note in this connection. The word "Masonry" is said to be derived from a Greek word which signifies "I am in the midst of heaven," alluding to the sun. Others derive it from the ancient Egyptian "Phre," the sun, and "Mas," a child, Phre-mas, i.e., children of the sun, or sons of light. From this we get our word "Freemason."

Masons are instructed to travel eastward in search of light, as the sun rises in the east. The initiation into all the ancient mysteries was a drama founded on the astronomical allegory of the death and resurrection of the Sun, and impressed on the mind of the candidate the unity of God and the immortality of man. These facts are taught in the ritual of the Third Degree.

[p. 305]

The Sun, overwhelmed by the three autumn months, returns to life at the vernal equinox, and is exalted at the summer solstice. In this drama the candidate was required to represent the Sun, and a solar significance characterises the whole ritual.

The following references to the symbolism of Masonry are taken from Stellar Theology by Robert Brown, Jr.

"The Lodge should be situated East and West, because the Sun, the glory of the Lord, rises in the East and sets in the West. A lodge has three lights situated in the East, West, and South. The Master's place is in the East, whence the sun rises, the Senior Warden's in the South, the point the sun occupies at mid-day.

"E.A.M. signifies the sun, F.C.M. the moon, and M.M. the sun, Benevolent God of Fire.

"O.G.M.H.A. is derived from two roots signifying the origin or manifestation of light, also he who was, and is. The source of eternal light, the sun taken as an emblem of Deity.

"O.G.M.H.A. represents the sun. The three steps delineated on the master's carpet have an obvious reference to the three steps or degrees by which the initiated becomes a Master-mason. They allude to the constellations Taurus, Gemini, and Cancer (emblematic of three steps), by means

[p. 306]

of which the sun ascends to the summit of the Royal Arch.

"The emblem of the Blazing Star alludes to the Sun as a symbol of Deity. The rite of Circumambulation has a direct solar allusion, as it was always performed from right to left, in imitation of the apparent course of the sun from East to West by way of the South.

"Masons celebrate June 24th and December 27th. These dates have a purely astronomic significance, and refer to the summer and winter solstice, the periods of great festivals and celebrations throughout the ancient world.

"The symbol of the all-seeing eye is distinctly solar in its character. In most of the ancient languages of Asia, eye and sun are expressed by the same word. In like manner Masons have emblematically represented the omniscience of the great Architect of the Universe.

"The significance of the Pillars of the Porch is of interest. In every Lodge there are two pillars surmounted by globes. These represent the pillars in the porch of King Solomon's temple. The Egyptian temples always contained two such pillars, one called 'Boaz,' meaning the sun, on the north side, the other 'Jachin,' referring to the moon, on the south.

"The corner-stone of the Lodge is placed in the

[p. 307]

[paragraph continues] North-East, as the sun on June 21st rises in the North-East."

According to Professor Worsaal, the ring cross is a symbol of the sun, and belongs to the later stone age of Scandinavia. It was also the Chaldean solar symbol. The same writer places amongst the emblems of the later bronze age the symbol of the wheel cross, which is considered a symbol of the sun.

The subject of solar symbolism has been only briefly touched upon in the foregoing, and a close study of its many features affords a rich field for research that should prove of fascinating interest to scholars and antiquarians alike.

 

 

Footnotes

^289:1 The Moqui Indian Symbol of the sun is a Greek cross with a small circle in the centre, in which are three marks to indicate the eyes and mouth of a face.

^293:1 The Lion and the Unicorn, Robert Brown, Jr.

^295:1 Ancient Legends of Ireland, Lady Wilde.

^295:2 The Origin of Pagan Idolatry, George Stanley Faber.

^296:1 The Origin of Pagan Idolatry, George Stanley Faber.

^299:1 Native Races of Mexico and Peru, Albert Reville.

^300:1 Ancient Faiths, Thomas Inman.

^303:1 The Unicorn, Robert Brown, Jr.

^304:1 Stellar Theology, Robert Brown, Jr.

 

    


===== BOOK: sma.txt =====


    
Secret Societies of the Middle Ages, by Thomas Keightley, [1837], at sacred-texts.com

  

SECRET SOCIETIES OF THE MIDDLE AGES.

  

by Thomas Keightley

  

Charles Knight & Co., London

  

[1837]

Scanned at sacred-texts.com, April 2006. Proofed and formatted by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain because it was published prior to 1923.

     
Secret Societies of the Middle Ages, by Thomas Keightley, [1837], at sacred-texts.com

[p. vii]

  

CONTENTS

           

       Page

     
      Introduction

       <page 1>

     
      
   THE ASSASSINS.

        

     
      
   CHAPTER I.

        

     
      State of the   World in the Seventh Century--Western Empire--Eastern   Empire--Persia--Arabia--Mohammed--His probable Motives--Character of his   Religion--The Koran

       <page 13>

     
      
   CHAPTER II.

        

     
      Origin of the Khalifat--The   first Khalifs--Extent of the Arabian Empire--Schism among the   Mohammedans--Soonees and Sheahs--Sects of the latter--The Keissanee--The   Zeidites--The Ghoollat--The Imamee--Sects of the Imamee--Their political   Character--The Carmathites--Origin of the Fatimite Khalifs--Secret Society at   Cairo--Doctrines taught in it--Its Decline

       <page 21>

     
      
   CHAPTER III.

        

     
      Ali of Rei--His   son Hassan Sabah--Hassan sent to study at Nishaboor--Meets there Omar Khiam and   Nizam-al-Moolk--Agreement made by them--Hassan introduced by Nizam to Sultan   Malek Shah--Obliged to leave the Court--Anecdote of him--His own account of   his Conversion--Goes to Egypt--Returns to Persia--Makes himself Master of   Alamoot

       <page 43>

     
      [p. viii]

        

     
       

       Page

     
      
   CHAPTER IV.

        

     
      Description of   Alamoot--Fruitless attempts to recover it--Extension of the Ismailite   Power--The Ismailites in Syria--Attempt on the Life of Aboo-Hard   Issa--Treaty made with Sultan Sanjar--Death of Hassan--His Character

       <page 56>

     
      
   CHAPTER V.

        

     
      Organization of   the Society--Names given to the Ismailites--Origin of the name   Assassin--Marco Polo's description of the Paradise of the Old Man of the Mountain--Description   of it given by Arabian writers Instances of the obedience of the Fedavee

       <page 66>

     
      
   CHAPTER VI.

        

     
      Keah   Buzoorg Oomeid--Affairs of the Society in Persia--They acquire the Castle of Banias   in Syria--Attempt to betray Damascus to the Crusaders--Murders committed   during the reign of Keah Buzoorg

       <page 84>

     
      
   CHAPTER VII.

        

     
      Keah   Mohammed--Murder of the Khalif--Castles gained in Syria--Ismailite   Confession of Faith--Mohammed's Son Hassan gives himself out for the promised   Imam--His followers punished--Succession of Hassan--He abolishes the   Law--Pretends to be descended from the Prophet--Is murdered

       <page 93>

     
      
   CHAPTER VIII.

        

     
      Mohammed   II.--Anecdote of the Imam Fakhr-ed-deen--Noor-ed-deen--Conquest of   Egypt--Attempt on the Life of Saladin

       <page 102>

     
      
   CHAPTER IX.

        

     
      Sinan the   Dai-al Kebir of Syria--Offers to become a Christian--His Ambassador murdered   by the Templars

        

     
      [p. ix]

        

     
       

       Page

     
      --Cardinal de   Vitry's Account of the Assassins--Murder of the Marquis of   Montferrat--Defence of King Richard 

       <page 114>

     
      
   CHAPTER X.

        

     
      Death of   Jellal-ed-deen--Character of Ala-ed-deen, his successor--The Sheikh Jemal-ed-deen--The   Astronomer Nasir-ed-deen--The Vizir Sheref-al-Moolk--Death of   Ala-ed-deen--Succession of Rukn-ed-deen, the last Sheikh-al-Jebal

       <page 148>

     
      
   CHAPTER XI.

        

     
      The   Mongols--Hoolagoo sent against the Ismailites--Rukn-ed-deen submits--Capture   of Alamoot--Destruction of the Library--Fate of Rukn-ed-deen--Massacre of the   Ismailites--St. Louis and the Assassins--Mission for the Conversion of   the People of Kuhistan--Conclusion

       <page 156>

     
      
   THE TEMPLARS.

        

     
      
   CHAPTER I.

        

     
      Introduction--The   Crusades--Wrong Ideas respecting their Origin--True Causes of   them--Pilgrimage--Pilgrimage of Frotmond--Of the Count of Anjou--Striking   Difference between the Christianity of the East and that of the West--Causes   of their different Characters--Feudalism--The Extent and Force of this   Principle

       <page 169>

     
      
   CHAPTER II.

        

     
      First Hospital   at Jerusalem--Church of Santa Maria de Latina--Hospital of St. John--The   Hospitallers--Origin of the Templars--Their original Poverty--They acquire Consideration--St   Bernard--His Character

        

     
      [p. x]

        

     
       

       Page

     
      of the   Templars--The Order approved of and confirmed by the Council of   Troyes--Proofs of the Esteem in which they were held

       <page 185>

     
      
   CHAPTER III.

        

     
      Return of the Templars   to the East--Exoneration and Refutation of the Charge of a Connection with   the Ismailites--Actions of the Templars--Crusade of Louis VII.--Siege of   Ascalon--Sale of Nassir-ed-deen--Corruption of the Hospitallers--The Bull, Omne Datum Optimum--Refusal of the   Templars to march against Egypt--Murder of the Ismailite Envoy

       <page 199>

     
      
   CHAPTER IV.

        

     
      Heroism of the   Templars and Hospitallers--Battle of Hittin--Crusade of Richard of England and   Philip of France--Corruption of the Order--Pope Innocent III. writes a Letter   of Censure--Frederic II.--Great Slaughter of the Templars--Henry III. of   England and the Templars--Power of the Templars in Moravia--Slaughter of them   by the Hospitallers--Fall of Acre

       <page 210>

     
      
   CHAPTER V.

        

     
      Classes of the   Templars--The Knights--Their Qualifications--Mode of Reception--Dress and   Arms of the Knight--Mode of Burial--The Chaplains--Mode of   Reception--Dress--Duties and Privileges--The Serving-Brethren--Mode of   Reception--Their Duties--The Affiliated--Causes and Advantages of   Affiliation--The Donates and Oblates

       <page 221>

     
      
   CHAPTER VI.

        

     
      Provinces of   the Order--Eastern Provinces--Jerusalem--Houses of this Province--Tripolis--Antioch--Cyprus--Western   Provinces--Portugal--Castile and Leon-Aragon--France and   Auvergne--Normandy--Aquitaine--Provence--England--Germany--Upper and Central   Italy--Apulia and Sicily

       <page 242>

     
      [p. xi]

        

     
       

       Page

     
      
   CHAPTER VII.

        

     
      Officers of the   Order--The Master--Mode of Election--His Rights and Privileges--Restraints on   him--The Seneschal--The Marshal--The Treasurer--The Draper--The   Turcopilar--Great-Priors--Commanders--Visitors--Sub-Marshal--Standard-bearer

       <page 253>

     
      
   CHAPTER VIII.

        

     
      Chapters--Mode   of holding them--Templars' Mode of Living--Amusements--Conduct in War

       <page 266>

     
      
   CHAPTER IX.

        

     
      Molay elected   Master--Last attempt of the Christians in Syria--Conduct of the Three Military   Orders--Philip the Fair and Pope Boniface VIII.--Seizure of the   Pope--Election of Clement V.--The Papal See removed to France--Causes of   Philip's enmity to the Templars--Arrival of Molay in France--His interviews   with the Pope--Charges made against the Templars--Seizure of the   Knights--Proceedings in England--Nature of the Charges against the Order

       <page 276>

     
      
   CHAPTER X.

        

     
      Examination of   the captive Knights--Different kinds of Torture--Causes of Confession--What   Confessions were made--Templars brought before the Pope--Their   Declarations--Papal Commission--Molay brought before it--Ponsard de   Gisi--Defenders of the Order--Act of Accusation--Heads of Defence--Witnesses   against the Order--Fifty-four Templars committed to the Flames at   Paris--Remarkable words of Aymeric de Villars-le-Duc--Templars burnt in other   places--Further Examinations--The Head worshipped by the Templars--John de   Pollincourt--Peter de la Palu

       <page 293>

     
      
   CHAPTER XI.

        

     
      Examinations in   England--Germany--Spain--Italy--Naples and Provence--Sicily--Cyprus--Meeting   of the

        

     
      [p. xii]

        

     
       

       Page

     
      Council of   Vienne--Suppression of the Order--Fate of its Members--Death of Molay

       <page 317>

     
      
   THE SECRET TRIBUNALS OF WESTPHALIA.

        

     
      
   CHAPTER I.

        

     
      Introduction--The   Original Westphalia--Conquest of the Saxons by Charlemagne--His   Regulations--Dukes of Saxony--State of Germany--Henry the Lion--His   Outlawry--Consequences of it--Origin of German Towns--Origin of the Fehm-gerichte,   or Secret Tribunals--Theories of their Origin--Origin of their   Name--Synonymous Terms

       <page 332>

     
      
   CHAPTER II.

        

     
      The   Tribunal-Lord--The Count--The Schoppen--The Messengers--The Public   Court--The Secret Tribunal--Extent of its Jurisdiction--Places of holding the   Courts--Time of holding them--Proceedings in them--Process where the Criminal   was caught in the fact--Inquisitorial Process

       <page 346>

     
      
   CHAPTER III.

        

     
      Accusatorial   Process--Persons liable to it--Mode of Citation--Mode of Procedure--Right of   Appeal

       <page 360>

     
      
   CHAPTER IV.

        

     
      The General   Chapter--Rights of the Emperor--Of his Lieutenant--Of the Stuhlherrn, or   Tribunal-Lords

       <page 372>

     
      
   CHAPTER V.

        

     
      Fehm-courts at Celle--At   Brunswick--Tribunal of the Knowing in the Tyrol--The Castle of Baden--African   Purrahs

       <page 377>

     
      [p. xiii]

        

     
       

       Page

     
      
   CHAPTER VI.

        

     
      The Emperor   Lewis the Bavarian--Charles IV.--Wenceslaus--Rupertian   Reformation--Encroachments of the Fehm-courts--Case of Nickel Weller and the   Town of Gorlitz--Of the City of Dantzig--Of Hans David and the Teutonic   Knights--Other instances of the presumption of the Free-counts--Citation of   the Emperor Frederic III.--Case of the Count of Teckenburg

       <page 385>

     
      
   CHAPTER VII.

        

     
      Cause of the   degeneracy of the Fehm-courts--Attempts at reformation--Causes of their high   reputation--Case of the Duke of Wurtemberg--Of Kerstian   Kerkerink--Causes of the Decline of the Fehm-jurisdiction

       <page 398>

     
   
     
Secret Societies of the Middle Ages, by Thomas Keightley, [1837], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

SECRET SOCIETIES

  

OF

  

THE MIDDLE AGES.

  

INTRODUCTION.

IF we had the means of investigating historically the origin of Secret Societies, we should probably find that they began to be formed almost as soon as any knowledge had been accumulated by particular individuals beyond what constituted the common stock. The same thing has happened to knowledge that has happened to all other human possessions,--its actual holders have striven to keep it to themselves! It is true that in this case the possessor of the advantage does not seem to have the same reason for being averse to share it with others which naturally operates in regard to many good things of a different kind; he does not, by imparting it to those around him, diminish his own store. This is true, in so far as regards the possession of knowledge considered in its character of a real good; the owner of the treasure does not impoverish himself by giving it away, as he would by giving away his money, but remains as rich as ever, even after he has made ever so many others as rich as himself. But still there is one thing that he loses, and a thing upon which the human mind is apt to set a very high value; he loses the distinction which he derived from his knowledge. This distinction really serves, in many respects, the

[p. 2]

same purpose that money itself does. Like money, it brings observation and worship. Like money, it is the dearest of all things, power. Knowledge, however held, is indeed essentially power; to ken, that is, to know, is the same word and the same thing with to can, that is, to be able. But there is an additional and a different species of power conferred by knowledge when it exists as the distinction of a few individuals in the midst of general ignorance. Here it is power not only to do those things the methods of doing which it teaches; it is, besides, the power of governing other men through your comparative strength and their weakness.

So strong is the motive thus prompting the possessor of knowledge to the exclusive retention of his acquisitions, that unless it had been met by another motive appealing in like manner directly to our self-interest, it appears probable that scarcely any general dissemination of knowledge would ever have taken place. The powerful counteracting motive in question is derived from the consideration that in most cases one of the most effective ways which the possessor of knowledge can take of exciting the admiration of others, is to communicate what he knows. The light must give itself forth, and illuminate the world, even that it may be itself seen and admired. In the very darkest times, the scholar or philosopher may find his ambition sufficiently gratified by the mere reputation of superior attainments, and the stupid wonder, or it may be superstitious terror, of the uninquiring multitude. But as soon as any thing like a spirit of intelligence or of curiosity has sprung up in the general mind, all who aspire to fame or consideration from their learning, their discoveries, or their intellectual powers, address themselves to awaken the admiration of their fellow-men, not by concealing, but by displaying their knowledge

[p. 3]

[paragraph continues] --not by scaling up the precious fountain, but by allowing its waters to flow freely forth, that all who choose may drink of them. From this time science ceases almost to have any secrets; and, all the influences to which it is exposed acting in the same direction, the tendency of knowledge becomes wholly diffusive.

But in the preceding state of things the case was altogether the reverse. Then there was little or no inducement to the communication of knowledge, and every motive for those who were in possession of it to keep it to themselves. There was not intelligence enough abroad to appreciate, or even to understand, the truths of philosophy if they had been announced in their simplicity, and explained according to their principles; all that was cared for, all that was capable of arousing the vulgar attention, was some display, made as surprising and mysterious as possible, of their practical application. It would even have been attended with danger in many cases to attempt to teach true philosophy openly, or to make open profession of it; it was too much in opposition to some of the strongest prejudices which everywhere held sway. It is not, then, to be wondered at, that its cultivators should have sought to guard and preserve it by means of secret associations, which, besides excluding the multitude from a participation in the thing thus fenced round and hidden, answered also divers other convenient purposes. They afforded opportunities of free conference, which could not otherwise have been obtained. There was much in the very forms of mystery and concealment thus adopted calculated to impress the popular imagination, and to excite its reverence and awe. Finally, the veil which they drew around their proceedings enabled the members of these secret societies to combine their efforts; and arrange their plans, in

[p. 4]

security and without interruption, whenever they cherished any designs of political innovation, or other projects, the open avowal and prosecution of which the established authorities would not have tolerated.

The facilities afforded by the system of secret association, and it may even be said the temptations which it presents, to the pursuit of political objects forbidden by the laws, are so great as to justify all governments in prohibiting it, under whatever pretence it may be attempted to be introduced. It is nothing to the purpose to argue that under bad governments valuable political reforms have sometimes been effected by such secret associations which would not otherwise have been attained. The same mode of proceeding, in the nature of the thing, is equally efficacious for the overthrow of a good government. Bad men are as likely to combine in the dark for their objects as good men are for theirs. In any circumstances, a secret association is an imperium in imperio, a power separate from, and independent of, that which is recognized as the supreme power in the state, and therefore something essentially disorganizing, and which it is contrary to the first principles of all government for any state to tolerate. In the case of a bad government, indeed, all means are fairly available for its overthrow which are not morally objectionable, the simple rule for their application being that it shall be directed by considerations of prudence and discretion. In such a case a secret association of the friends of reform may sometimes be found to supply the most effective means for accomplishing the desired end; but that end, however desirable it may be, is not one which the constitution of the state itself can rationally contemplate. The constitution cannot be founded upon the supposition that even necessary alterations of it are to be brought about through agencies out of

[p. 5]

itself, and farming no part of its regular mechanism. Whenever such agencies are successfully brought into operation, there is a revolution, and the constitution is at an end. Even the amendment of the constitution so effected is its destruction.

Yet most of the more remarkable secret associations which have existed in different ages and countries have probably either been originally formed to accomplish some political end, or have come to contemplate such an object as their chief design. Even when nothing more than a reformation of the national religion has been, as far as can be discovered, the direct aim of the association, it may still be fairly considered as of a political character, from the manner in which religion has been mixed up in almost every country with the civil institutions of the state. The effect which it was desired to produce upon the government may in many cases have been very far from extending to its complete abolition, and the substitution of another form of polity; an alteration in some one particular may have been all that was sought, or the object of the association may even have been to support some original principle of the constitution against the influence of circumstances which threatened its subversion or modification. Whether directed to the alteration or to the maintenance of the existing order of things, the irregular and dangerous action of secret combinations is, as we have said, a species of force which no state can reasonably be expected to recognize. But it may nevertheless have happened at particular emergencies, and during times of very imperfect civilization, that valuable service has been rendered by such combinations to some of the most important interests of society, and that they have to a considerable extent supplied the defects of the rude and imperfect arrangements of the ordinary government.

[p. 6]

The system of secret association is, indeed, the natural resource of the friends of political reform, in times when the general mind is not sufficiently enlightened to appreciate or to support their schemes for the improvement of the existing institutions and order of things. To proclaim their views openly in such circumstances would be of no more use than haranguing to the desert. They might even expose themselves to destruction by the attempt. But, united in a secret association, and availing themselves of all the advantages at once of their superior knowledge and intelligence, and of their opportunities of acting in concert, a very few individuals may work with an effect altogether out of proportion to their number. They may force in a wedge which in time shall even split and shiver into fragments the strength of the existing social system, no matter by how many ages of barbarism it may be consolidated. Or, in the absence of a more regular law and police, they may maintain the empire of justice by stretching forth the arm of their own authority in substitution for that of the state, which lies paralysed and powerless, and turning to account even the superstitions and terrors of the popular imagination by making these, as excited by their dark organization and mysterious forms of procedure, the chain whereby to secure the popular obedience.

On the whole, the system of secret association for political objects, even when there is no dispute about the desirableness of the ends sought to be accomplished, may be pronounced to be a corrective of which good men will avail themselves only in times of general ignorance, or under governments that sin against the first principles of all good government, by endeavouring to put a stop to the advancement of society through the prohibition of the open expression of opinion; but, in countries where the liberty of

[p. 7]

discussion exists, and where the public mind is tolerably enlightened, as entirely unsuited to the circumstances of the case as it is opposed to the rules and maxims on which every government must take its stand that would provide for its own preservation. In these happier circumstances the course for the friends of social improvement to follow is to come forward into the full light of day as the only place worthy of their mission, and to seek the realization of their views by directly appealing to the understandings of their fellow-citizens.

One evil to which secret societies are always exposed is the chance of the objects and principles of their members being misrepresented by those interested in resisting their power and influence. As the wakeful eyes of the government, and of those concerned in the maintenance of the actual system, will be ever upon them, they must strictly confine the knowledge of their real views and proceedings to the initiated, and as their meetings must for the same reason be held in retired places, and frequently by night, an opportunity, which is rarely neglected, is afforded to their enemies of spreading the most calumnious reports of their secret practices, which, though conscious of innocence, they may not venture openly to confute. By arts of this kind the suspicions and aversion of the people are excited, and they are often thus made to persecute their best friends, and still to bow beneath the yoke of their real foes. The similarity of the accusations made against secret associations in all parts of the world is a sufficient proof of their falsehood, and we should always listen to them with the utmost suspicion, recollecting the quarter from which they proceed. Of the spotless purity of the Christian religion when first promulgated through the Roman world no one can entertain a doubt; yet when persecution obliged its

[p. 8]

professors to form as it were a secret society, the same charges of Thyestian banquets, and of the promiscuous intercourse of the sexes, were made against them, which they themselves afterwards brought, and with probably as little truth, against the various sects of the Gnostic heresy. Wherever there is secrecy there will be suspicion, and charges of something unable to bear the light of day will be made.

The ancient world presents one secret society of a professedly political character--that of the Pythagoreans. Of religious ones it might be expected to yield a rich harvest to the inquirer, when we call to mind all that has been written in ancient and modern times concerning the celebrated mysteries. But the original Grecian mysteries, such as those of Eleusis, appear to have been nothing more than public services of the gods, with some peculiar ceremonies performed at the charge of the state, and presided over by the magistrates, in which there were no secrets communicated to the initiated, no revelation of knowledge beyond that which was generally attainable. The private mysteries, namely, the Orphic, Isiac, and Mithraic, which were introduced from the East, were merely modes employed by cunning and profligate impostors for taking advantage of the weakness and credulity of the sinful and the superstitious, by persuading them that by secret and peculiar rites, and the invocation of strange deities, the apprehended punishment of sin might be averted. The nocturnal assemblies for the celebration of these mysteries were but too often scenes of vice and debauchery, and they were discountenanced by all good governments. It is to these last, and not to the Eleusinian mysteries, that the severe strictures of the fathers of the church apply. [**]

The history of Pythagoras and his doctrines is

[p. 9]

extremely obscure. The accounts of this sage which have come down to us were not written till many centuries after his death, and but little reliance is to be placed on their details. Pythagoras was a Samian by birth; he flourished in the sixth century before Christ, at the time when Egypt exercised so much influence over Greece, and its sages sought the banks of the Nile in search of wisdom. There is, therefore, no improbability in the tradition of Pythagoras also having visited that land of mystery, and perhaps other parts of the East, and marked the tranquil order of things where those who were esteemed the wise ruled over the ignorant people. He may therefore have conceived the idea of uniting this sacerdotal system with the rigid morals and aristocratic constitution of the Dorian states of Greece. His native isle, which was then under the tyranny of Polycrates, not appearing to him suited for the introduction of his new system of government, he turned his eyes to the towns of Magna Graecia, or Southern Italy, which were at that time in a highly flourishing condition, whose inhabitants were eager in the pursuit of knowledge, and some of which already possessed written codes of law. He fixed his view on Croton, one of the wealthiest and most distinguished of those towns.

Aristocracy was the soul of the Dorian political constitutions, and the towns of Magna Graecia were all Dorian colonies; but in consequence of their extensive commerce the tendency of the people was at that time towards democracy. To preserve the aristocratic principle was the object of Pythagoras; but he wished to make the aristocracy not merely one of birth; he desired that, like the sacerdotal castes of the East, it should also have the supremacy in knowledge. As his system was contrary to the general feeling, Pythagoras saw that it was only by gaining

[p. 10]

the veneration of the people that he could carry it into effect; and by his personal advantages of beauty of form, skill in gymnastic exercises, eloquence, and dignity, he drew to himself the popular favour by casting the mantle of mystery over his doctrines. He thus at once inspired the people with awe for them, and the nobles with zeal to become initiated in his secrets.

The most perfect success, we are told, attended the project of the philosopher. A total change of manners took place in Croton; the constitution became nearly Spartan; a body of 300 nobles, rendered by the lessons of the sage as superior to the people in knowledge of every kind as they were in birth, ruled over it. The nobles of the other states flocked to Croton to learn how to govern by wisdom; Pythagorean missionaries went about everywhere preaching the new political creed; they inculcated on the people religion, humility, and obedience; such of the nobles as were deemed capable were initiated in the wisdom of the order, and taught its maxims and principles; a golden age, in which power was united with wisdom and virtue, seemed to have begun upon earth.

But, like every thing which struggles against the spirit of the age, such a political system was not fated to endure. While Croton was the chief seat of Pythagoreanism, luxury had fixed her throne in the neighbouring city of Sybaris. The towns were rivals: one or the other must fall. It was little more than thirty years after the arrival of Pythagoras in Croton that a furious war broke out between them. Led by Milo and other Pythagoreans, who were as expert in military affairs as skilled in philosophy, the Crotoniates utterly annihilated the power of their rivals, and Sybaris sank to rise no more. But with her sank the power of the Pythagoreans. They judged

[p. 11]

it inexpedient to give a large share of the booty to the people; the popular discontent rose; Cylon, a man who had been refused admittance into the order, took advantage of it, and urged the people on; the Pythagoreans were all massacred, and a democracy established. All the other towns took example by Croton, a general persecution of the order commenced, and Pythagoras himself was obliged to seek safety in flight, and died far away from the town which once had received him as a prophet. The Pythagoreans never made any further attempts at attaining political power, but became a mere sect of mystic philosophers, distinguished by peculiarities of food and dress.

Ancient times present us with no other society of any importance to which we can properly apply the term secret.

The different sects of the Gnostics, who are by the fathers of the church styled heretics, were to a certain extent secret societies, as they did not propound their doctrines openly and publicly; but their history is so scanty, and so devoid of interest, that an examination of it would offer little to detain ordinary readers.

The present volume is devoted to the history of three celebrated societies which flourished during the middle ages, and of which, as far as we know, no full and satisfactory account is to be found in English literature. These are the Assassins, or Ismailites, of the East, whose name has become in all the languages of Europe synonymous with murderer, who were a secret society, and of whom we have in general such vague and indistinct conceptions; the military order of the Knights Templars, who were most barbarously persecuted under the pretext of their holding a secret doctrine, and against whom the charge has been renewed at the present day; and,

[p. 12]

finally, the Secret Tribunals of Westphalia, in Germany, concerning which all our information has hitherto been derived from the incorrect statements of dramatists and romancers. [**]

It is the simplicity of truth, and not the excitement of romance, that the reader is to expect to find in the following pages,--pictures of manners and modes of thinking different from our own,--knowledge, not mere entertainment, yet as large an infusion of the latter as is consistent with truth and instruction.

Footnotes

^8:* See Lobeck's excellent work "Aglaophamus."

^12:* Since the present work was prepared, a translation of Von Hammer's History of the Assassins has been published by Dr. Oswald Charles Wood.

     
Secret Societies of the Middle Ages, by Thomas Keightley, [1837], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 13]

  

THE ASSASSINS [**].

  

CHAPTER I.

State of the World in the 7th Century--Western Empire--Eastern Empire--Persia--Arabia--Mohammed--His probable Motives--Character of his Religion--The Koran.

AT the commencement of the 7th century of the Christian era a new character was about to be impressed on a large portion of the world. During the two centuries which preceded, the Goths, Vandals, Huns, and other martial tribes of the Germanic race, had succeeded in beating down the barriers opposed to them, and in conquering and dismembering the Western Empire. They brought with them and retained their love of freedom and spirit of dauntless valour, but abandoned their ancient and ferocious superstitions, and embraced the corrupt system which then degraded the name of Christianity. This system, hardened, as it were, by ideas retained and transferred from the original faith of its new disciples, which ideas were fostered by those passages of the books of the Hebrew Scriptures which accorded with their natural sentiments, afterwards, when allied with feudalism, engendered the spirit which poured the hosts of Western Europe over the mountains and plains of Asia for the conquest of the Holy Land.

[p. 14]

A different picture was at this time presented by the empire of the East. It still retained the extent assigned to it by Theodosius; and all the countries from the Danube, round the east and south coasts of the Mediterranean, to the straits of Gades, yielded a more or less perfect obedience to the successors of Constantine. But a despotism more degrading, though less ferocious, than those of Asia paralyzed the patriotism and the energy of their subjects; and the acuteness, the contentiousness, and the imagination of the Greeks, combined with mysticism and the wild fancy of the Asiatics to transform the simplicity of the religion of Christ into a revolting system of intricate metaphysics and gross idolatry, which aided the influence of their political condition in chilling the martial ardour of the people. The various provinces of the empire were held together by the loosest and feeblest connexion, and it was apparent that a vigorous shock would suffice to dissolve the union.

The mountains of Armenia and the course of the Euphrates separated the Eastern Empire from that of Persia. This country had been under the dominion of the people named Parthians at the time when the eagles of the Roman republic first appeared on the Euphrates, and defeat had more than once attended the Roman armies which attempted to enter their confines. Like every dominion not founded on the freedom of the people, that of the Arsacides (the Parthian royal line) grew feeble with time, and after a continuance of nearly five centuries the sceptre of Arsaces passed from the weak hand of the last monarch of his line to that of Ardeshir Babegan (that is the son of Babec), a valiant officer of the royal army, and a pretended descendant of the ancient monarchs of Persia. Ardeshir, to accomplish this revolution, availed himself of the religious prejudices of the Persian people. The Parthian monarchs had

[p. 15]

inclined to the manners and the religion of the Greeks, and the Light-religion--the original faith of Persia, and one of the purest and most spiritual of those to which a divine origin may not be assigned--had been held in slight estimation, and its priests unvisited by royal favour. It was the pride and the policy of Ardeshir to restore the ancient religion to the dignity which it had enjoyed under the descendants of Cyrus, and Religion, in return, lent her powerful aid to his plans of restoring the royal dignity to its pristine vigour, and of infusing into the breast of the people the love of country and the ardour for extending the Persian dominion to what it had been of old; and for 400 years the Sassanides [**] were the most formidable enemies of the Roman empire. But their dominion had, at the period of which we write, nearly attained the greatest limit allotted to Oriental dynasties; and though Noosheerwan the Just had attained great warlike fame, and governed with a vigour and justice that have made his name proverbial in the East, and Khoosroo Purveez displayed a magnificence which is still the theme of Persian poetry and romance, and carried his victorious arms over Syria and Egypt, and further along the African coast than even those of Darius I. had been able to advance, yet defeat from the gallant Emperor Heraclius clouded his latter days, and the thirteenth year after his death, by showing the Persian armies in flight, and the palladium of the empire, the jewel-set apron of the blacksmith Kawah, in the hands of the rovers of the deserts, revealed the secret that her strength

[p. 16]

was departed from Persia. The brilliancy of the early part of the reign of Khoosroo Purveez had been but the flash before death which at times is displayed in empires as in individuals. The vigour was gone which was requisite to stem the torrent of fanatic valour about to burst forth from the wilds of Arabia.

It is the boast of Arabia that it has never been conquered. This immunity from subjugation has, however, been only partial, and is owing to the nature of the country; for although the barren sands of the Hejaz and Nejed have always baffled the efforts of hostile armies, yet the more inviting region of Yemen, the Happy Arabia of the ancients, has more than once allured a conqueror, and submitted to his sway. The inhabitants of this country have been the same in blood and in manners from the dawn of history. Brave, but not sanguinary, robbers, but kind and hospitable, of lively and acute intellect, we find the Arabs, from the days of Abraham to the present times, leading the pastoral and nomadic life in the desert, agriculturists in Yemen, traders on the coasts and on the confines of Syria and Egypt. Their foreign military operations had hitherto been confined to plundering expeditions into the last-mentioned countries, unless they were the Hycsos, or Shepherd Kings, who, according to tradition, once made the conquest of Egypt. Arabia forming a kind of world in itself, its various tribes were in ceaseless hostility with each other; but it was apparent that if its brave and skilful horsemen could be united under one head, and animated by motives which would inspire constancy and rouse valour, they might present a force capable of giving a fatal shock to the empires of Persia and of Rome.

It is impossible, on taking a survey of the history of the world, not to recognize a great predisposing

[p. 17]

cause, which appoints the time and circumstances of every event which is to produce any considerable change in the state of human affairs. The agency of this overruling providence is nowhere more perceptible than in the present instance. The time was come for the Arabs to leave their deserts and march to the conquest of the world, and the man was born who was to inspire them with the necessary motives.

Mohammed (Illustrious [**]) was the son of Abd-Allah (Servant of God), a noble Arab of the tribe of Koreish, which bad the guardianship of the Kaaba (Square House of Mecca), the Black Stone contained in which (probably an aerolite) had been for ages an object of religious veneration to the tribes of Arabia. His mother was Amineh, the daughter of a chief of princely rank. He was early left an orphan, with the slender patrimony of five camels and a female Aethiopian slave. His uncle, Aboo Talib, brought him up. At an early age the young Mohammed accompanied his uncle to the fair of Bozra, on the verge of Syria, and in his 18th year he signalized his valour in an engagement between the Koreish and a hostile tribe. At the age of 25 he entered the service of Khadijah, a wealthy widow, with whose merchandise he visited one of the great fairs of Syria. Mohammed, though poor, was noble, handsome, acute, and brave; Khadijah, who was fifteen years his senior, was inspired with love; her passion was returned; and the

[p. 18]

gift of her hand and wealth gave the nephew of Aboo Talib affluence and consideration.

Mohammed's original turn of mind appears to have been serious, and it is not unlikely that the great truth of the Unity of the Deity had been early impressed on his mind by his mother or his Jewish kindred. The Koreish and the rest of his countrymen were idolaters; Christianity was now corrupted by the intermixture of many superstitions; the fire-worship of the Persians was a worshipping of the Deity under a material form; the Mosaic religion had been debased by the dreams and absurd distinctions of the Rabbis. A simpler form than any of these seemed wanted for man. God, moreover, was believed to have at sundry times sent prophets into the world for its reformation, and might do so again; the Jews still looked for their promised Messiah; many Christians held that the Paraclete was yet to come. Who can take upon him to assert that Mohammed may not have believed himself to be set apart to the service of God, and appointed by the divine decree to be the preacher of a purer faith than any which he then saw existing? Who will say that in his annual seclusions of fifteen days in the cave of Hira he may not have fallen into ecstatic visions, and that in one of these waking dreams the angel Gabriel may not have appeared to his distempered fancy to descend to nominate him to the office of a prophet of God, and present to him, in a visible form, that portion of his future law which had probably already passed through his mind [**]?

[p. 19]

[paragraph continues] A certain portion of self-delusion is always mingled with successful imposture; the impostor, as it were, makes his first experiment on himself. It is much more reasonable to conclude that Mohammed had at first no other object than the dissemination of truth by persuasion, and that he may have beguiled himself into a belief of his being the instrument selected for that purpose, than that the citizen of a town in the secluded region of Arabia beheld in ambitious vision from his mountain-cave his victorious banners waving on the banks of the Oxus and the Ebro, and his name saluted as that of the Prophet of God by a fourth part of the human race. Still we must not pass by another, and perhaps a truer supposition, namely, that, in the mind of Mohammed, as in that of so many others, the end justified the means, and that he deemed it lawful to feign a vision and a commission from God in order to procure from men a hearing for the truth.

Whatever the ideas and projects of Mohammed may originally have been, he waited till he had attained his fortieth year (the age at which Moses showed himself first to the Israelites), and then revealed his divine commission to his wife Khadijah, his slave Zeid, his cousin Ali, the son of Aboo Talib, and his friend, the virtuous and wealthy Aboo Bekr. It is difficult to conceive any motive but conviction to have operated on the minds of these

[p. 20]

different persons, who at once acknowledged ledged his claim to the prophetic office; and it speaks not a little for the purity of the previous life of the new Prophet, that he could venture to claim the faith of those who were most intimately acquainted with him. The voice of wisdom has assured us that a prophet has no honour in his own country and among his own kindred, and the example of Mohammed testified the truth of the declaration. During thirteen years the new religion made but slow and painful progress in the town of Mecca; but the people of Yathreb, a town afterwards dignified with the appellation of the City of the Prophet (Medinat-en-Nabi), were more susceptive of faith; and when, on the death of Aboo Talib, who protected his nephew, though he rejected his claims, his celebrated Flight (Hejra) brought him to Yathreb, the people of that town took arms in his defence against the Koreish. It was probably now that new views opened to the mind of the Prophet. Prince of Yathreb, he might hope to extend his sway over the ungrateful Mecca; and those who had scoffed at his arguments and persuasions might be taught lessons of wisdom by the sword. These anticipations were correct, and in less than ten years after the battle of Bedr (the first he fought) he saw his temporal power and his prophetic character acknowledged by the whole of the Arabian peninsula.

It commonly happens that, when a new form of religion is proposed for the acceptance of mankind, it surpasses in purity that which it is intended to supersede. The Arabs of the days of Mohammed were idolaters; 300 is said to have been the number of the images which claimed their adoration in the Caaba. A gross licentiousness prevailed among hem; their polygamy had no limits assigned to it [**].

[p. 21]

[paragraph continues] For this the Prophet substituted the worship of One God, and placed a check on the sensual propensities of his people. His religion contained descriptions of the future state of rewards and punishments, by which he allured to obedience and terrified from contumacy or opposition. The pains of hell which he menaced were such as were most offensive to the body and its organs; the joys of Paradise were verdant meads, shady trees, murmuring brooks, gentle airs, precious wines in cups of gold and silver, stately tents, and splendid sofas; the melody of the songs of angels was to ravish the souls of the blessed; the black-eyed Hoories were to be the ever-blooming brides of the faithful servants of God. Yet, though sensual bliss was to be his ultimate reward, the votary was taught that its attainment demanded self-denial on earth; and it has been justly observed that "a devout Mussulman exhibits more of the Stoical than of the Epicurean character [**]." As the Prophet had resolved that the sword should be unsparingly employed for the diffusion of the truth, the highest degree of the future bliss was pronounced to be the portion of the martyrs, i.e., of those who fell in the holy wars waged for the dissemination of the faith. "Paradise," says the Prophet, "is beneath the shadow of swords." At the

[p. 22]

day of judgment the wounds of the fallen warrior were to be resplendent as vermilion, and odoriferous as musk; and the wings of angels were to supply the loss of limbs. The religion of Mohammed was entitled Islam (resignation), hence its votaries were called by the Arabs Moslems, and in Persian Mussulmans. Its articles of belief were five--belief in God, in his angels, in his Prophet, in the last day, and in predestination. Its positive duties were also five--purification, prayer, fasting, alms, and the pilgrimage to Mecca. Various rites and observances which the Arabs had hitherto practised were retained by the Prophet, either out of regard for the prejudices of his followers, or because he did not, or could not, divest his own mind of respect for usages in which he had been reared up from infancy.

Such is a slight sketch of the religion which Mohammed substituted for the idolatry of Arabia. It contained little that was original; all its details of the future state were borrowed from Judaism or from the Magian system of Persia. The book which contains it, entitled the Koran (reading), was composed in detached pieces, during a long series of years, by the illiterate Prophet, and taken down from his lips by his scribes. His own account of its origin was that each Sura, or revelation, was brought to him from heaven by the angel Gabriel. It is regarded by the Mohammedan. East, and by most European Orientalists, as the masterpiece of Arabian literature; and when we make due allowance for the difference of European and Arabian models and taste, and consider that the rhyme [**] which in prose is insufferable to the former, may to the latter sound grateful, we may allow that the praises lavished on it are not

[p. 23]

unmerited. Though tedious and often childish legends, and long and tiresome civil regulations, occupy the greater part of it, it is pervaded by a fine strain of fervid piety and humble resignation to the will of God, not unworthy of the inspired seers of Israel; and the sublime doctrine of the Unity of God runs like a vein of pure gold through each portion of the mass, giving lustre and dignity to all. Might we not venture to say that Christianity itself has derived advantage from the imposture of Mohammed, and that the clear and open profession of the Divine Unity by their Mohammedan enemies kept the Christians of the dark ages from smothering it beneath the mass of superstition and fable by which they corrupted and deformed so much of the majestic simplicity of the Gospel? No one, certainly, would dream of comparing the son of Abd-Allah with the Son of God, of setting darkness by the side of light; but still we may confess him to have been an agent in the hands of the Almighty, and admit that his assumption of the prophetic office was productive of good as well as of evil.

The Mohammedan religion is so intimately connected with history, law, manners, and opinions, in the part of the East of which we are about to write, that this brief view of its origin and nature was indispensable. We now proceed to our history.

Footnotes

^13:* Hammer's Geschichte der Assassinen (History of the Assassins), and the same writer's Fundgruben des Oriente (Mines of the East), M. Jourdain's Extrait de l'Ouvrage de Mirkhond sur la Dynastie des Ismaelites, and Malcolm's History of Persia, are the principal authorities for the following account of the Assassins.

^15:* The name given to the dynasty founded by Ardeshir, from his pretended ancestor Sassan, a grandson of Isfundear, a hero greatly celebrated in the ancient history of Persia. Isfundear was the son of Gushtasp, who is supposed to be the Darius Hystaspes of the Greek historians. Sir John Malcolm has endeavoured to identify Isfundear with the Xerxes of the Greeks.

^17:* The Oriental proper names being mostly all significant, we shall translate them when we first employ them. As, however, it is not always that it can be discovered what the original Arabic characters are of an eastern word which we meet in Roman letters, we shall be sometimes obliged to leave names unexplained, and at other times to hazard conjectural explanations. In the last case, we shall affix a mark of doubt.

^18:* The Kubla Khan of Coleridge (Poetical Works, vol. i. p. 266) is a fine instance of this power of the mind, withdrawn from the contemplation of material objects. The reader will probably recollect the sign given from heaven to Lord Herbert of Cherbury, on the occasion of his work written against revealed [p. 19] religion. The writer has lately heard an instance of a lady of fortune, to whom, as she reclined one day on a sofa, a voice seemed to come from heaven, announcing to .her that she was selected as the instrument for accomplishing a great work in the hands of God; and giving, as a sign, that, for a certain number of months, she should be unable to leave the sofa on which she was lying. Such is the power of imagination, that the supposed intimation in regard to the sign actually took effect; she believed herself to have lost the power of motion, and therefore did in reality lose it.

^20:* See, in Sir J. Malcolm's History of Persia, the dialogue [p. 21] between the Persian king Yezdijird and the Arab envoy. "Whatever," said the latter, "thou hast said regarding the former condition of the Arabs is true. Their food was green lizards; they buried their infant daughters alive; nay, some of them feasted on dead carcasses and drank blood, while others slew their relations, and thought themselves great and valiant when, by such an act, they became possessed of more property. They were clothed with hair garments, knew not good from evil, and made no distinction between that which is lawful and that which is unlawful. Such was our state. But God in his mercy has sent us by a holy prophet a sacred volume, which teaches us the true faith," &c.

^21:* Hallam, Middle Ages, ii, 165.

^22:* The Hebrews, as appears from the poetic parts of the Scriptures, had the same delight in the clang of rhyme as the Arabs. See particularly Isaiah in the original.

     
Secret Societies of the Middle Ages, by Thomas Keightley, [1837], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 24]

  

CHAPTER II.

Origin of the Khalifat--The first Khalifs--Extent of the Arabian Empire--Schism among the Mohammedans--Soonees and Sheahs--Sects of the latter--The Keissanee--The Zeidites--The Ghoollat--The Imamee--Sects of the Imamee--Their political Character--The Carmathites--Origin of the Fatimite Khalifs--Secret Society at Cairo--Doctrines taught in it--Its Decline.

THE civil and ecclesiastical dignities were united in the person of Mohammed. As Emir (prince) he administered justice and led his followers to battle; as Imam (director) he on every Friday (the Mohammedan sabbath) taught the principles and duties of religion from his pulpit. Though his wives were numerous, the Prophet had no male issue surviving at the time when he felt the approaches of death; but his daughter Fatima was married to his cousin Ali, his early and faithful disciple, and it was naturally to be expected that the expiring voice of the Prophet would nominate him as his Khalif (successor) over the followers of his faith. But Ayesha, the daughter of Aboo Bekr, Mohammed's youthful and best beloved wife, was vehemently hostile to the son of Aboo Talib, and she may have exerted all the influence of a revengeful woman over the mind of the dying Prophet. Or perhaps Mohammed, like Alexander, perplexed with the extent of dominion to which he had attained, and aware that only a vigour of character similar to his own would avail to retain and enlarge it, and, it may be, thinking himself answerable

[p. 25]

to God for the choice he should make, deemed it the safest course to leave the matter to the free decision of his surviving followers. His appointing Aboo Bekr, a few days before his death, to officiate in his pulpit, might seem to indicate an intention of conferring the khalifat on him; and he is said to have at one time declared that the strength of character displayed by his distinguished follower, Omar, evinced his possession of the virtues of a prophet and a khalif. Tradition records no equally strong declaration respecting the mild and virtuous Ali.

At all events the Prophet expired without having named a successor, and the choice devolving on his companions dissension was ready to break out, when Omar, abandoning his own claims, gave his voice for Aboo Bekr. All opposition was thus silenced, and the father of Ayesha reigned for two years over the faithful. Ali at first refused obedience, but he finally acknowledged the successor of the Prophet. When dying, Aboo Bekr bequeathed the sceptre to Omar, as the worthiest, and when, twelve years afterwards, Omar perished by the dagger of an assassin, six electors conferred the vacant dignity on Othman, who had been the secretary of the Prophet. Age having enfeebled the powers of Othman, the reins of authority were slackened, and a spirit of discord pervaded all Arabia, illustrative of the Prophet's declaration of vigour being essential to a khalif. A numerous body of rebels besieged the aged Othman in Medina, and he was slain, holding the Koran in his lap, by a band of murderers, headed by the brother of Ayesha, who, the firebrand of Islam, it is probable had been secretly active in exciting the rebellion.

The popular choice now fell upon Ali, but the  Ayesha stimulated to revolt against his authority

[p. 26]

two powerful Arab chiefs, named Telha and Zobeir, who raised their standards in the province of Arabian Irak. Ayesha, mounted on a camel, appeared in the thickest of the battle, in which the rebel chiefs were defeated and slain. The generous Ali sent her to dwell at the tomb of the Prophet, where she passed in tranquillity the remainder of her days. The khalif himself was less fortunate. Moawiya, the Governor of Syria, son of Aboo Sofian, the most violent of the opponents of the Prophet, assumed the office of the avenger of Othman, whose death he charged on Ali and his party, and, declaring himself to be the rightful khalif, roused Syria to arms against the Prophet's son-in-law. In the war success was on the side of Ali, till the superstition of his troops obliged him to agree to a treaty; and shortly afterwards he was murdered by a fanatic in the mosk of Coofa. His son Hassan was induced by Moawiya to resign his claims and retire to the city of Medina; but his more high-spirited brother, Hussein, took arms against the khalif Yezid, the son of Moawiya; and the narrative of his death is one of the most pathetic and best related incidents of Oriental history [**]. The sisters and children of Hussein were spared by the clemency of the victorious Yezid, and from them descend a numerous race, glorying in the blood of Ali and the Prophet.

The Arabian empire was now of immense extent. Egypt, Syria, and Persia had been conquered in the reign of Omar. Under the first khalifs of the dynasty of the Ommiades (so called from Ommiyah, the great-grandfather of Moawiya), the conquest of Africa and Spain was achieved, and the later princes of this family ruled over the most extensive empire of the world.

[p. 27]

The great schism of the Mohammedan church (we must be permitted to employ this term, the only one our language affords) commences with the accession of the house of Ommiyah. The Mohammedans have, as is generally known, been from that time to the present day divided into two great sects, the Soonees and the Sheahs, the orthodox and the dissenters, as we might venture to call them, whose opposite doctrines, like those of the Catholics and the Protestants of the Christian church, are each the established faith of great and independent nations. The Ottoman and the Usbeg Turks hold the Soonee faith; the Persians are violent Sheahs; and national and religious animosity concur in making them the determined and inveterate foes of each other.

The Soonees hold that the first four khalifs were all legitimate successors of the Prophet; but as their order was determined by their degree of sanctity, they assign the lowest rank to Ali. The Sheahs, on the contrary, maintain that the dignity of the Prophet rightfully descended to the son of his uncle and the husband of his daughter. They therefore regard Aboo Bekr, Omar, and Othman, as usurpers, and curse and revile their memory, more especially that of the rigid Omar, whose murderer they venerate as a saint. It must be steadily kept in mind, in every discussion respecting the Mohammedan religion, that Mohammed and his successors succeeded in establishing what the lofty and capacious mind of Gregory VII. attempted in vain--the union of the civil and ecclesiastical powers in the same person. Unlike the schisms of the eastern and western, of the Catholic and Protestant churches, which originated in difference of opinion on points of discipline or matters of doctrine, that of the Mohammedans arose solely from ambition and the struggle for temporal power. The sceptre of the greatest empire of

[p. 28]

the world was to be the reward of the party who could gain the greatest number of believers in his right to grasp the staff and ascend the pulpit of the Prophet of God. Afterwards, when the learning of the Greeks and the Persians became familiar to the Arabs, theological and metaphysical niceties and distinctions were introduced, and the two great stems of religion threw out numerous sectarian branches. The Soonees are divided into four main sects, all of which are, however, regarded as orthodox, for they agree in the main points, though they differ in subordinate ones. The division of the Sheahs is also into four sects, the point of agreement being the assertion of the right of Ali and his descendants to the imamat, or supreme ecclesiastical dignity; the point of difference being the nature of the proof on which his rights are founded, and the order of succession among his descendants. These four sects and their opinions are as follows:--

I. The first and most innocuous of the sects which maintained the rights of the family of Ali were the Keissanee, so named from Keissan, one of his freedmen. These, who were subdivided into several branches, held that Ali's rights descended, not to Hassan or Hussein, but to their brother, Mohammed-ben-Hanfee. One of these branch-sects maintained that the imamat remained [**] in the person of this Mohammed, who had never died, but had since appeared, from time to time, on earth, under various names. Another branch, named the Hashemites, held that the imamat descended from Mohammed-ben-Hanfee to his son Aboo-Hashem, who transmitted it to Mohammed, of the family of Abbas, from whom it descended to Saffah, the founder of the Abbasside dynasty of khalifa [*+]. It is quite evident

[p. 29]

that the object of this sect was to give a colour to the claims of the family of Abbas, who stigmatized the family of Ommiyah as usurpers, and insisted that the khalifat belonged of right to themselves. Aboo-Moslem, the great general who first gave dominion to the family of Abbas, was a real or pretended maintainer of the tenets of this sect, the only branch, by the way, of the Sheahs which supported the house of Abbas.

II. A second branch of the Sheahs was named Zeidites. These held that the imamat descended through Hassan and Hussein to Zein-al-Abedeen, the son of this last, and thence passed to Zeid (whence their name), the son of Zein; whereas most other Sheahs regarded Mohammed Bakir, the brother of Zeid, as the lawful imam. The Zeidites differed from the other Sheahs in acknowledging the three first khalifs to have been legitimate successors of the Prophet. Edris, who wrested a part of Africa from the Abbasside khalifs, and founded the kingdom of Fez, was a real or pretended descendant of Zeid.

III. The Ghoollat (Ultras), so named from the extravagance of their doctrines, which, passing all bounds of common sense, were held in equal abomination by the other Sheahs and by the Soonees. This sect is said to have existed as early as the time of Ali himself, who is related to have burnt some of them on account of their impious and extravagant

[p. 30]

opinions. They held, as we are told, that there was but one imam, and they ascribed the qualities of divinity to Ali. Some maintained that there were two natures (the divine and the human) in him, others that the last alone was his. Some again said that this perfect nature of Ali passed by transmigration through his descendants, and would continue so to do till the end of all things; others that the transmission stopped with Mohammed Bakir, the son of Zein-al-Ahedeen, who still abode on earth, but unseen, like Khizer, the Guardian of the Well of Life, according to the beautiful eastern legend [**]. Others, still more bold, denied the transmission, and asserted that the divine Ali sat enthroned in the clouds, where the thunder was the voice and the lightning the scourge wherewith he terrified and chastised the wicked. This sect presents the first (though a very early) instance of the introduction into Islam of that mysticism which appears to have had its original

[p. 31]

birth-place in the dreamy groves of India. As a political party the Ghoollat never seem to have been formidable.

IV. Such, however, was not the case with the Imamee, the most dangerous enemies of the house of Abbas. Agreeing with the Ghoollat in the doctrine of an invisible imam, they maintained that there had been a series of visible imams antecedent to him, who had vanished. One branch of this sect (thence called the Seveners--Sebiin) closed the series with Ismail, the grandson of Mohammed Bakir, the seventh imam, reckoning Ali himself the first. These were also called Ismailites, from Ismail. The other branch, called Imamites, continued the series from Ismail, through his brother Moosa Casim, down to Askeree, the twelfth imam. These were hence called the Twelvers (Esnaashree). They believed that the imam Askeree had vanished in a cavern at Hilla, on the banks of the Euphrates, where he would remain invisible till the end of the world, when he would again appear under the name of the Guide (Mehdee) to lead mankind into the truth. The Imamee, wherever they might stop in the series of the visible imams, saw that, for their political purposes, it was necessary to acknowledge a kind of locum tenentes imams; but, while the Zeidites, who agreed with them in this point, required in these princes the royal virtues of valour, generosity, justice, knowledge, the Imamee declared themselves satisfied if they possessed the saintly ones of the practice of prayer, fasting, and alms-giving. Hence artful and ambitious men could set up any puppet who was said to be descended from the last of the visible imams, and aspire to govern the Mohammedan world in his name.

The Twelvers were very near obtaining possession of the khalifat in the time of the first Abbassides;

[p. 32]

for the celebrated Haroon Er-Rasheed's son, Al-Mamoon, the eighth khalif of that house, moved either by the strength or preponderance which the Sheah party had arrived at, or, as the eastern historians tell us, yielding to the suggestions of his vizir, who was devoted to that sect, named Ali Riza, the eighth imam, to be his successor on the throne. He even laid aside the black habiliments peculiar to his family, and wore green, the colour of Ali and the Prophet. But the family of Abbas, which now numbered 30,000 persons, refused their assent to this renunciation of the rights of their line. They rose in arms, and proclaimed as khalif Al-Mamoon's uncle Ibrahim. The obnoxious vizir perished, and the opportune death of Ali Riza (by poison, as was said) relieved the son of Haroon Er-Rasheed from embarrassment. Ali Riza was interred at Meshed, in the province of Khorasan; and his tomb is, to the present day, a place of pilgrimage for devout Persians [**].

The Ismailites were more successful in their attempts at obtaining temporal power; and, as we shall presently see, a considerable portion of their dominions was wrested from the house of Abbas.

Religion has, in all ages, and in all parts of the world, been made the mask of ambition, for which its powerful influence over the minds of the ignorant so well qualifies it. But the political influence of religion among the calmer and more reasoning nations of Europe is slight compared with its power over the more ardent and susceptible natives of Asia. Owing to the effects of this principle the despotism of the East has never been of that still, undisturbed nature which we might suppose to be its character. To say nothing of the bloody wars and massacres which have taken place under the pretext of religion

[p. 33]

in the countries from Japan to the Indus, the Mohammedan portion of the East has been, almost without ceasing, the theatre of sanguinary dramas, where ambition, under the disguise of religion, sought for empire; and our own days have seen, in the case of the Wahabees, a bold though unsuccessful attempt of fanaticism to achieve a revolution in a part of the Ottoman empire. It was this union of religion with policy which placed the Suffavee family on the throne of Persia in the fifteenth century; and it was this also which, at a much earlier period, established the dominion of the Fatimite khalifs of Egypt. The progress of this last event is thus traced by oriental historians [**]:--

The encouragement given to literature and science by the enlightened Al-Mamoon had diffused a degree of boldness of speculation and inquiry hitherto unknown in the empire of the Arabs. The subtile philosophy of the Greeks was now brought into contact with the sublime but corrupted theology of the Persians, and the mysticism of India secretly mingled itself with the mass of knowledge. We are not, perhaps, to give credit to the assertion of the Arab historian that it was the secret and settled plan of the Persians to undermine and corrupt the religion, and thus sap the empire, of those who had overcome them in the field; but it is not a little remarkable that, as the transformation of the Mosaic religion into Judaism may be traced to Persia, and as the same country sent forth the monstrous opinions which corrupted the simplicity of the Gospel, so it is in Persia that we find the origin of most of the sects which have sprung up in Islam. Without agreeing with those who would derive all knowledge from India, it may be held not improbable that the

[p. 34]

intricate metaphysics and mysticism of that country have been the source of much of the corruption of the various religions which have prevailed in Cis-Indian Asia. It is at least remarkable that the north-east of Persia, the part nearest to India, has been the place where many of the impostors who pretended to intercourse with the Deity made their appearance. It was here that Mani (Manes), the head of the Manichaeans, displayed his arts, and it was in Khorasan (Sun-land) that Hakem, who gave himself out for an incarnation of the Deity, raised the standard of revolt against the house of Abbas. But, be this as it may, on surveying the early centuries of Islam, we may ob- serve that all the rebellions which agitated the empire of the khalifs arose from a union of the claims of the family of Ali with the philosophical doctrines current in Persia.

We are told that, in the ninth century of the Christian era, Abdallah, a man of Persian lineage, residing at Ahwaz, in the south of Persia, conceived the design of overturning the empire of the khalifs by secretly introducing into Islam a system of atheism and impiety. Not to shock deep-rooted prejudices in favour of the established religion and government, he resolved to communicate his doctrines gradually, and he fixed on the mystic number seven as that of the degrees through which his disciples should pass to the grand revelation of the vanity of all religions and the indifference of all actions. The political cloak of his system was the assertion of the claims of the descendants of Mohammed, the son of Ismail, to the imamat, and his missionaries (dais) engaged with activity in the task of making proselytes throughout the empire of the khalifs. Abdallah afterwards removed to Syria, where he died. His son and

[p. 35]

grandsons followed up his plans, and in their time a convert was made who speedily brought the system into active operation [**].

The name of this person was Carmath, a native of the district of Koofa, and from him the sect was called Carmathites. He made great alterations in the original system of Abdallah; and as the sect was now grown numerous and powerful, he resolved to venture on putting the claims of the descendants of Ismail to the test of the sword. He maintained that the indefeasible right to earthly dominion lay with what he styled the imam Maassoom (spotless), a sort of ideal of a perfect prince, like the wise man of the Stoics; consequently all the reigning princes were usurpers, by reason of their vices and imperfections; and the warriors of the perfect prince were to precipitate them all, without distinction, from their thrones. Carmath also taught his disciples to understand the precepts and observances of Islam in a figurative sense. Prayer signified obedience to the imam Maassoom, alms-giving was paying the tithe due to him (that is, augmenting the funds of the society), fasting was keeping the political secrets relating to the imam and his service. It was not the tenseel, or outward word of the Koran, which was to be attended to; the taweel, or exposition, was alone worthy of note. Like those of Mokanna, and other opponents of the house of Abbas, the followers of Carmath distinguished themselves by wearing white raiment to mark their hostility to the reigning khalifs, whose garments and standards retained the black hue which they had displayed against the white banners of the house of Ommiyah. A bloody war was renewed at various periods during

[p. 36]

an entire century between the followers of Carmath and the troops of the khalifs, with varying success. In the course of this war the holy city of Mecca was taken by the sectaries (as it has been of late years by the Wahabees), after the fall of 30,000 Moslems in its defence. The celebrated black stone was taken and conveyed in triumph to Hajar, where it remained for two-and-twenty years, till it was redeemed for 50,000 ducats by the emir of Irak, and replaced in its original seat. Finally, like so many of their predecessors, the Carmathites were vanquished by the yet vigorous power of the empire, and their name, though not their principles, was extinguished.

During this period of contest between the house of Abbas and the Carmathites, a dai (missionary) of the latter, named Abdallah, contrived to liberate from the prison into which he had been thrown by the khalif Motadhad a real or pretended descendant of Fatima, named Obeid-Allah [**], whom he conveyed to Africa, and, proclaiming him to be the promised Mehdi (guide), succeeded in establishing for him a dominion on the north coast of that country. The gratitude of Obeid-Allah was shown by his putting to death him to whom he was indebted fir his power; but talent and valour can exist without the presence of virtue, and Obeid-Allah and his two next descendants extended their sway to the shores of the Atlantic. Moez-ladin-Allah, his great-grandson, having achieved the conquest of Egypt and Syria, wisely abandoned his former more distant dominions along the coast of the Mediterranean, his eye being fixed on the more valuable Asiatic empire of he Abbassides. This dynasty of Fatimite khalifs,

[p. 37]

as they were called, reigned during two centuries at Cairo, on the Nile, the foes and rivals of those who sat in Bagdad, on the banks of the Tigris. Like every other eastern dynasty, they gradually sank into impotence and imbecility, and their throne was finally occupied by the renowned Koord Saladin.

Obeid-Allah derived his pedigree from Ismail, the seventh imam. His house, therefore, looked to the support of the whole sect of the Seveners, or Ismailites, in their projects for extending their sway over the Mohammedan world; and it was evidently their interest to increase the numbers and power of that sect as much as possible. We are accordingly justified in giving credit to the assurances of the eastern historians, that there was a secret institution at Cairo, at the head of which was the Fatimite khalif, and of which the object was the dissemination of the doctrines of the sect of the Ismailites, though we may be allowed to hesitate as to the correctness of some of the details.

This society, we are told, comprised both men and women, who met in separate assemblies, for the common supposition of the insignificance of the latter sex in the east is erroneous. It was presided over by the chief missionary (Dai-al-Doat [**]), who was always a person of importance in the state, and not unfrequently supreme judge (Kadhi-al-kodhat [*+]). Their assemblies, called Societies of Wisdom (Mejalis-al-hicmet), were held twice a-week, on Mondays and Wednesdays. All the members appeared clad in white. The president, having first waited on the khalif, and read to him the intended lecture, or, if that could not be done, having gotten his signature on the back of it, proceeded to the assembly and delivered a written discourse. At the

[p. 38]

conclusion of it those present kissed his hand and reverently touched with their forehead the handwriting of the khalif. In this state the society continued till the reign of that extraordinary madman the khalif Hakem-bi-emr-illah (Judge by the command of God), who determined to place it on a splendid footing. He erected for it a stately edifice, styled the House of Wisdom (Dar-al-hicmet), abundantly furnished with books and mathematical instruments. Its doors were open to all, and paper, pens, and ink were profusely supplied for the use of those who chose to frequent it. Professors of law, mathematics, logic, and medicine were appointed to give instructions; and at the learned disputations which were frequently held in presence of the khalif, these professors appeared in their state caftans (Khalaa), which, it is said, exactly resembled the robes worn at the English universities. The income assigned to this establishment, by the munificence of the khalif, was 257,000 ducats annually, arising from the tenths paid to the crown.

The course of instruction in this university pro. seeded, according to Macrisi, by the following nine degrees:--1. The object of the first, which was long and tedious, was to infuse doubts and difficulties into the mind of the aspirant, and to lead him to repose a blind confidence in the knowledge and wisdom of his teacher. To this end he was perplexed with captious questions; the absurdities of the literal sense of the Koran, and its repugnance to reason, were studiously pointed out, and dark hints were given that beneath this shell lay a kernel sweet to the taste and nutritive to the soul. But all further information was most rigorously withheld till he had consented to bind himself by a most solemn oath to absolute faith and blind obedience to his instructor. 2. When he had taken the oath he was admitted to

[p. 39]

the second degree, which inculcated the acknowledgment of the imams appointed by God as the sources of all knowledge. 3. The third degree informed him what was the number of these blessed and holy imams; and this was the mystic seven; for, as God had made seven heavens, seven earths, seas, planets, metals, tones, and colours, so seven was the number of these noblest of God's creatures. 4. In the fourth degree the pupil learned that God had sent seven lawgivers into the world, each of whom was commissioned to alter and improve the system of his predecessor; that each of these had seven helpers, who appeared in the interval between him and his successor; these helpers, as they did not appear as public teachers, were called the mute (samit), in contradistinction to the speaking lawgivers. The seven lawgivers were Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, Mohammed, and Ismail, the son of Jaaffer; the seven principal helpers, called Seats (soos), were Seth, Shem, Ishmael (the son of Abraham), Aaron, Simon, Ali, and Mohammed, the son of Ismail. It is justly observed [**] that, as this last personage was not more than a century dead, the teacher had it in his power to fix on whom he would as the mute prophet of the present time, and inculcate the belief in, and obedience to, him of all who had not got beyond this degree. 5. The fifth degree taught that each of the seven mute prophets had twelve apostles for the dissemination of his faith. The suitableness of this number was also proved by analogy. There are twelve signs of the zodiac, twelve months, twelve tribes of Israel, twelve joints in the four fingers of each hand, and so forth. 6. The pupil being led thus far, and having shown no symptoms of restiveness, the precepts of the Koran were once more brought under consideration, and he was told that all the positive portions of

[p. 40]

religion must be subordinate to philosophy. He was consequently instructed in the systems of Plato and Aristotle during a long space of time; and (7), when esteemed fully qualified, he was admitted to the seventh degree, when instruction was communicated in that mystic Pantheism which is held and taught by the sect of the Soofees. 8. The positive precepts of religion were again considered, the veil was torn from the eyes of the aspirant, all that had preceded was now declared to have been merely scaffolding to raise the edifice of knowledge, and was to be flung down. Prophets and teachers, heaven and hell, all were nothing; future bliss and misery were idle dreams; all actions were permitted. 9. The ninth degree had only to inculcate that nought was to be believed, everything might be done [**].

In perusing the accounts of secret societies, their rules, regulations, degrees, and the quantity or nature of the knowledge communicated in them, a difficulty must always present itself. Secrecy being of the very essence of everything connected with them, what means had writers, who were generally hostile to them, of learning their internal constitution and the exact nature of their maxims and tenets? In the present case our authority for this account of a society which chiefly flourished in the tenth and eleventh centuries is Macrisi, a writer of the fifteenth century. His authorities were doubtless of more ancient date, but we know not who they were or whence they derived their information. Perhaps our

[p. 41]

safest course in this, as in similar cases, would be to admit the general truth of the statement, but to suffer our minds to remain in a certain degree of suspense as to the accuracy of the details. We can thus at once assent to the fact of the existence of the college at Cairo, and of the mystic tenets of Soofeeism being taught in it, as also to that of the rights of the Fatimites to the khalifat being inculcated on the minds of the pupils, and missionaries being thence sent over the east, without yielding implicit credence to the tale of the nine degrees through which the aspirant had to pass, or admitting that the course of instruction terminated in a doctrine subversive of all religion and of all morality.

As we have seen, the Dai-al-doat, or chief missionary, resided at Cairo, to direct the operations of the society, while the subordinate dais pervaded all parts of the dominions of the house of Abbas, making converts to the claims of Ali. The dais were attended by companions (Refeek), who were persons who had been instructed up to a certain point in the secret doctrines, but who were neither to presume to teach nor to seek to make converts, that honour being reserved to the dais. By the activity of the dais the society spread so widely that in the year 1058 the emir Bessassiri, who belonged to it, made himself master of Bagdad, and kept possession of it during an entire year, and had money struck, and prayer made, in the name of the Egyptian khalif. The emir, however, fell by the sword of Toghrul the Turk, whose aid the feeble Abbasside implored, and these two distinguishing acts of Mohammedan sovereignty were again performed by the house of Abbas. Soon afterwards the society at Cairo seems to have declined along with the power of the Fatimite khalifs. In 1123 the powerful vizir Afdhal, on occasion of some disturbance caused by them, shut up the Dar-al-hicmet,

[p. 42]

or, as it would appear, destroyed it. His successor Mamoon permitted the society to hold their meetings in a building erected in another situation, and it lingered on till the fall of the khalifat of Egypt. The policy of Afdhal is perhaps best to be explained by a reference to the state of the East at that time. The khalif of Bagdad was become a mere pageant devoid of all real power; the former dominions of the house of Abbas were in the hands of the Seljookian Turks; the Franks were masters of a great part of Syria, and threatened Egypt, where the khalifs were also fallen into incapacity, and the real power had passed to the vizir. As this last could aspire to nothing beyond preserving Egypt, a society instituted for the purpose of gaining partisans to the claims of the Fatimites must have been rather an impediment to him than otherwise. He must therefore have been inclined to suppress it, especially as the society of the Assassins, a branch of it, had now been instituted, which, heedless of the claims of the Fatimites, sought dominion for itself alone. To the history of that remarkable association we now proceed.

Footnotes

^26:* See Ockley's History of the Saracens.

^28:* Hence they were named the Standing (Wakfiyah).

^28:+ Abbas, the ancestor of this family, was one of the uncles [p. 29] of the Prophet. They obtained possession of the khalifat A.D. 750, and retained it through an hereditary succession of princes for 500 years. Al-Mansoor, the second khalif of this dynasty, transferred the royal residence from Damascus, where the Ommiades had dwelt, to Bagdad, which he founded on the banks of the Tigris. This city, also named the City of Peace, the Vale of Peace, the House of Peace, has acquired, beyond what any other town can claim, a degree of romantic celebrity by means of the inimitable Thousand and One Nights. Such is the ennobling power of genius!

^30:* Khizer, by some supposed, but perhaps erroneously, to be the prophet Elias, is regarded by the Mohammedans in the light of a beneficent genius. He is the giver of youth to the animal and the vegetable world. He is clad in garments of the most brilliant green, and he stands as keeper of the Well of Life in the Land of Darkness. According to the romances of the East, Iskander, that is, Alexander the Great, resolved to march into the West, to the Land of Darkness, that he might drink of the water of immortality. During seven entire days he and his followers journeyed through dark and dismal deserts. At length they faintly discerned in the distance the green light which shone from the raiment of Khizer. As they advanced it became more and more resplendent, like the brightest and purest emeralds. As the monarch approached, Khizer dipped a cup in the verdant Water of Life, and reached it to him; but the impatience of Iskander was so great that he spilt the contents of the cup, and the law of fate did not permit the guardian of the fount to fill it for him again. The moral of this tale is evident. Its historic foundation is the journey of the Macedonian to the temple of Ammon.

^32:* See Frazer's Khorasan.

^33:* Lari and Macrisi, quoted by Hammer.

^35:* Macrisi is Hammer's authority for the preceding account of Abdallah. It is to be observed that this Abdallah is unnoticed by Herbelot.

^36:* The genuineness of the descent of Obeid-Allah has been a great subject of dispute among the eastern historians and jurists. Those in the interests of the house of Abbas strained  nerve to make him out an impostor.

^37:* That is, Missionary of Missionaries.

^37:+ Cadhi of Cadhis.

^39:* Hammer, p. 54.

^40:* Mr. De Sacy (Journal des Savans, an 1818) is of opinion that the Arabic words Taleel and Ibahat will not hear the strong sense which Hammer gives them. The former, he says, only signifies that Deism which regards the Deity as merely a speculative being, and annihilates the moral relations between him and the creature; the latter only denotes emancipation from the positive precepts of laws, such as fasting prayer, &c., but not from moral obligations.

     
Secret Societies of the Middle Ages, by Thomas Keightley, [1837], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 43]

  

CHAPTER III.

Ali of Rei--His son Hassan Sabah--Hassan sent to study at Nishaboor--Meets there Omar Khiam and Nizam-al-Moolk--Agreement made by them--Hassan introduced by Nizam to Sultan Malek Shah--Obliged to leave the Court--Anecdote of him--His own account of his Conversion--Goes to Egypt--Returns to Persia--Makes himself Master of Ala-moot.

THERE was a man named Ali, who resided in the city of Rei, in Persia. He was a strenuous Sheah, and maintained that his family had originally come from Koofa, in Arabia; but the people of Khorasan asserted that his family had always dwelt in one of the villages near Toos, in that province, and that consequently his pretensions to an Arabian extraction were false. Ali, it would appear, was anxious to conceal his opinions, and employed the strongest asseverations to convince the governor of the province, a rigid Soonite, of his orthodoxy, and finally retired into a monastery to pass the remainder of his days in meditation. As a further means of clearing himself from the charge of heresy he sent his only son Hassan Sabah [**] to Nishaboor to be instructed by the celebrated imam Mowafek, who resided at that place. What lessons he may have given the young Hassan previously to parting with him, and what communication he may have afterwards kept up with him, are points on which history is silent.

The fame of the imam Mowafek was great over all Persia, and it was currently believed that those

[p. 44]

who had the good fortune to study the Koran and the Soonna [**] under him were secure of their fortune in after-life. His school was consequently thronged by youths ambitious of knowledge and future distinction; and here Hassan met, and formed a strict intimacy with, Omar Khiam, afterwards so distinguished as a poet and an astronomer, and with Nizam-al-Moolk (Regulation of the Realm), who became vizir to the monarchs of the house of Seljook. This last, in a history which he wrote of himself and his times, relates the following instance of the early development of the ambition of Hassan. As these three, who were the most distinguished pupils of the imam, were one day together, "It is the general opinion," said Hassan, "that the pupils of the imam are certain of being fortunate. This opinion may be verified in one of us. So come, let us pledge ourselves to one another that he who shall be successful will make the other two sharers in his good fortune." His two companions readily assented, and the promise was mutually given and received.

Nizam-al-Moolk entered the path of politics, where his talents and his noble qualities had free course, and he rose through the various gradations of office, till at length he attained the highest post in the realm, the viziriate, under Alp Arslan (Strong Lion), the second monarch of the house of Seljook. When thus exalted he forgot not his former friends; and calling to mind the promise which he had made, he received with great kindness Omar Khiam, who waited on him to congratulate him on his elevation; and he offered at once to employ all his interest to procure him a post under the government. But Omar, who was devoted to Epicurean indulgences, and averse from toil and care, thanking his friend,

[p. 45]

declined his proffered services; and all that the vizir could prevail on him to accept was an annual pension of 1,200 ducats on the revenues of Nishaboor, whither he retired to spend his days in ease and tranquillity.

The case was different with Hassan. During the ten years' reign of Alp Arslan he kept aloof from the vizir, living in obscurity, and probably maturing his plans for the future. But when the young prince Malek Shah (King King) mounted the throne he saw that his time was come. He suddenly appeared at the court of the new monarch, and waited on the powerful vizir. The story is thus told by the vizir himself in his work entitled Wasaya (Political Institutes), whence it is given by Mirkhond.

"He came to me at Nishaboor in the year that Malek Shah, having got rid of Kaward, had quieted the troubles which his rebellion had caused. I received him with the greatest honours, and performed, on my part, all that could be expected from a man who is a faithful observer of his oaths, and a slave to the engagements which he has contracted. Each day I gave him a new proof of my friendship, and I endeavoured to satisfy his desires. He said to me once, 'Khojah (master), you are of the number of the learned and the virtuous; you know that the goods of this world are but an enjoyment of little duration. Do you then think that you will be permitted to fail in your engagements by letting yourself be seduced by the attractions of greatness and the love of the world? and will you be of the number of those who violate the contract made with God?' 'Heaven keep me from it!' replied I. 'Though you heap honours upon me,' continued he, 'and though you pour upon me benefits without number, you cannot be ignorant that that is not the way to perform what we once pledged ourselves to respecting each other.' 'You are right,' said I; 'and I

[p. 46]

am ready to satisfy you in what I promised. All that I possess of honour and power, received from my fathers or acquired by myself, belongs to you in common with me.' I then introduced him into the society of the sultan, I assigned him a rank and suitable titles, and I related to the prince all that had formerly passed between him and me. I spoke in terms of such praise of the extent of his knowledge, of his excellent qualities, and his good morals, that he obtained the rank of minister and of a confidential man. But he was, like his father, an impostor, a hypocrite, one who knew how to impose, and a wretch. He so well possessed the art of covering himself with an exterior of probity and virtue that in a little time he completely gained the mind of the sultan, and inspired him with such confidence that that prince blindly followed his advice in most of those affairs of a greater and more important nature which required good faith and sincerity, and he was always decided by his opinion. I have said all this to let it be seen that it was I who had raised him to this fortune, and yet, by an effect of his bad character, there came quarrels between the sultan and me, the unpleasant result of which had like to have been that the good reputation and favour which I had enjoyed for so many years were near going into dust and being annihilated; for at last his malignity broke out on a sudden, and the effects of his jealousy showed themselves in the most terrible manner in his actions and in his words."

In fact, Hassan played the part of a treacherous friend. Everything that occurred in the divan was carefully reported to the sultan, and the worst construction put upon it, and hints of the incapacity and dishonesty of the vizir were thrown out on the fitting occasions. The vizir himself has left us an account of what he considered the worst trick which his old

[p. 47]

schoolfellow attempted to play him. The sultan, it seems, wishing to see a clear and regular balance-sheet of the revenues and expenditure of his empire, directed Nizam-al-Moolk to prepare it. The vizir required a space of more than a year for the accomplishment of the task. Hassan deemed this a good opportunity for distinguishing himself, and boldly offered to do what the sultan demanded in forty days, not more than one-tenth of the time required by the vizir. All the clerks in the finance department were immediately placed at the disposal of Hassan; and the vizir himself confesses that at the end of the forty days the accounts were ready to be laid before the sultan. But, just when we might expect to see Hassan in triumph, and enjoying the highest favour of the monarch, we find him leaving the court in disgrace and vowing revenge on the sultan and his minister. This circumstance is left unexplained by the Ornament of the Realm, who however acknowledges, with great naivete, that, if Hassan had not been obliged to fly, he should have left the court himself. But other historians inform us that the vizir, apprehensive of the consequences, had recourse to art, and contrived to have some of Hassan's papers stolen, so that, when the latter presented himself before the sultan, full of hope and pride, and commenced his statement, he found himself obliged to stop for want of some of his most important documents. As he could not account for this confusion, the sultan became enraged at the apparent attempt to deceive him, and Hassan was forthwith obliged to retire from court with precipitation.

Nizam-al-Moolk determined to keep no measures with a man who had thus sought his ruin, and he resolved to destroy him. Hassan fled to Rei, but, not thinking  safe there, he went further south,

[p. 48]

and took refuge with his friend the reis [**] Aboo-'l-Fazl (Father of Excellence), at Isfahan. What his plans may have hitherto been is uncertain; but now they seem to have assumed a definite form, and he unceasingly meditated on the means of avenging himself on the sultan and his minister. In consultation one day with Aboo-'l-Fazl, who appears to have adopted his speculative tenets, after he had poured out his complaints against the vizir and his master, he concluded by passionately saying, "Oh that I had but two faithful friends at my devotion! soon should I overthrow the Turk and the peasant," meaning the sultan and the vizir. Aboo-'l-Fazl, who was one of the most clear-headed men of his time, and who still did not comprehend the long-sighted views of Hassan, began to fancy that disappointment had deranged the intellect of his friend, and, believing that reasoning would in such a case be useless, commenced giving him at his meals aromatic drinks and dishes prepared with saffron, in order to relieve his brain. Hassan perceived what his kind host was about, and resolved to leave him. Aboo-'l-Fazl in vain employed all his eloquence to induce him to prolong his visit; Hassan departed, and shortly afterwards set out for Egypt.

Twenty years afterwards, when Hassan had accomplished all he had projected, when the sultan and the vizir were both dead, and the society of the Assassins was fully organized, the reis Aboo-'l-Fazl, who was one of his most zealous partisans, visited him at his hill-fort of Alamoot. "Well, reis," said Hassan,

[p. 49]

[paragraph continues] "which of us was the madman? did you or I stand most in need of the aromatic drinks and the dishes prepared with saffron which you used to have served up at Isfahan? You see that I kept my word as soon as I had found two trusty friends."

When Hassan left Isfahan, in the year 1078, the khalif Mostanser, a man of some energy, occupied the throne of Egypt, and considerable exertions were made by the missionaries of the society at Cairo to gain proselytes throughout Asia. Among these proselytes was Hassan Sabah, and the following account of his conversion, which has fortunately been preserved in his own words, is interesting, as affording a proof that, like Cromwell, and, as we have supposed, Mohammed, and all who have attained to temporal power by means of religion, he commenced in sincerity, and was deceived himself before he deceived others.

"From my childhood," says he, "even from the age of seven years, my sole endeavour was to acquire knowledge and capacity. I had been reared up, like my fathers, in the doctrine of the twelve imams, and I made acquaintance with an Ismailite companion (Refeek), named Emir Dhareb, with whom I knit fast the bonds of friendship. My opinion was that the tenets of the Ismailites resembled those of the Philosophers, and that the ruler of Egypt was a man who was initiated in them. As often, therefore, as Emir said anything in favour of these doctrines I fell into strife with him, and many controversies on points of faith ensued between him and me. I gave not in to anything that Emir said in disparagement of our sect, though it left a strong impression on my mind. Meanwhile Emir parted from me, and I fell into a severe fit of sickness, during which I reproached myself, saying, that the doctrine of the Ismailites was assuredly the true one, and that yet out of obstinacy I had not gone over to it, and that

[p. 50]

should death (which God avert!) overtake me, I should die without having attained to the truth. At length I recovered of that sickness, and I now met with another Ismailite, named Aboo Nejm Zaraj, of whom I inquired touching the truth of his doctrine. Aboo Nejm explained it to me in the fullest manner, so that I saw quite through the depths of it. Finally I met a dai, named Moomin, to whom the sheikh Abd-al-Melik (Servant of the King, i, e. of God) Ben Attash, the director of the missions of Irak, had given permission to exercise this office. I besought that he would accept my homage (in the name of the Fatimite khalif), but this he at the first refused to do, because I had been in higher dignities than he; but when I pressed him thereto beyond all measure, he yielded his consent. When now the sheikh Abd-al-Melik came to Rei, and through intercourse learned to know me, my behaviour was pleasing unto him, and he bestowed on me the office of a dai. He said unto me, 'Thou must go unto Egypt, to be a sharer in the felicity of serving the imam Mostander.' When the sheikh Abd-al-Melik went from Rei to Isfahan I set forth for Egypt [**]."

There is something highly interesting in this account of his thoughts and feelings given by Hassan Sabah, particularly when we recollect that this was the man who afterwards organized the society of the Assassins, so long the scourge of the East. We here find him, according to his own statement, dreading the idea of dying without having openly made profession of the truth, yet afterwards, if we are to credit the Oriental historians, he inculcated the doctrine of the indifference of all human actions. Unfortunately this declension from virtue to vice has been too often exhibited to allow of our doubting that it may have happened in the case of Hassan Sabah. A further reflection

[p. 51]

which presents itself is this; Can anything be more absurd than those points which have split the Moslems into sects? and yet how deeply has conscience been engaged in them, and with what sincerity have they not been embraced and maintained! Will not this apply in some measure to the dissensions among Christians, who divide into parties, not for the essential doctrines of their religion, but for some merely accessory parts?

Hassan, on his arrival in Egypt, whither his fame had preceded him, was received with every demonstration of respect. His known talents, and the knowledge of the high favour and consideration which he had enjoyed at the court of Malek Shah, made the khalif esteem him a most important acquisition to the cause of the Ismailites, and no means were omitted to soothe and flatter him. He was met on the frontiers by the Dai-al-Doat, the sherif Taher Casvini, and several other persons of high consideration; the great officers of state and court waited on hint as soon as he had entered Cairo, where the khalif assigned him a suitable abode, and loaded him with honours and tokens of favour. But such was the state of seclusion which the Fatimite khalifs had adopted, that during the eighteen months which Hassan is said to have passed at Cairo he never once beheld the face of Mostanser, though that monarch always evinced the utmost solicitude about him, and never spoke of him but in terms of the highest praise.

While Hassan abode in Egypt the question of the succession to the throne (always a matter of dispute in Oriental monarchies) became a subject of dissension and angry debate at court. The khalif had declared his eldest son, Nesar, to be his legitimate successor; but Bedr-al-Jemali, the Emir-al-Juyoosh, or commander-in-chief of the army, who enjoyed almost unlimited power under the Fatimites, asserted

[p. 52]

the superior right of Musteali, the khalif's second son, which right his power afterwards made good. Hassan Sabah, not very wisely, as it would seem, took the side of Prince Nesar, and thereby drew on himself the hostility of Bedr-al-Jemali, who resolved on his destruction. In vain the reluctant khalif struggled against the might of the powerful Emir-al-Juyoosh; he was obliged to surrender Hassan to his vengeance, and to issue an order for committing him to close custody in the castle of Damietta.

While Hassan lay in confinement at Damietta one of the towers of that city fell down without any apparent cause. This being looked upon in the light of a miracle by the partisans of Hassan and the khalif, his enemies, to prevent his deriving any advantage from it, hurried him on board of a ship which was on the point of sailing for Africa. Scarcely had the vessel put to sea when a violent tempest came on. The sea rolled mountains high, the thunder roared, and the lightning flamed. Terror laid hold on all who were aboard, save Hassan Sabah, who looked calm and undisturbed on the commotion of the elements, while others gazed with agony on the prospect of instant death. On being asked the cause of his tranquillity he made answer, in imitation probably of St. Paul, "Our Lord (Seydna) has promised me that no evil shall befall me." Shortly afterwards the storm fell and the sea grew calm. The crew and passengers now regarded him as a man under the especial favour of Heaven, and when a strong west wind sprung up, and drove them to the coast of Syria, they offered no opposition to his leaving the vessel and going on shore.

Hassan proceeded to Aleppo, where he staid some time, and thence directed his course to Bagdad. Leaving that city he entered Persia, traversed the province of Khuzistan, and, visiting the cities of

[p. 53]

[paragraph continues] Isfahan and Yezd, went on to the eastern province of Kerman, everywhere making proselytes to his opinions. He then returned to Isfahan, where he made a stay of four months. He next spent three months in Khuzistan. Having fixed his view on Damaghan and the surrounding country in Irak as a district well calculated to be the seat of the power which he meditated establishing, he devoted three entire years to the task of gaining disciples among its inhabitants, For this purpose he employed the most eloquent dais he could find, and directed them to win over by all means the inhabitants of the numerous hill-forts which were in that region. While his dais were thus engaged he himself traversed the more northerly districts of Jorjan and Dilem, and when he deemed the time fit returned to the province of Irak, where Hussein Kaini, one of the most zealous of his missionaries, had been long since engaged in persuading the people of the strong hill-fort of Alamoot to swear obedience to the khalif Mostanser. The arguments of the dai had proved convincing to the great majority of the inhabitants, but the governor, Ali Mehdi, an upright and worthy man, whose ancestors had built the fort, remained, with a few others, faithful to his duty, and would acknowledge no spiritual head but the Abbasside khalif of Bagdad; no temporal chief but the Seljookian Malek Shah. Mehdi, when he first perceived the progress of Ismailism among his people, expelled those who had embraced it, but afterwards permitted them to return. Sure of the aid of a strong party within the fort, Hassan is said to have employed against the governor the same artifice by which Dido is related to have deceived the Lybians [**]. He

[p. 54]

offered him 3,000 ducats for as much ground as he could compass with an ox-hide. The guileless Mehdi consented, and Hassan instantly cutting the hide into thongs surrounded with it the fortress of Alamoot. Mehdi, seeing himself thus tricked, refused to stand to the agreement. Hassan appealed to justice, and to the arms of his partisans within the fortress, and by their aid compelled the governor to depart from Alamoot. As Mehdi was setting out for Damaghan, whither he proposed to retire, Hassan placed in his hand an order on the reis Mozaffer, the governor of the castle of Kirdkoo, couched in these terms: "Let the reis Mozaffer pay to Mehdi, the descendant of Ali, 3,000 ducats, as the price of the fortress of Alamoot. Peace be upon the Prophet and his family! God, the best of directors, sufficeth us." Mehdi could hardly believe that a man of the consequence of the reis Mozaffer, who held an important government under the Seljookian sultans, would pay the slightest attention to the order of a mere adventurer like Hassan Sabah; he, however, resolved, out of curiosity, or rather, as we are told, pressed by his want of the money, to try how he would act. He accordingly presented the order, and, to his infinite surprise, was forthwith paid the 3,000 ducats. The reis had in fact been long in secret one of the most zealous disciples of Hassan Sabah.

Historians are careful to inform us that it was on the night of Wednesday, the sixth of the month Rejeb, in the 483d year of the Hejra, that Hassan Sabah made himself master of Alamoot, which was to become the chief seat of the power of the sect of the Ismailites. This year answers to the year 1090 of the Christian era, and thus the dominion of the Assassins was founded only nine years before the Christians of the west established their empire in the Holy Land.

[p. 55]

 

Click to enlarge
Hill Fort.

 

Footnotes

^43:* Or Hassan-ben-Sabah (son of Sabah), so named from Sabah Homairi, one of his pretended Arabian ancestors.

^44:* The Soonna is the body of traditions, answering to the Mishna of the Jews, held by the orthodox Mussulmans.

^48:* Reis, from the Arabic Ras (the head), answers in some respects to captain, a word of similar origin. Thus the master of a ship is called the Reis. Sir John Malcolm says, "it is equivalent to esquire, as it was originally understood. It implies in Persia the possession of landed estates and some magisterial power. The reis is in general the hereditary head of a village."

^50:* Mirkhond.

^53:* Sir J. Malcolm says that the person with whom he read this portion of history in Persia observed to him that the English were well acquainted with this stratagem, as it was by means of it that they got Calcutta from the poor Emperor of Delhi.

     
Secret Societies of the Middle Ages, by Thomas Keightley, [1837], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 56]

  

CHAPTER IV.

Description of Alamoot--Fruitless Attempts to recover it--Extension of the Ismailite Power--The Ismailites in Syria--Attempt on the Life of Aboo-Hard Issa--Treaty made with Sultan Sanjar--Death of Hassan--His Character.

ALAMOOT, a name so famous in the history of the East, signifies the Vulture's Nest, an appellation derived from its lofty site. It was built in the year 860, on the summit of a hill, which bears a fancied resemblance to a lion couching with his nose to the ground, situated, according to Hammer, in 50 1/2 degrees E. long. and 36 degrees N. lat. It was regarded as the strongest of 50 fortresses of the same kind, which were scattered over the district of Roodbar (River-land), the mountainous region which forms the border between Persian Irak and the more northerly provinces of Dilem and Taberistan, and is watered by the stream called the King's River (Shahrood). As soon as Hassan saw himself master of this important place he directed his thoughts to the means of increasing its strength. He repaired the original walls, and added new ones; he sunk wells, and dug a canal, which conveyed water from a considerable distance to the foot of the fortress. As the possession of Alamoot made him master of the surrounding country, he learned to regard the inhabitants as his subjects, and he stimulated them to agriculture, and made large plantations of fruit-trees around the eminence on which the fortress stood.

But before Hassan had time to commence, much less complete these plans of improvement, he saw

[p. 57]

himself in danger of losing all the fruits of his toil. It was not to be expected that the emir, on whom the sultan had bestowed the province of Roodbar, would calmly view its strongest fort in the possession of the foe of the house of Seljook. Hassan, therefore, had not had time to collect stores and provisions when he found all access to the place cut off by the troops of the emir. The inhabitants were about to quit Alamoot, but Hassan exerted the usual influence of a commanding spirit over their minds, and confidently assured them that that was the place in which fortune would favour them. They yielded faith to his words and staid; and at length their perseverance wore out the patience of the emir, and Alamoot thence obtained the title of the Abode of Fortune. The sultan, who had at first viewed the progress of his ex-minister with contempt, began soon to grow apprehensive of his ultimate designs, and in 1092 he issued orders to the emir Arslantash (Lion-stone) to destroy Hassan and his adherents. Arslantash advanced against Alamoot. Hassan, though he had but 70 men with him, and was scantily supplied with provisions, defended himself courageously till Aboo Ali, the governor of Casveen, who was in secret one of his dais, sent 300 men to his aid. These fell suddenly, during the night, on the troops of the emir; the little garrison made at the same time a sortie; the sultan's troops took to flight, and Alamoot remained in the possession of the Ismailites. Much about the same time Malek Shah sent troops against Hussein Kaini, who was actively engaged in the cause of Hassan Sabah in Kuhistan. Hussein threw himself into Moominabad, a fortress nearly as strong as that of Alamoot, and the troops of the sultan assailed him in vain. It was now that Hassan began to display the system which we shall presently unveil. The aged vizir, the great and

[p. 58]

good Nizam-al-Moolk, perished by the daggers of his emissaries, and the sultan himself speedily followed his minister to the tomb, not without suspicion of poison.

Circumstances were now particularly favourable to the plans of Hassan Sabah. On the death of sultan Malek Shah a civil war broke out among his sons for the succession. All the military chiefs and persons of eminence were engaged on one side or the other, and none had leisure or inclination to attend to the progress of the Ismailites. These, therefore, went on gradually extending their power, and fortress after fortress fell into their hands. In the course of ten years they saw themselves masters of the principal hill-forts of Persian Irak; they held that of Shandorr [**] (King's pearl), and two other fortresses, close to Isfahan; that of Khalankhan, on the borders of Fars and Kuhistan; Damaghan, Kirdkoo, and Firoozkoo, in the district of Komis; and Lamseer and several others in Kuhistan. It was in vain that the most distinguished imams and doctors of the law issued their, fetuas against the sect of the Ismailites, and condemned them to future perdition; in vain they called on the orthodox to employ the

[p. 59]

sword of justice in freeing the earth from this godless and abominable race. The sect, strong in its secret bond of unity and determination of purpose, went on and prospered; the dagger avenged the fate of those who perished by the sword, and, as the Orientalized European historian of the society expresses it [**], "heads fell like an abundant harvest beneath the twofold sickle of the sword of justice and the dagger of murder."

The appearance of the Ismailites, under their new form of organization, in Syria, happened at the same time with that of the crusaders in the Holy Land. The Siljookian Turks had made the conquest of that country, and the different chiefs who ruled Damascus, Aleppo, and the other towns and their districts, some of whom were of Turkish, others of Syrian extraction, were in a constant state of enmity with each other. Such powerful auxiliaries as the followers of Hassan Sabah were not to be neglected; Risvan, Prince of Aleppo, so celebrated in the history of the crusades, was their declared favourer and protector, and an Ismailite agent always resided with him. The first who occupied this post was an astrologer, and on his death the office fell to a Persian goldsmith, named Aboo Taher Essaigh. The enemies of Risvan felt the effects of his alliance with the Ismailites. The Prince of Emessa, for example, fell by their daggers, as he was about to relieve the castle of the Koords, to which Raymond, Count of Toulouse, had laid siege.

Risvan put the strong castle of Sarmin, which lay about a day's journey south of Aleppo, into the hands of Aboo-'l-Fettah, the nephew of Hassan Sabah, and his Dai-el-Kebir (Great Missionary) for the province of Syria. The governor of this fortress was Aboo Taher Essaigh. A few years afterwards (1107) the people of Apamea invoked the aid of Aboo Taher

[p. 60]

against Khalaf, their Egyptian governor. Aboo Taher took possession of the town in the name of Risvan, but Tancred, who was at war with that prince, having come and attacked it, it was forced to surrender. Aboo Taher stipulated for free egress for himself; but Tancred, in violation of the treaty, brought him to Antioch, where he remained till his ransom was paid. Aboo-'l-Fettah and the other Ismailites were given up to the vengeance of the sons of Khalaf. Tancred took front them at the same time another strong fortress, named Kefrlana. This is to be noted as the first collision between the Crusaders and the Assassins, as we shall now begin to call them. The origin of this name shall presently be explained.

On the return of Aboo Taher to Aleppo a very remarkable attempt at assassination took place. There was a wealthy merchant, named Aboo-Hard Issa [**], a sworn foe to the Ismailites, and who had spent large sums of money in his efforts to injure them. He was now arrived from the borders of Toorkistan with a richly laden caravan of 500 camels. An Ismailite, named Ahmed, a native of Rei, had secretly accompanied him from the time he left Khorasan, with the design of avenging the death of his father, who had fallen under the blows of Aboo-Hard's people. The Ismailite, on arriving at Aleppo, immediately communicated with Aboo Taher and Risvan. Revenge, and the hope of gaining the wealth of the hostile merchant, made them yield assent at once to the project of assassination. Aboo Taher gave Ahmed

[p. 61]

a sufficient number of assistants; Risvan promised the aid of his guards; and one day, as the merchant was in the midst of his slaves, counting his camels, the murderers fell on him. But the faithful slaves valiantly defended their master, and the Ismailites expiated their guilt with their lives. The princes of Syria heaped reproaches on Risvan for this scandalous violation of the rights of hospitality, and he vainly endeavoured to justify himself by pretending ignorance of the fact. Aboo Taher, as the increasing hatred of the people of Aleppo to the sect made that town an unsafe abode, returned to Persia, his native country, leaving his son, Aboo-'l-Fettah, to manage the affairs of the society in his stead.

The acquisition of castles and other places of strength was now the open and avowed object of the society, whose aim was evidently at the empire of Asia, and no mean was left unemployed for the effecting of this design. In the year 1108 they made a bold attempt at making themselves masters of the strong castle of Khizar, also in Syria, which belonged to the family of Monkad. The festival of Easter being come, when the Mussulman garrison was in the habit of going down into the town to partake in the festivities of the Christians, during their absence the Ismailites entered the castle, and barred the gates. When the garrison returned towards night, they found themselves excluded; but the Ismailites, in their reliance on the strength of the place, being negligent, the women drew up their husbands by cords at the windows, and the intruders were speedily expelled.

In the year 1113, as Mevdood, Prince of Mosul, was walking up and down, on a festival day, in the mosk of Damascus, with the celebrated Togteghin, he was fallen on and slain by an Ismailite. The murderer was cut to pieces on the spot.

[p. 62]

This year was, however, near proving fatal to the society in Syria. Risvan, their great protector, died; and the eunuch Looloo, the guardian of his young son, was their sworn enemy. An order for their indiscriminate destruction was forthwith issued, and, in consequence, more than 300 men, women, and children were massacred, while 200 more were thrown into prison. Aboo-'l-Fettah was put to death with torture; his body was cut to pieces and burnt at the gate looking towards Irak, and his head sent through all Syria. They did not, however, fall totally unavenged; the daggers of the society were directed against the governors and men in power, many of whom became their victims. Thus, in the year 1115, as the Attabeg Togteghin was receiving an audience at the court of the khalif of Bagdad, the governor of Khorasan was fallen upon by three Ismailites, who probably mistook him for the Attabeg, and he and they perished. In 1119 as Bedii, the governor of Aleppo, was journeying with his sons to the court of the emir Il-Ghazi, they were fallen upon by two assassins; Bedii and one of his sons fell by their blows; his other sons cut the murderers down; but a third then sprang forth, and gave the finishing stroke to one of the young men, who was already wounded. The murderer was taken, and brought before Togteghin and Il-Ghazi, who only ordered him to be put in prison; but he drowned himself to escape their vengeance, from which he had, perhaps, nothing to apprehend.

In fact at this time the dread of the followers of Hassan Sabah had sunk deep into the hearts of all the princes of the East, for there was no security against their daggers. Accordingly, when the next year (1120) Aboo Mohammed, the head of them at Aleppo, where they had re-established themselves, sent to the powerful II-Ghazi to demand of him possession

[p. 63]

of the castle of Sherif, near that town, he feared to refuse; but the people of Aleppo, at the persuasion of one of their fellow-citizens (who speedily paid for his advice with his blood), rose en masse, levelled the walls, filled up the ditches, and united the castle to the town. Even the great Noor-ed-deen (Lamp of Religion) was some years afterwards obliged to have recourse to the same artifice to save the castle of Beitlaha from becoming one of their strong-holds.

The same system was pursued in Persia, where sultan Sanjar, the son of Malek Shah, had united under his sceptre the greater part of the dominions of his father and Fakhr-al-Moolk (Fame of the Realm). The son and successor of Nizam-al-Moolk and Chakar Beg, the great uncle of the sultan, perished by the daggers of the emissaries of Hassan Sabah. Sultan Sanjar was himself on his march, intending to lay siege to Alamoot, and the other strong-holds of the Ismailites, when one morning, on awaking, he found a dagger struck in the ground close to his pillow. The sultan was dismayed, but he concealed his terror, and a few days afterwards there came a brief note from Alamoot, containing these words: "Were we not well affected towards the sultan, the dagger had been struck in his bosom, not in the ground." Sanjar recollected that his brother Mohammed, who had laid siege to the castles of Lamseer and Alamoot, had died suddenly just as they were on the point of surrendering--an event so opportune for the society, that it was but natural to ascribe it to their agency--and he deemed it the safest course to proceed gently with such dangerous opponents. He accordingly hearkened to proposals of peace, which was concluded on the following conditions: 1. That the Ismailites should add no new works to their castles; 2. That they should purchase

[p. 64]

no arms or military machines; 3. That they should make no more proselytes. The sultan, on his part, released the Ismailites from all tolls and taxes in the district of Kirdkoh, and assigned them a part of the revenue of the territory of Komis by way of annual pension. To apprehend clearly what the power of the society was, we must recollect that sultan Sanjar was the most powerful monarch of the East, that his mandate was obeyed from Cashgar to Antioch, from the Caspian to the Straits of Bab-el-Mandeb.

Thirty-four years had now elapsed since the acquisition of Alamoot, and the first establishment of the power of Hassan Sabah. In all that time he had never been seen out of the castle of Alamoot, and had been even known but twice to leave his chamber, and to make his appearance on the terrace. In silence and in solitude he pondered the means of extending the power of the society of which he was the head, and he drew up, with his own hand, the rules and precepts which were to govern it. He had outlived most of his old companions and early disciples, and he was now childless, for he had put to death his two only sons, the elder for having been concerned in the murder of his faithful adherent Hussein Kaini; the younger for having violated the precept of the Koran against drinking wine. Feeling the approaches of death, he summoned to Alamoot Keah Buzoorg Oomeid (Keah of Good Hope), who was residing at Lamseer, which he had conquered twenty years before, and Aboo Ali, of Casveen, and committed the direction of the society to them, appointing the former to be its proper spiritual head and director, and placing in the hands of the latter the administration of the civil and external affairs. He then calmly expired, apparently unconscious of or indifferent to the fact of having, by the organization of his pernicious society, rendered

[p. 65]

his name an object of execration, a by-word and a proverb among the nations.

Dimly as we may discern the character of Hassan Sabah through the medium of prejudice and hatred through which the scanty notices of it have reached us, we cannot refuse him a place among the higher order of minds. The founder of an empire or of a powerful society is almost always a great man; but Hassan seems to have had this advantage over Loyola and other founders of societies, that he saw clearly from the commencement what might be done, and formed all his plans with a view to one ultimate object. He surely had no ordinary mind who could ask but two devoted adherents to shake the throne of the house of Seljook, then at the acme of its power.

Footnotes

^58:* This castle was built by sultan Malek Shah. The following was its origin:--As Malek Shah, who was a great lover of the chase, was out one day a hunting, one of the hounds went astray on the nearly inaccessible rock on which the castle was afterwards erected. The ambassador of the Byzantine emperor, who was of the party, observed to the sultan, that in his master's dominions so advantageous a situation would not be left unoccupied, but would long since have been crowned with a castle. The sultan followed the ambassador's advice, and erected the castle of the King's Pearl on this lofty rock. When the castle fell into the hands of the Ismailites, pious Moslems remarked that it could not have better luck, since its site had been pointed out by a dog (an unclean beast in their eyes), and its erection advised by an infidel.

^59:* Hammer, 97.

^60:* That is, Jesus. It may be here observed that the proper names of the Old Testament are still used in the East. Ibrahim, Ismael, Yahya, Joossuf, Moossa, Daood, Suleiman, Issa, are Abraham, Ishmael, Jacob, Joseph, Moses, David, Solomon, and Joshua, or Jesus.

     
Secret Societies of the Middle Ages, by Thomas Keightley, [1837], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 66]

  

CHAPTER V.

Organization of the Society--Names given to the Ismailites--Origin of the name Assassin--Marco Polo's description of the Paradise of the Old Man of the Mountain--Description of it given by Arabian writers--Instances of the obedience of the Fedavee.

HAVING traced thus far the history of this celebrated society, having shown its origin, and how it grew out of the claims of the descendants of Ali to the khalifat, mixed with the mystic tenets which seem to have been ultimately derived from India, we proceed to describe its organization, and its secret doctrines, as they are related by oriental historians.

Hassan Sabah clearly perceived that the plan of the society at Cairo was defective as a mean of acquiring temporal power. The Dais might exert themselves, and proselytes might be gained; but till possession was obtained of some strongholds, and a mode of striking terror into princes devised, nothing effectual could be achieved. He first, therefore, as we have seen, made himself master of Alamoot and the other strong places, and then added to the Dais and the Refeek another class, named Fedavee (Devoted), whose task it was to yield implicit obedience to the mandate of their chief, and, without inquiry or hesitation, plunge their dangers into the bosom of whatever victim was pointed out to them, even though their own lives should be the immediate sacrifice. The ordinary dress of the Fedavee was (like that of all the sects opposed to the house of Abbas) white; their caps, girdles, or boots, were red. Hence they were named the White (Mubeiyazah),

[p. 67]

and the Red (Muhammere [**]); but they could with ease assume any guise, even that of the Christian monk, to accomplish their murderous designs.

The gradations in the society were these. At the head of it stood Hassan himself and his successors, with the title of Seydna, or Sidna [*+] (Our Lord), and Sheikh-al-Jebal (Mountain Chief), a name derived from that of the territory which was the chief seat of the power of the society. This last, owing to the ambiguity of the word sheikh (which, like seigneur and signore, signifies either an elder or chief), has been ridiculously translated by the early European historians Old Man of the Mountain. Under him were the Dai-'l-Kebir (Great Missionaries), of which there were three, for the three provinces of Jebal, Kuhistan and Syria [*++]. Then came the Dais, next the Refeek, then the Fedavee, and lastly the Lazik, or aspirants.

Hassan was perfectly aware that without the compressing power of positive religion no society can well be held together. Whatever, therefore, his private opinions may have been, he resolved to impose on the bulk of his followers the most rigid obedience to the positive precepts of Islam, and, as we have seen, actually put his own son to death for a breach of one of them.

Hassan is said to have rejected two of the degrees of the Ismailite society at Cairo, and to have reduced them to seven, the original number in the plan of Abdallah Maimoon, the first projector of this secret society. Besides these seven degrees, through which the aspirants gradually rose to knowledge, Hassan,

[p. 68]

in what Hammer terms the breviary of the order, drew up seven regulations or rules for the conduct of the teachers in his society. 1. The first of these, named Ashinai-Risk (Knowledge of duty), inculcated the requisite knowledge of human nature for selecting fit persons for admission. To this belonged the proverbial expressions said to have been current among the Dais, similar to those used by the ancient Pythagoreans, such as Sow not on barren ground (that is, Waste not your labour on incapable persons). Speak not in a house where there is a lamp, (that is, Be silent in the presence of a lawyer). 2. The second rule was called Teenis (Gaining of confidence), and taught to win the candidates by flattering their passions and inclinations. 3. The third, of which the name is not given, taught to involve them in doubts and difficulties by pointing out the absurdities of the Koran, and of positive religion. 4. When the aspirant had gone thus far, the solemn oath of silence and obedience, and of communicating his doubts to his teacher alone, was to be imposed an the disciple; and then (5.) he was to be informed that the doctrines and opinions of the society were those of the greatest men in church and state. 6. The Tessees (Confirmation) directed to put the pupil again through all he had learned, and to confirm him in it. And, (7.) finally, the Teevil (Instruction in allegory) gave the allegorical mode of interpreting the Koran, and drawing whatever sense might suit their purposes from its pages. Any one who had gone through this course of instruction, and was thus become perfectly imbued with the spirit of the society, was regarded as an accomplished Dai, and employed in the important office of making proselytes and extending its influence.

We must again express our opinion that the minute accounts which are given to us by some writers, respecting the rules and doctrines of secret associations,

[p. 69]

should be received with a considerable degree of hesitation, owing to the character and the means of information of those from whom we receive them. In the present case our authority is a very suspicious one. We are told that when Alamoot was taken by Hoolekoo Khan, the Mongol prince, he gave his vizir, the learned Ata-Melek (King's father) Jowani, permission to examine the library, and to select such books as were worthy of being preserved. The vizir took out the Korans and some other books of value in his eyes; the rest, among which are said to have been the archives and the secret rules and doctrines of the society, he committed, after looking cursorily through them, to the flames. In an historical work of his own he gave the result of his discoveries in those books, and he is the authority from which Mirkhond and other writers have derived the accounts which they have transmitted to us. It is quite clear, therefore, that the vizir of Hoolakoo was at liberty to invent what atrocities he pleased of the sect which was destroyed by his master, and that his testimony is consequently to be received with suspicion. On the other hand it receives some confirmation from its agreement with the account of the society at Cairo given by Macrisi, and is not repugnant to the spirit of Soofeism.

This last doctrine, which is a kind of mystic Pantheism, viewing God in all and all in God, may produce, like fatalism, piety or its opposite. In the eyes of one who thus views God, all the distinctions  vice and virtue become fleeting and uncertain, and crime may gradually lose its atrocity, and be regarded as only a mean for the production of a good end. That the Ismailite Fedavee murdered innocent persons without compunction, when ordered so to do by his superiors, is an undoubted fact, and there is no absurdity in supposing that he and they may have

[p. 70]

thought that in so doing they were acting right, and promoting the cause of truth. Such sanctifying of crime is not confined to the East; the maxim that the end sanctions the means is of too convenient a nature not to have prevailed in all parts of the world; and the assassins of Henry III. and Henry IV. of France displayed all the sincerity and constancy of the Ismailite Fedavees. Without, therefore, regarding the heads of the Ismailites, with Hammer, mere ruthless and impious murderers, who trampled under foot religion and morals with all their obligations, we may assent to the opinion of their leading doctrine being Soofeism carried to its worst consequences.

The followers of Hassan Sabah were called the Eastern Ismailites, to distinguish them from those of Africa. They were also named the Batiniyeh (Internal or Secret), from the secret meaning which they drew from the text of the Koran, and Moolhad, or Moolahid (Impious) on account of the imputed impiety of their doctrines,--names common to there with most of the preceding sects. It is under this last appellation that they were known to Marco Polo, the Venetian traveller. The name, however, by which they are best known in Europe, and which we shall henceforth chiefly employ, is that of Assassins. This name is very generally derived from that of the founder of their society; but M. De Sacy has made it probable that the oriental term Hashisheen, of which the Crusaders made Assassins, comes from Hashish, a species of hemp, from which intoxicating opiates were made, which the Fedavee were in the habit of taking previously to engaging in their daring enterprises, or employed as a medium of procuring delicious visions of the paradise promised to them by the Sheikh-al-Jebal.

It is a curious question how Hassan Sabah contrived

[p. 71]

to infuse into the Fedavee the recklessness of life, joined with the spirit of implicit obedience to the commands of their superiors, which they so invariably displayed. We are told [**] that the system adopted for this purpose was to obtain, by purchase or otherwise, from their parents, stout and healthy children. These were reared up in implicit obedience to the will of the Sheikh, and, to fit them for their future office, carefully instructed in various languages. The most agreeable spots were selected for their abode, they were indulged in the gratification of their senses, and, in the midst of their enjoyments, some persons were directed to inflame their imaginations by glowing descriptions of the far superior delights laid up in the celestial paradise for those who should be admitted to repose in its bowers; a happiness only to be attained by a glorious death met in obedience to the commands of the Sheikh. When such ideas had been impressed on their minds, the glorious visions ever floated before their eyes, the impression was kept up by the use of the opiate above-mentioned, and the young enthusiast panted for the hour when death, obtained in obeying the order of the Sheikh, should open to him the gates of paradise to admit him to the enjoyment of bliss never to end.

The celebrated Venetian, Marco Polo, who traversed the most remote parts of the East in the 13th century, gave on his return to Europe an account of the regions which he had visited, which filled the minds of men with wonder and amazement. As is usual in such cases this was followed or accompanied by unbelief, and it is only by the inquiries and discoveries of modern travellers that the veracity of Marco Polo, like that of Herodotus, has been established and placed beyond doubt.

Among other wonderful narratives which we meet

[p. 72]

in the travels of Marco Polo is the account which he gives of the people whom he calls Mulehetites (that is, Moolahid), and their prince the Old Man of the Mountain. He describes correctly the nature of this society, and gives the following romantic narrative of the mode employed by that prince to infuse the principle of implicit obedience into the minds of his followers [**].

"In a beautiful valley," says he, "enclosed between two lofty mountains, he had formed a luxurious garden, stored with every delicious fruit and every fragrant shrub that could be procured. Palaces of various sizes and forms were erected in different parts of the grounds, ornamented with works of gold, with paintings, and with furniture of rich silks. By means of small conduits contained in these buildings streams of wine, milk, honey, and some of pure water, were seen to flow in every direction. The inhabitants of these palaces were elegant and beautiful damsels, accomplished in the arts of singing, playing upon all sorts of musical instruments, dancing, and especially those of dalliance and amorous allurement. Clothed in rich dresses, they were seen continually sporting and amusing themselves in the garden and pavilions, their female guardians being confined within doors, and never suffered to appear. The object which the chief had in view in forming a garden of this fascinating kind was this: that Mahomet having promised to those who should obey his will the enjoyments of paradise, where every species of sensual gratification should be found in the society of beautiful nymphs, he was desirous of its being understood by his followers that he also was a prophet, and a compeer of Mahomet, and had the power of admitting to paradise such as he should choose to favour. In order that none without his licence should find their way into this delicious valley, he caused a strong and inexpugnable

[p. 73]

castle to be erected at the opening of it, through which the entry was by a secret passage. At his court, likewise, this chief entertained a number of youths, from the age of twelve to twenty years, selected from the inhabitants of the surrounding mountains, who showed a disposition for martial exercises, and appeared to possess the quality of daring courage. To them he was in the daily practice of discoursing on the subject of the paradise announced by the Prophet and of his own, of granting admission, and at certain times he caused draughts of a soporific nature to be administered to ten or a dozen of the youths, and when half dead with sleep he had them conveyed to the several apartments of the palaces in the garden. Upon awakening from this state of lethargy their senses were struck with all the delightful objects that have been described, and each perceived himself surrounded by lovely damsels, singing, playing, and attracting his regards by the most fascinating caresses, serving him also with delicious viands and exquisite wines, until, intoxicated with excess of enjoyment, amidst actual rivers of milk and wine, he believed himself assuredly in paradise, and felt an unwillingness to relinquish its delights. When four or five days had thus been passed, they were thrown once more into a state of somnolency and carried out of the garden. Upon their being introduced to his presence, and questioned by him as to where they had been, their answer was, 'In paradise, through the favour of your highness;' and then, before the whole court, who listened to them with eager curiosity and astonishment, they gave a circumstantial account of the scenes to which they had been witnesses. The chief thereupon addressing them said, 'We have the assurance of our Prophet that he who defends his lord shall inherit paradise, and if you show yourselves devoted to the obedience of my orders, that happy lot

[p. 74]

awaits you.' Animated to enthusiasm by words of this nature all deemed themselves happy to receive the commands of their master, and were forward to die in his service."

This romantic narrative, more suited to a place among the wonders of the "Thousand and One Nights" than to admission into sober history, has been very generally rejected by judicious inquirers such as De Sacy and Wilkin, the able historians of the Crusades; but it has found credence with Hammer, to whose work we are indebted for the far greater part of the present details on the subject of the Assassins. This industrious scholar has, as he thinks, found a proof of its truth in the circumstance of similar narratives occurring in the works of some Arabian writers which treat of the settlements of the society in Syria, forgetting that a fabulous legend is often more widely diffused than sober truth. All, therefore, that can be safely inferred from this collection of authorities is that the same marvellous tale which the Venetian traveller heard in the north of Persia was also current in Syria and Egypt. Its truth must be established by a different species of proof.

In the Siret-al-Hakem (Memoirs of Hakem), a species of Arabian historic romance, the following account of the gardens at Massyat, the chief seat of the Assassins in Syria, was discovered by Hammer [**]:--

"Our narrative now returns to Ismail the chief of the Ismailites. He took with him his people laden with gold, silver, pearls, and other effects, taken away from the inhabitants of the coasts, and which he had received in the island of Cyprus, and on the part of the king of Egypt, Dhaher, the son of Hakem-biemr-Illah. Having bidden farewell to the sultan of Egypt at Tripolis, they proceeded to Massyat, when

[p. 75]

the inhabitants of the castles and fortresses assembled to enjoy themselves, along with the chief  and his people. They put on the rich dresses with which the sultan had supplied them, and adorned the castle of Massyat with everything that was good and fine. Ismail made his entry into Massyat with the Devoted (Fedavee), as no one has ever done at Massyat before him or after him. He stopped there some time to take into his service some more persons whom he might make Devoted both in heart and body.

"With this view he had caused to be made a vast garden, into which he had water conducted. In the middle of this garden he built a kiosk raised to the height of four stories. On each of the four sides were richly-ornamented windows joined by four arches, in which were painted stars of gold and silver. He put into it roses, porcelain, glasses, and drinking-vessels of gold and silver. He had with him Mamlooks (i.e. slaves), ten males and ten females, who were come with him from the region of the Nile, and who had scarcely attained the age of puberty. He clothed them in silks and in the finest stuffs, and he gave unto them bracelets of gold and of silver. The columns were overlaid with musk and with amber, and in the four arches of the windows he set four caskets, in which was the purest musk. The columns were polished, and this place was the retreat of the slaves. He divided the garden into four parts. In the first of these were pear-trees, apple-trees, vines, cherries, mulberries, plums, and other kinds of fruit-trees. In the second were oranges, lemons, olives, pomegranates, and other fruits. In the third were cucumbers, melons, leguminous plants, &c. In the fourth were roses, jessamine, tamarinds, narcissi, violets, lilies, anemonies, &c. &c.

[p. 76]

"The garden was divided by canals of water, and the kiosk was surrounded with ponds and reservoirs. There were groves in which were seen antelopes, ostriches, asses, and wild cows. Issuing from the ponds, one met ducks, geese, partridges, quails, hares, foxes, and other animals. Around the kiosk the chief Ismail planted walks of tall trees, terminating in the different parts of the garden. He built there a great house, divided into two apartments, the upper and the lower. From the latter covered walks led out into the garden, which was all enclosed with walls, so that no one could see into it, for these walks and buildings were all void of inhabitants. He made a gallery of coolness, which ran from this apartment to the cellar, which was behind. This apartment served as a place of assembly for the men. Having placed himself on a sofa there opposite the door, the chief made his men sit down, and gave them to eat and to drink during the whole length of the day until evening. At nightfall he looked around him, and, selecting those whose firmness pleased him, said to them, 'Ho! such-a-one, come and seat thyself near me.' It is thus that Ismail made those whom he had chosen sit near him on the sofa and drink. He then spoke to them of the great and excellent qualities of the imam Ali, of his bravery, his nobleness, and his generosity, until they fell asleep, overcome by the power of the benjeh [**] which he had given them, and which never failed to produce its effects in less than a quarter of an hour, so that they fell down as if they were inanimate. As soon as the man had fallen the chief Ismail arose, and, taking him up, brought him into a dormitory, and then, shutting the

[p. 77]

door, carried him on his shoulders into the gallery at coolness, which was in the garden, and thence into the kiosk, where he committed him to the care of the male and female slaves, directing them to comply with all the desires of the candidate, on whom they flung vinegar till he awoke. When he was come to himself the youths and maidens said to him, 'We are only waiting for thy death, for this place is destined for thee. This is one of the pavilions of paradise, and we are the hoories and the children of paradise. If thou wert dead thou wouldest be for ever with us, but thou art only dreaming, and wilt soon awake.' Meanwhile the chief Ismail had returned to the company as soon as he had witnessed the awakening of the candidate, who now perceived nothing but youths and maidens of the greatest beauty, and adorned in the most magnificent manner.

"He looked round the place, inhaled the fragrance of musk and frankincense, and drew near to the garden, where he saw the beasts and the birds, the running water, and the trees. He gazed on the beauty of the kiosk, and the vases of gold and silver, while the youths and maidens kept him in converse. In this way he remained confounded, not knowing whether he was awake or only dreaming. When two hours of the night had gone by, the chief Ismail returned to the dormitory, closed to the door, and thence proceeded to the garden, where his slaves came around him and rose before him. When the candidate perceived him he said unto him, 'O chief Ismail, do I dream, or am I awake?' The chief Ismail then made answer to him, 'O such-a-one, beware of relating this vision to any one who is a stranger to this place! Know that the Lord Ali has shown thee the place which is destined for thee in paradise. Know that at this moment the Lord Ali and I have been sitting together in the regions of the empyrean.

[p. 78]

[paragraph continues] So do not hesitate a moment in the service of the imam who has given thee to know his felicity.' Then the chief Ismail ordered supper to be served. It was brought in vessels of gold and of silver, and consisted of boiled meats and roast meats, with other dishes. While the candidate ate he was sprinkled with rose-water; when he called for drink there were brought to him vessels of gold and silver filled with delicious liquors, in which also had been mingled some benjeh. When he had fallen asleep, Ismail carried him through the gallery back to the dormitory, and, leaving him there, returned to his company. After a little time he went, back, threw vinegar on his face, and then, bringing him out, ordered one of the Mamlooks to shake him. On awaking, and finding himself in the same place among the guests, he said, 'There is no god but God, and Mohammed is the Prophet of God!' The chief Ismail then drew near and caressed him, and he remained, as it were, immersed in intoxication, wholly devoted to the service of the chief, who then said unto him, 'O such-a-one, know that what thou hast seen was not a dream, but one of the miracles of the imam Ali. Know that he has written thy name among those of his friends. If thou keep the secret thou art certain of thy felicity, but if thou speak of it thou wilt incur the resentment of the imam. If thou die thou art a martyr; but beware of relating this to any person whatever. Thou hast entered by one of the gates to the friendship of the imam, and art become one of his family; but if thou betray the secret, thou wilt become one of his enemies, and be driven from his house.' Thus this man became one of the servants of the chief Ismail, who in this manner surrounded himself with trusty men, until his reputation was established. This is what is related of the chief Ismail and his Devoted."

To these romantic tales of the paradise of the Old

[p. 79]

[paragraph continues] Man of the Mountain, we must add a third of a still more juggling character, furnished by the learned and venerable Sheikh Abd-ur-Rahman (Servant of the Compassionate, i.e., of God) Ben Ebubekr Al-Jeriri of Damascus, in the twenty-fourth chapter of his work entitled "A Choice Book for discovering the Secrets of the Art of Imposture [**]."

After giving some account of Sinan, the chief of the Syrian Assassins, whom we shall presently have occasion to mention, the sheikh proceeds to narrate the artifice which he employed to deceive his followers:--

"There was near the sofa on which he sat a hole in the ground sufficiently deep for a man to sit down in it. This he covered with a thin piece of wood, leaving only so much of it open as would contain the neck of a man. He placed on this cover of wood a disk of bronze with a hole in the middle of it, and put in it two doors. Then taking one of his disciples, to whom he had given a considerable sum of money to obtain his consent, he placed the perforated disk round his neck, and kept it down by weights, so that nothing appeared but the neck of the man; and he put warm blood upon it, so that it looked as if he had just cut off his head. He then called in his companions, and showed them the plate, on which they beheld the head of their comrade. 'Tell thy comrades,' said the master to the head, 'what thou hast seen, and what has been said unto thee.' The man then answered as he had been previously instructed. 'Which wouldest thou prefer,' said the master, 'to return to the world and thy friends, or to dwell in paradise?' 'What need have I,' replied the head, 'to return to the world after having seen my pavilion in paradise, and the hoories, and al; that God has prepared for me? Comrades, salute

[p. 80]

my family, and take care not to disobey this prophet, who is the lord of the prophets in the state of time, as God has said unto me. Farewell.' These words strengthened the faith of the others; but when they were gone the master took the man up out of the hole, and cut off his head in right earnest. It was by such means as this that he made himself obeyed by his people."

The preceding accounts, whatever may be thought of their truth, serve to testify a general belief throughout the East of some extraordinary means being employed by the mountain chief to acquire the power which he was known to possess over the minds of his Fedavee. And, in fact, there is no great improbability in the supposition of some artifice of that nature having been occasionally employed by him; for, when we recollect that an Asiatic imagination is coarse, especially among the lower orders, and that in the East men rarely see any females but those of their own family, the chief might find no great difficulty in persuading a youth, whom he had transported in a state of stupor into an apartment filled with young girls, of his having been in the actual paradise promised to the faithful.

But, laying aside supposition, we may observe that the very power over the minds of their followers ascribed to Hassan Sabah and his successors has been actually exercised in our own days by the chief of the Wahabees. Sir John Malcolm [**] informs us, from a Persian manuscript, that a few years ago one of that sect, who had stabbed an Arab chief near Bussora, when taken, not only refused to do anything towards saving his life, but, on the contrary, seemed anxiously to court death. He was observed to grasp something firmly in his hand, which he appeared to prize beyond life itself. On its being taken from him and examined,

[p. 81]

it proved to be an order from the Wahabee chief for an emerald palace and a number of beautiful female slaves in the blissful paradise of the Prophet. This story, however, it must be confessed, appears to be little consistent with the principles of the sect of the Wahabees, and we may suspect that it has originated in some misapprehension.

The following instance of the implicit obedience of the Fedavee to the orders of Hassan Sabah is given 'by a respectable oriental historian [**]. An ambassador from the Sultan Malek Shah having come to Alamoot to demand the submission and obedience of the sheikh, Hassan received him in a hall in which he had assembled several of his followers. Making a sign to one youth, he said, "Kill thyself!" Instantly the young man's dagger was plunged into his own bosom, and he lay a corpse upon the ground. To another he said, "Fling thyself down from the wall." In an instant his shattered limbs were lying in the castle ditch. Then turning to the terrified envoy, "I have seventy thousand followers who obey me after this fashion. This be my answer to thy master."

Very nearly the same tale is told of the Assassins of Syria by a western writer [*+]. As Henry Count of Champagne was journeying, in the year 1194, from Palestine to Armenia [*++], his road lay through the confines of the territory of the Ismailites. The chief sent some persons to salute him, and to beg that, on his return, he would stop at, and partake of the hospitality of his castle. The count accepted the invitation. As he returned the Dai-al-Kebir advanced to meet him, showed him every mark of honour, and led him to view his castles and fortresses. Having

[p. 82]

passed through several, they came at length to one the towers of which rose to an exceeding height. On each tower stood two sentinels clad in white. "These," said the chief, pointing to them, "obey me far better than the subjects of you Christians obey their lords;" and at a given signal two of them flung themselves down, and were dashed to pieces. "If you wish," said he to the astonished count, "all my white ones shall do the same." The benevolent count shrank from the proposal, and candidly avowed that no Christian prince could presume to look for such obedience from his subjects. When he was departing, with many valuable presents, the chief said to him significantly, "By means of these trusty servants I get rid of the enemies of our society."

In oriental, and also in occidental history, the same anecdote is often told of different persons, a circumstance which might induce us to doubt of its truth altogether, or at least of its truth in any particular case. The present anecdote, for instance, with a slight variation in the details, is told of Aboo Taher, a celebrated leader of the Carmathites. This chief, after his expedition to Mecca, in which he had slain 30,000 of the inhabitants, filled the hallowed well Zemzem with the bodies of dead men, and carried off the sacred black stone in triumph, had the hardihood to approach Bagdad, the residence of the khalif, with only 500 horsemen. The pontiff of Islam, enraged at the insult, ordered his general Aboo Saj to take 30,000 men, and make him a prisoner. The latter, having collected his forces, sent a man off to Aboo Taher to tell him on his part that out of regard for him, who had been his old friend, he advised him, as he had so few troops with him, either to yield himself at once to the khalif or to see about making his escape. Aboo Taher asked of the envoy how many men Aboo Saj had with him. The

[p. 83]

envoy replied, "Thirty thousand." "He still wants three like mine," said Aboo Taher; and calling to him three of his men, he ordered one of them to stab himself, another to throw himself into the Tigris, a third to fling himself down from a precipice. His commands were at once obeyed. Then turning to the envoy, "He who has such troops fears not the number of his enemies. I give thyself quarter; but know that I shall soon let thee see thy general Aboo Saj chained among my dogs." In fact, that very night he attacked and routed the troops of the khalif, and Aboo Saj, happening to fall into his hands, soon appeared chained among the mastiffs of the Carmathite chief [**].

The preceding details on the paradise of the Sheikh-al-Jebal, and his power over the minds of his followers, will at least help to illustrate the manners and modes of thinking of the orientals. We now resume the thread of our narrative, and proceed to narrate the deeds of the Assassins, as we shall henceforth designate them.

Footnotes

^67:* Ahmar, fem. Hamra, is red in Arabic; hence the celebrated Moorish palace at Granada was called Alhambra (Al Hamra), i.e. the Red.

^67:+ Hence the Spanish Cid.

^67:++ Hammer, book ii.

^71:* Wilken, Geschichte der Kreuzzuge, vol. ii

^72:* Marsden's Translation.

^74:* Fundgruben des Orients, vol. i 11.

^76:* The Arabic name of the hyoscyamus, or henbane. Hammer conjectures that the word benge, or, with the Coptic article in the plural, ni-benje, is the same with the nepenthe of the ancients.--Fundgruben des Orients, iii. 202.

^79:* Fundgruben des Orients, vol. iv.

^80:* History of Persia, vol. i.

^81:* Elmacin, Historia Saracenica, l. iii. p. 286.

^81:+ Marinus Sanutus, l. iii. p. x. c. 8.

^81:++ This was the Armenia in Cilicia.

^83:* D'Herbelot, titre Carmath.

     
Secret Societies of the Middle Ages, by Thomas Keightley, [1837], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 84]

  

CHAPTER VI.

Keah Buzoorg Oomeid--Affairs of the Society in Persia--They acquire the Castle of Banias, in Syria--Attempt to betray Damascus to the Crusaders--Murders committed during the reign of Keah Buzoorg.

KEAH BUZOORG OOMEID trod faithfully in the footprints of his predecessor. He built the strong fortress of Maimoondees, and he made the enemies of the society feel that it was still animated by the spirit of Hassan Sabah. Sultan Sanjar, who, on account of the favourable terms on which he had made peace with the Assassins, was regarded by the rigidly orthodox as a secret follower of their doctrine, declared A himself once more their open enemy, and sent an army to ravage Kirdkoh. These troops were defeated by those which Keah sent against them; but the following year Sanjar put to the sword a great number of the members of the sect. The dagger, as usual, retaliated. Mahmood, the successor of Sanjar, having first tried in vain the effect of arms, sent his grand falconer Berenkesh to Alamoot, to desire that an envoy might be sent to him to treat of peace. The Khojah (Master) Mohammed Nassihi accompanied Berenkesh back to court, and kissed the hand of the sultan, who spoke to him a few words about the peace; but as the Khojah was going out of the palace, he and his followers were fallen upon and massacred by the people.

When the sultan sent an ambassador to Alamoot to exculpate himself from the guilt of participation in this violation of the laws of nations, Keah made

[p. 85]

answer, "Go back to the sultan, and tell him, in my name, Mohammed Nassihi trusted to your perfidious assurances, and repaired to your court; if you speak truly, deliver up the murderers to justice; if not, expect my vengeance." On the refusal of the sultan to surrender the murderers, a corps of Assassins appeared at the gates of Casveen, slew 400 men, and led away 3,000 sheep, 200 horses, and 200 oxen. Next year the sultan took, and retained for a short time, the fortress of Alamoot; but a body of 2,000 men which he sent against Lamseer fled, without drawing a sword, when they heard that the Refeek (Companions) of the society were marching against them. Shortly afterwards the sultan died, and the Assassins made another incursion into the district of Casveen, where they carried off booty and prisoners.

The mountain chief would tolerate no rival near his throne. Hearing that one Aboo Hashem, a descendant of Ali, had arrogated to himself the dignity of imam in the province of Ghilan, which lies north of Kuhistan, and had issued letters calling on the people to acknowledge him, Keah wrote to him to desist from his pretensions. The self-appointed imam only replied by reviling the odious tenets of the Ismailites. The sheikh forthwith sent a body of his troops against him, took him prisoner, and, after trying him by a court-martial, committed him to the flames.

Though, as we have seen, the settlements of the Assassins were in the mountainous region of Irak, in the north-west of Persia, their power was of such a nature that no distance was a security against it. A Fedavee could speedily traverse the intervening regions to plant his dagger in the bosom of any prince or minister who had incurred the vengeance of the Sheikh-al-Jebal. Accordingly we find the shah (King) of Khaurism, between which and Irak lies

[p. 86]

the extensive province of Khorasan, coming to Sultan Massood, the successor of Mahmood, to concert with him a plan for the destruction of these formidable foes to princes. The shah of Khaurism had been formerly rather disposed to favour the Ismailites, but his eyes were now opened, and he was become their most inveterate enemy. Sultan Massood, we know not for what reason, bestowed on him the lands which Berenkesh, the grand falconer, had held of the sultan. Berenkesh, mortally offended at this unworthy treatment, retired, with his family, to the territory of the Ismailites, and sought the protection of Keah, whose open enemy he had hitherto been. Policy, or a regard to good faith and humanity, made the Assassin prince grant the protection which was required; and when the shah of Khaurism wrote, reminding Keah of his own former friendship, and the bitter hostility of Berenkesh, and requesting him, on that plea, to give up the fugitive, the sheikh replied, "The shah of Khaurism speaks true, but we will never give up our suppliants." Long and bloody enmity between the sheikh and the shah was the consequence of this refusal to violate the rights of hospitality.

The Syrian branch of the society begins at this time to attract rather more attention than that of Persia, chiefly on account of its connexion with the Crusaders, who had succeeded in establishing an empire extending from the frontiers of Egypt to those of Armenia. A Persian Ismailite, named Behram of Astrabad, who is said to have commenced his career by the murder of his own father, gained the confidence of the vizir of the prince of Damascus, who gave him the castle of Banias, or Banias (the ancient Balanea), for the use of the society. This place, which became the nucleus of the power of the Assassins in Syria, lies in a fertile, well-watered

[p. 87]

plain, about 4,000 paces from the sea. The valley whence the numerous streams which fructify it issue is called the Wadi-al-Jinn (Valley of Demons), "a place," observes Hammer, whom no casual coincidence escapes, "from its very name worthy of becoming a settlement of the Assassins." From Banias they extended their power over the neighbouring castles and fortresses, until, twelve years afterwards, the seat of dominion was transferred thence to Massyat.

Behram fell shortly afterwards in an engagement against the people of the valley of Taim, the brother of whose chief had perished by the daggers of the Assassins. His successor was Ismail, a Persian, who continued the bond of amity with the vizir of Damascus, whither he sent, by way of resident, a man named, rather inappropriately as it would appear, Aboo-'l-Wefa (Father of Fidelity). This man so won the favour of the vizir and prince that he was appointed to the office of Hakem, or supreme judge; and having thus acquired power and influence, he immediately turned his thoughts to the best mode of employing them for the advantage of the society, an object always near the heart of a true Ismailite. A place of strength on the sea-coast would, he conceived, be of the utmost importance to them; so he fixed his eyes upon Tyre, and fell upon the following expedient to obtain possession of it.

The Franks had been now upwards of thirty years established in the East. Their daring and enthusiastic valour was at once the dread and the admiration of their Mussulman foes, and feats almost surpassing the fables of the romances of chivalry had been performed by their gallant warriors. These were the auxiliaries to whom Aboo-'l-Wefa directed his attention; for we are to observe that as yet the fanatic spirit had not united all the Moslems in 

[p. 88]

against the followers of the Cross, and the princes of Aleppo, Damascus, and the other districts of Syria, had been more than once in alliance with the Christian realms of Jerusalem and Antioch. Aboo-'l-Wefa sent therefore and concluded a secret treaty with Baldwin II., king of Jerusalem, in which he engaged, if the Christian warriors would secretly march and appear before Damascus on a i Friday, when the emir and his officers would be at the mosk, to give them possession of the gates of the town. The king was in return to put Tyre into the hands of the Ismailites.

The Christian army was assembled; all the barons of the kingdom appeared in arms; the king in person led the host; the newly-formed military order of the Templars displayed for the first time in the field their striped banner Beauseant, afterwards so well known in many a bloody fray. Prince Bernard of Antioch, Count Pontius of Tripolis, the brave Joscelin of Edessa, led their knights and footmen to share in the capture of the wealthy city of Damascus. The mountains which environ Lake Tiberias were left behind, and the host joyfully emerged into the plain watered by the streams Abana and Pharpar. But here defeat awaited them. Taj-al-Molook (Diadem of Kings) Boozi, the emir of Damascus, had in time discovered the plot of his hakem. He had put him and the vizir to death, and had ordered a general massacre of the Ismailites in the city [**]. The Christian army was now at a place named Marj Safar, and the footmen had begun to plunder the villages for food, when a small body of gallant Damascene warriors rushed from the town and fell upon them. The defenceless Christians sank beneath their blows, incapable of resistance. The rest of the army advanced to aid or avenge their brethren, when 

[p. 89]

suddenly [**] the sky became overcast, thick darkness enveloped all objects, the thunder roared, the lightning flashed, the rain poured down in torrents, and, by a rapid transition, peculiar to Eastern climates, the rain and waters turned into snow and ice, and augmented the horrors of the day. The superstitious and conscience-stricken Crusaders viewed in this awful phenomenon the immediate agency of heaven, and deemed it to be sent as a punishment for their sins; and, recollecting that on that very spot but four years before King Baldwin had gained, with a handful of men, a victory over an army of the Damascenes, they were plunged into grief and humiliation. The only advantage which they derived from this expedition was the acquisition of the castle of Banias, which the Ismailite governor put into their hands, that under their protection he might escape the fate of his brethren.

Banias was given up to the Christians in the same year in which Alamoot was taken by the Seljookian sultan, and thus the power of the Assassins seemed to be almost gone. But it had in it a conservative principle, and, hydra-like, it grew by its wounds. Alamoot was speedily recovered, and three years afterwards Banias was once more the seat of a Dai-al-Kebir. At the same time the dagger raged with unwonted fury against all of whom the society stood in apprehension, and the annals of the reign of Keah Buzoorg Oomeid furnish a list of illustrious victims.

The first of these was the celebrated Aksunkur, Prince of Mossul, a warrior equally dreaded by the Christians and by the Assassins. As this prince, on his return from Maarra Mesrin, where the Moslem and Christian hosts had parted without venturing to engage, entered the mosk at Mossul to perform his

[p. 90]

devotions, he was attacked at the moment when Le was about to take his usual seat by eight assassins, disguised as dervishes. Three of them fell beneath the blows of the valiant emir, but ere his people could come to his aid he had received his death-wound and expired. The remainder of the murderers became victims to the vengeance of the people; one youth only escaped. The Arabian historian, Kemal-ed-Deen, relates on this occasion a curious trait of the fanaticism and Spartan spirit which animated the members of the sect of the Ismailites. When the mother of the youth above-mentioned heard that the formidable Aksunkur had been slain, she painted her face and put on her gayest raiment and ornaments, rejoicing that her son had been found worthy to die the glorious death of a martyr in the cause of the Imam. But when she saw him return alive and unscathed, she cut off her hair and blackened her countenance, and would not be comforted.

In the following year (1127) fell Moin-ed-deen, the vizir of Sultan Sanjar. In this case the Assassin had engaged himself as a groom in the service of the vizir. As Moin-ed-deen went one day into the stable to look at his horses the Assassin appeared before him, stripped, and holding one of the horses by the bridle. As the vizir, unsuspicious of danger, came near where he was, the false groom made the horse rear, and, under the pretence of soothing and pacifying the restive animal, he took out a small dagger which he had concealed in the horse's mane, and plunged it into the bosom of the vizir.

The slaughter of the Ismailites by the Prince of Damascus was not forgotten, and two years afterwards he received two dagger wounds, one of which proved mortal. Their vengeance was not appeased by his blood, and his son and successor, Shems-al-Molook (Sun of Kings), perished by a conspiracy

[p. 91]

with the guilt of which the Assassins were charged. in the catalogue of the victims of this period appear also the names of the Judges of the East and of the West, of the Mufti of Casveen, of the Reis of Isfahan, and the Reis of Tebreez.

The East has been at all times prolific of crime; human life is not there held to be of the value at which it is estimated in Europe; and the dagger and poison are freely employed to remove objects of apprehension, to put obstacles out of the way of ambition, or to satiate the thirst of vengeance. We are not, therefore, lightly to give credit to every charge made against the Assassins, and to believe them guilty of murders from which they had no advantage to derive. Thus, when at this time the Fatimite Khalit Amir bi-ahkami-llah (Commander of the observance of the laws of God) fell by the hands of murderers, the probability is that he was not a victim to the vengeance of the Ismailite society, whom he had never injured, but rather to that of the family of the powerful vizir Afdal, who had been assassinated some time before by the khalif's order, as we have every reason to suppose.

With a greater show of reason may the murder or Mostarshed, the Khalif of Bagdad, be imputed to the policy of the mountain chief. The Seljookian princes, the predecessors of Massood, had been satisfied to exercise all real power in the empire which had once obeyed the house of Abbas, leaving to that feeble Shadow of God upon Earth the unsubstantial privilege of having the coin of the realm struck and prayers offered on Friday in the mosk in his name. But Massood arrogated even these rights to himself. and the helpless successor of the Prophet was obliged to submit to the indignity which he could not pre vent. At length some discontented military chiefs passed with their troops over to the khalif, and persuaded

[p. 92]

him that by one bold effort he might overthrow the might of the Turkish sultan, and recover all his rights. The khalif listened to their arguments, and, placing himself at the head of an army, marched against Sultan Massood. But fortune proved adverse to him. At the first shock the greater part of the troops of Bagdad abandoned him, and he remained a captive in the hands of the sultan, who brought him with him a prisoner to Maragha. Here a treaty was concluded between them, and the khalif bound himself not to go any more outside of the walls of Bagdad, and annually to pay a sum of money. This treaty appears to have been displeasing to the Assassins; and, watching their opportunity, when Massood was gone to meet the ambassadors of Sultan Sanjar, a party of them fell upon and massacred the khalif and his train. The lifeless body of the Commander of the Faithful was mangled by them in the most scandalous manner.

After a blood-stained reign of fourteen years and three days Keah Buzoorg Oomeid died. Departing from the maxims of Hassan Sabah, who it is probable wished to imitate the conduct of the Prophet, and leave the supreme dignity elective, he appointed his own son, Keah Mohammed, to be his successor, induced either by paternal partiality, or believing him to be the person best qualified for the office.

Footnotes

^88:* The number slain was 6,000.

^89:* It was the month of December.

     
Secret Societies of the Middle Ages, by Thomas Keightley, [1837], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 93]

  

CHAPTER VII.

Keah Mohammed--Murder of the Khalif--Castles gained in Syria--Ismailite Confession of Faith--Mohammed's Son Hassan gives himself out for the promised Imam--His Followers punished--Succession of Hassan--He abolishes the Law--Pretends to be descended from the Prophet--Is murdered.

THE policy of the society underwent no alteration on the accession of Mohammed. The dagger still smote its enemies, and as each victim fell, the people who maintained the rights of Ismail, and who were kept in rigid obedience to the positive precepts of the Koran, beheld nothing but the right hand of Heaven made bare for the punishment of crime and usurpation. The new mountain prince had hardly taken the reins of government into his hands when Rasheed, the successor of the late khalif, eager to avenge the murder of his father, assembled an army and marched against Alamoot. He had reached Isfahan, but there his march terminated. Four Assassins, who had entered his service for the purpose, fell upon him in his tent and stabbed him. When the news was conveyed to Alamoot great rejoicings were made, and for seven days and seven nights the trumpets and kettle-drums resounded from the towers of the fortress, proclaiming the triumph of the dagger to the surrounding country.

The Syrian dominion of the Ismailites was at this time considerably extended. They purchased from Ibn Amroo,  owner, the castles of Cadmos and Kahaf, and took by force that of Massyat from the

[p. 94]

lords of Sheiser. This castle, which was situated on the west side of Mount Legam, opposite Antaradus, became henceforth the chief seat of Ismailite power in Syria. The society had now a line of coast to the north of Tripolis, and their possessions extended inland to the verge of the Hauran.

The reign of Mohammed presents few events to illustrate the history of the Assassins. It was probably in his time that the following confession of the Ismailite faith was made to the persons whom Sultan Sanjar sent to Alamoot to inquire into it [**]:

"This is our doctrine," said the heads of the society. "We believe in the unity of God, and acknowledge as the true wisdom and right creed only that which accords with the word of God and the commands of the Prophet. We hold these as they are delivered in the holy writ, the Koran, and believe in all that the Prophet has taught of the creation, and the last things, of rewards and punishments, of the last judgment, and the resurrection. To believe this is necessary, and no one is authorized to judge of the commands of God for himself, or to alter a single letter in them. These are the fundamental doctrines of our sect, and if the sultan does not approve of them, let him send hither one of his learned divines, that we may argue the matter with him."

To this creed no orthodox Mussulman could well make any objection. The only question was, what was the Ismailite system of interpretation, and what other doctrines did they deduce from the sacred text; and the active employment of the dagger of the Fedavee suggested in tolerably plain terms that there were others, and that something not very compatible with the peace and order of society lay behind the veil. Indeed the circumstance of the Ismailite chiefs

[p. 95]

professing themselves to be only the ministers and representatives of the invisible imam was in itself highly suspicious; for what was to prevent their enjoining any atrocity which might be for their interest, in the name of their viewless master? They are ignorant indeed of human nature who suppose that a prompt obedience would not be yielded to all such commands by the ignorant and bigoted members of the sect.

The ill leaven of the secret doctrine displayed itself before very long. Keah Mohammed, who appears to have been a weak, inefficient man, was held in little esteem by his followers. They began to attach themselves to his son Hassan, who had the reputation of being a man of prodigious knowledge, learned in tradition and the text of the Koran, versed in exposition, and well acquainted with the sciences. Hassan, either through vanity or policy, began secretly to disseminate the notion of his being himself the imam whose appearance had been promised by Hassan Ben Sabah. Filled with this idea, the more instructed members of the society vied with each other in eagerness to fulfil his commands, and Keah Mohammed, seeing his power gradually slipping from him, was at length roused to energy. Assembling the people, he reprobated in strong terms the prevailing heresy. "Hassan," said he, "is my son, and I am not the imam, but only one of his missionaries. Whoever maintains the contrary is an infidel." Then, in true Assassin fashion, he gave effect to his words by executing 250 of his son's adherents, and banishing an equal number from the fortress. Hassan himself, in order to save his life, was obliged publicly to curse those who held the new opinions, and to write dissertations condemning their tenets, and defending those of his father. By these means he succeeded in removing suspicion

[p. 96]

from the mind of the old chief; but, as he continued to drink wine in private, and violated several of the other positive precepts of the law, his adherents became only the more convinced of his being the imam, at whose coming all the precepts of the law were to cease to be of any force.

Hassan was obliged to be cautious and conceal his opinions during the lifetime of his father; for, whatever their opinion might be of the capacity and intellectual power of the head of their sect, the Assassins believed themselves to be bound to obey his orders, as proceeding from the visible representative of the sacred invisible imam; and, high as their veneration for Hassan was, his blood would have flowed on the ground the instant an order to that effect had passed the lips of his father. But no sooner was Keah Mohammed dead, after a reign of twenty-four years, and the supreme station was come to Hassan himself, than he resolved to fling away the mask at once, and not* only to trample on the law himself, but to authorize and encourage all his people to do the same.

Accordingly, when the month Ramazan (the Mohammedan Lent) of the 559th year of the Hejra (A. D. 1163) was come, he ordered all the inhabitants of Roodbar to assemble on the place of prayer (Mosella), or esplanade, before the castle of Alamoot. Facing the direction of the Keblah [**] he caused a pulpit to be erected, at whose four corners were displayed banners of the different hues familiar to Islam, namely, a white, a red, a yellow, a green, colours adverse to the black of the Abbassides.

On the 17th day of the month the people, in obedience to his commands, appeared in great numbers beneath the walls of the fortress. After a little

[p. 97]

time Hassan came forth and ascended the pulpit. All voices were hushed; expectation waited on the words of the Sheikh-al-Jebal. He commenced his discourse by perplexing the minds of his auditors by enigmatical and obscure sentences. When he had thus deluded them for some time, he informed them that an envoy of the imam (that is, the phantom of a khalif who was still sitting on the throne at Cairo) had arrived, and had brought him a letter addressed to all Ismailites, whereby the fundamental tenets of the sect were renewed and confirmed. He proceeded to assure them that, by this letter, the gates of mercy and compassion had been opened for all who would follow and obey him; that they were the true elect; that they were freed from all obligations of the law, and delivered from the burden of all commands and prohibitions; that he had now conducted them to the day of the resurrection, that is, of the revelation of the imam. He then commenced in Arabic the Khootbeh, or public prayer, which he said he had received from the imam; and an interpreter, who stood at the foot of the pulpit, translated it for them to the following effect:--

"Hassan, the son of Mohammed, the son of Buzoorg Oomeid, is our khalif (successor), dai, and hoojet (proof). All who follow our doctrine must hearken to him in affairs of faith and of the world, and regard his commands as imperative, his words as impressive. They must not transgress his prohibitions, and they must regard his commands as ours. They should know that our lord has had compassion upon them, and has conducted them to the most high God."

When this proclamation was made known Hassan came down from the pulpit, directed tables to be spread, and commanded the people to break the fast, and to give themselves up, as on festival days, to all

[p. 98]

kinds of enjoyment, with music, and various games and sports. "For this," cried he, "this is the day of the resurrection;" that is, according to the Ismailite mode of interpreting the Koran, the day of the manifestation of the imam.

What the orthodox had before only suspected was now confirmed. It was now manifest, beyond doubt, that the Ismailites were heretics who trampled under foot all the most plain and positive precepts of Islam; for, though they might pretend to justify their practice by their allegorical system of interpretation, it was clearly repugnant to common sense, and might be made the instrument of sanctioning, under the name of religion, every species of enormity. From this time the term Moolahid (impious) began to become the common and familiar appellation of the Ismailites in the mouths of the orthodox Moslems. As to the Ismailites themselves, they rejoiced in what they had done; they exulted like emancipated bondsmen in the liberty which they had acquired; and they even commenced a new era from the 17th (or, according to some authorities, the 7th) Ramazan of the 559th year, namely, the day of the manifestation of the imam. To the name of Hassan they henceforth affixed the formula "On his memory be peace;" which formula, it would appear, was employed by itself to designate him; for the historian Mirkhond assures us that he had been informed by a credible person that over the door of the library in Alamoot was the following inscription:--

"With the aid of God, the bonds
 Of the law he took away,
 The commander of the world,
 Upon whose name be peace."

The madness of Hassan now attained its climax. He disdained to be regarded, like his predecessors, as merely the representative of the imam on earth,

[p. 99]

but asserted himself to be the true and real imam, who was now at length made manifest to the world. He sent letters to all the settlements of the society, requiring them to acknowledge him in his new capacity. He was prudent enough, however, to show a regard for the dignity and power of his different lieutenants in these letters, as appears by the following specimen, being the letter which was sent to Kuhistan, where the reis Mozaffar commanded:--

"I Hassan say unto you that I am the representative of God upon earth, and mine in Kuhistan is the reis Mozaffar, whom the men of that country are to obey, and to receive his word as mine."

The reis erected a pulpit in the castle of Moominabad, the place of his residence, and read the letter aloud to the people, the greater part of whom listened to its contents with joy. The tables were covered before the pulpit, the wine was brought forth, the drums and kettle-drums resounded, the notes of the pipe and flute inspired joy, and the day of the abolition of the positive precepts of the law was devoted to mirth and festivity. Some few, who were sincere and upright in their obedience to Islam, quitted the region which they now regarded as the abode of infidelity, and went in search of other abodes; others, of a less decided character, remained, though shocked at what they were obliged every day to behold. The obedience to the commands of the soi-disant imam was, however, tolerably general, and, according to Hammer, who can scarcely, however, be supposed to regard the system of Hassan as really more licentious than he has elsewhere described that of Mahomet, "the banner of the freest infidelity, and of the most shameless immorality, now waved on all the castles of Roodbar and Kuhistan, as the standard of the new illumination; and, instead of the name of the Egyptian khalif, resounded from

[p. 100]

all the pulpits that of Hassan as the true successor of the Prophet."

The latter point had presented some difficulty to Hassan; for, in order to satisfy the people on that head, it was necessary to prove a descent from the Prophet, and this was an honour to which it was well known the family from which he was sprung had never laid claim. He might take upon him to abolish the positive precepts of the law as he pleased, and the people, whose inclinations were thereby gratified, would not perhaps scan very narrowly the authority by which he acted; but the attempt to deprive the Fatimite khalif of the honour which he had so long enjoyed, and to assume the rank of God's vicegerent on earth in his room, was likely to give too great a shock to their prejudices, if not cautiously managed.

It was necessary, therefore, that he should prove himself to be of the blood of the Fatimites. He accordingly began to drop some dark hints respecting the truth of the received opinion of his being the son of Keah Mohammed. Our readers will recollect that, when Hassan Sabah was in Egypt, a dispute had taken place respecting the succession to the throne, in which Hassan had nearly lost his life for opposing the powerful commander-in-chief (Emir-al-Jooyoosh), and Nezar, the prince for whom the khalif Mostanser had designed the succession, had been deprived of his right by the influence of that officer. The confidents of Hassan now began to give out that, in about a year after the death of the khalif Mostanser, a certain person named Aboo-'l-Zeide, who had been high in his confidence, had come to Alamoot, bearing with him a son of Nezar, whom he committed to the care of Hassan Sabah, who, grateful to the memory of the khalif and his son, had received the fugitive with great honour, and assigned a village at the foot of Alamoot for the

[p. 101]

residence of the young imam. When the youth was grown up he married and had a son, whom he named On his Memory be Peace. Just at the time when the imam's wife was confined in the village, the consort of Keah Mohammed lay in at the castle; and, in order that the descendant of Fatima might come to the temporal power which was his right, a confidential woman undertook and succeeded in the task of secretly changing the children. Others went still further, and did not hesitate to assert that the young imam had intrigued with the wife of Keah Mohammed, and that Hassan was the fruit of their adulterous intercourse. Like a true pupil of ambition, Hassan was willing to defame the memory of his mother, and acknowledge himself to be a bastard, provided he could succeed in persuading the people to believe him a descendant of the Prophet.

These pretensions of Hassan to a Fatimite pedigree gave rise to a further increase of the endless sects into which the votaries of Islam were divided. Those who acknowledged it got the name of Nezori, and by them Hassan was called the Lord of the Resurrection (Kaim-al-Kiamet), and they styled themselves the Sect of the Resurrection.

The reign of the vain, inconsiderate Hassan was but short. He had governed the society only four years when he was assassinated by his brother-in-law, Namver, a descendant, we are told, of the family of Buyah, which had governed the khalifs and their dominions before the power passed into the hands of the Turkish house of Seljook.

Footnotes

^94:* As Sanjar lived to a great age he was contemporary with several of the Ismailite sheikhs.

^96:* That is, the point towards which they turn in prayer, namely, Mecca.

     
Secret Societies of the Middle Ages, by Thomas Keightley, [1837], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 102]

  

CHAPTER VIII.

Mohammed II.--Anecdote of the Imam Fakhr-ed-deen--Noor-ed-deen--Conquest of Egypt--Attempt on the Life of Saladin.

THE death of Hassan was amply avenged by his son and successor, Mohammed II. Not only was the murderer himself put to death; vengeance, in its oriental form, extended itself to all his kindred of both sexes, and men, women, and children bled beneath the sword of the executioner. Mohammed, who had been carefully trained up in the study of philosophy and literature, was, like his father, puffed up with vanity and ambition, and, far from receding from any of his predecessor's pretensions to the imamat, he carried them to even a still greater length than he had done. At the same time he maintained a high character for knowledge and talent among his literary contemporaries, who were numerous, for his reign extended through a period of forty-six years, and the modern Persian literature was now fast approaching its climax. Not to mention other names, less familiar to our readers, we shall remark, as a proof of what we have said, that this was the period in which Nizamee of Ghenj sang in harmonious numbers the loves of Khosroo and Shireen, and of Mujnoon and Leila (these last the Romeo and Juliet of the east), the crown and flower of the romantic poetry of Persia. Then too flourished the great panegyrist Enveree, and a crowd of historians, jurists, and divines.

One of the most celebrated men of this time was

[p. 103]

the imam Fakhr-ed-deen (Glory of Religion) Rasi, who gave public lectures on the law in his native city of Rei. It being slanderously reported that he was devoted in secret to the opinions of the Ismailites, and was even one of their missionaries, he adopted the ordinary expedient of abusing and reviling that sect, and each time he ascended the pulpit to preach he reprobated and cursed the Impious in no measured terms. Intelligence of what he was about was not long in reaching the eyrie of the Sheikh-al-Jebal, and a Fedavee received his instructions, and forthwith set out for Rei. He here entered himself as a student of the law, and sedulously attended the lectures of the learned imam. During seven months he watched in vain for an opportunity of executing his commission. At length he discovered one day that the attendants of the imam had left him to go to fetch him some food, and that he was alone in his study. The Fedavee entered, fastened the doors, seized the imam, cast him on the ground, and directed his dagger at his bosom. "What is thy design?" said the astonished imam. "To rip up thy belly and breast." "And wherefore?" "Wherefore? Because thou hast spoken evil of the Ismailites in the pulpit." The imam implored and entreated, vowing that, if his life was spared, he would never more say aught to offend the sect of Ismail. "I cannot trust thee," cried the Assassin; for when I am gone thou wilt return to thy old courses, and, by some ingenious shift or other, contrive to free thyself from the obligation of thy oath." The imam then, with a most solemn oath, abjured the idea of explaining away his words, or seeking absolution for perjury. The Assassin got up from over him, saying, "I had no order to slay thee, or I should have put thee to death without fail. Mohammed, the son of Hassan, greets thee, and invites thee to honour

[p. 104]

him by a visit at his castle. Thou shalt there have unlimited power, and we will all obey thee like trusty servants. We despise, so saith the sheikh, the discourses of the rabble, which rebound from our ears like nuts from a ball; but you should not revile us, since your words impress themselves like the strokes of the graver in the stone." The imam replied that it was totally out of his power to go to Alamoot, but that in future he should be most careful never to suffer a word to pass his lips to the discredit of the mountain prince. Hereupon the Fedavee drew 300 pieces of gold from his girdle, and, laying them down, said, "See! here is thy annual pension; and, by a decree of the divan, thou shalt every year receive an equal sum through the reis Mozaffer. I also leave thee, for thy attendants, two garments from Yemen, which the Sheikh-al-Jebal has sent thee." So saying, the Fedavee disappeared. The imam took the money and the clothes, and for some years his pension was Maid regularly. A change in his language now became perceptible, for, whereas he was used before, when, on treating of any controverted point, he had occasion to mention the Ismailites, to express himself thus, "Whatever the Ismailites, whom God curse and destroy! may say,"--now that he was pensioned he contented himself with merely saying, "Notwithstanding what the Ismailites may say." When one of his scholars asked him the cause of this change he made answer, "We cannot curse the Ismailites, they employ such sharp and convincing arguments." This anecdote is related by several of the Persian historians, and it serves to prove, like the case of sultan Sanjar, related above, that the Ismailites were not so thoroughly ruthless and bloodthirsty as not to prefer rendering an enemy innocuous by gentle means to depriving him of life.

Historians record no other event connected with

[p. 105]

the eastern establishment of the Ismailite society during the long reign of Mohammed II. We shall now, therefore, turn our view to the Syrian branch, which attracts attention by the illustrious names which appear in oriental history at that time, and with which the ruler of Massyat came into hostile or friendly relations. The names of Noor-ed-deen (Light of Religion), Salah-ed-deen (Integrity of Religion), the Noradin and Saladin of western writers, and the Lion-hearted king of England, will at once awake the attention of the reader.

The celebrated Emod-ed-deen (Pillar of Religion) Zengi, who gave the Christian power in the east its first shock by the conquest of Edessa, perished by the hand of a slave shortly after that achievement. His power and the title Atabeg fell to his son Noor-ed-deen, who carried on the war against the Christians with all the activity of his father, and with more of the gentleness and courtesies which shed a lustre on zeal and valour. Noor-ed-deen was one of the most accomplished characters which the East has exhibited. He was generous and just, and strict in the observance of all the duties of Islam. No pomp or magnificence surrounded him. He wore neither silk nor gold. With the fifth part of the booty, which was his share as prince, he provided for all his expenses. A zealous Moslem, he was evermore engaged in the combats of the Holy War,--either the greater, which was held to be fought against the world and its temptations by fasting and prayer, by study, and the daily practice of the virtues required of him who is placed in authority,--or the lesser, which was fought with natural weapon's against the foes of Islam. From this union of piety and valour he acquired the titles of Gasi (Victor) and Sheheed (Martyr); for, though he did not fall in the defence of the faith, he was regarded as being entitled to all the future rewards attendant

[p. 106]

on actual martyrdom. Notwithstanding his being one of the most deadly foes that the Christians ever encountered, their historians did justice to the illustrious Noor-ed-deen, and the learned William, Archbishop of Tyre, says of him, "He was a prudent, moderate man, who feared God according to the faith of his people, fortunate, and an augmenter of his paternal inheritance."

The possession of Mossul and Aleppo made Noor-ed-deen master of northern Syria; the southern part of that country was under the Prince of Damascus. Twice did the atabeg lay siege, without effect, to that city; at length the inhabitants, fearing the Crusaders, invited him to take possession of it, and the feeble prince was obliged to retire, accepting Emessa in exchange for the "Queen of Syria." The power of Noor-ed-deen now extended from the Euphrates to the Holy Land, and his thoughts were directed towards his grand object of expelling the Franks from the East, when an opportunity presented itself of bringing Egypt once more under the spiritual dominion of the house of Abbas.

Degeneracy is the inevitable lot of unlimited power. The Fatimite Commanders of the Faithful were now become mere puppets in the hands of their ministers, and the post of vizir was now, as was so often the case with the throne, contended for with arms. A civil war was at this time raging in Egypt between Shaver and Dhargam, rival candidates for the viziriate. The former came in person to Damascus, and offered the atabeg Noor-ed-deen a third of the revenues of Egypt if he would aid him to overcome his rival. Without hesitation Noor-ed-deen ordered Asad-ed-deen (Lion of Religion) Sheerkoh (Mountain Lion) [**] a Koordish chief who commanded for him at Emessa, to assemble an army and march for

[p. 107]

[paragraph continues] Egypt. Sheerkoh obeyed, and sorely against his will, and only at the urgent command of Noor-ed-deen, did his nephew, the then little known, afterwards so justly famous, Saladin, quit the banquets and enjoyments of Damascus, and the other towns of Syria, to accompany his uncle to the toils and the perils of war. Dhargam was victorious in the first action, but he being murdered shortly afterwards by one of his slaves, Shaver obtained possession of the dignity which he sought. 'The new vizir then tried. to get rid of his allies, but such was not the intention of Noor-ed-deen, and Sheerkoh took his post with his troops in the north-eastern part of the kingdom, where he occupied the frontier town of Belbeis, on the most eastern branch of the Nile, under pretext of receiving the third part of the revenue which had been promised to Noor-ed-deen. Shaver, anxious to get rid of such dangerous guests, formed a secret league with Amalric, King of Jerusalem, and engaged to give him 60,000 ducats for his aid against them. Sheerkoh, who had been reinforced, advanced into Upper Egypt, and Saladin took the command of Alexandria, which he gallantly defended for three months against the combined forces of the Christians and Egyptians, and, after some fighting, peace was made on condition of Noor-ed-deen receiving 50,000 ducats, and double that sum being paid annually to the King of Jerusalem.

Shortly afterwards an unprincipled attempt was made on Egypt by Amalric, at the suggestion of the Master of the Hospitallers, and Shaver, in his distress, had once more recourse to Noor-ed-deen. The phantom-khalif joined in the supplication, and sent what is the greatest mark of need in the east--locks of the hair of his women, which is as much as to say, "Aid! aid! the foe is dragging the women forth by the hair." Belbeis had now been conquered, and

[p. 108]

[paragraph continues] Cairo was besieged by the Christians. Shaver had burnt the old town, and defended himself and the khalif in the new town, the proper Cairo. Sheerkoh appeared once more in Egypt with a larger army  before [**], but, ere he reached the beleaguered town, Shaver and Amalric had entered into a composition, and the former had withdrawn on receiving a sum of 50,000 ducats. Sheerkoh however advanced, and pitched his tents before the walls of Cairo. The khalif Adhad and his principal nobles came forth to receive him, and that unhappy prince made his complaints of the tyranny and selfishness of Shaver, who had brought so much misery on him and his kingdom. He concluded by requesting the head of his vizir at the hand of the general of Noor-ed-deen. Shaver, aware of the danger which menaced him, invited Sheerkoh, his nephew, and the other chiefs of the army, to a banquet, with the intention of destroying them, but his plot was discovered, and his head cast at the feet of the khalif. Sheerkoh was forthwith appointed to the vacant dignity, with the honourable title of Melik-el-Mansoor (Victorious King), but he enjoyed it only for a short time, having been carried off by death in little more than two months after his elevation. He was succeeded in his rank, and in the

[p. 109]

command of the army, by his nephew Saladin, u ho now became in effect master of Egypt. Noor-ed-deen, thinking the time was come for establishing the spiritual sway of the house of Abbas, sent directions to Saladin to fill all the offices which had been occupied by the Sheahs with the orthodox, and hear prayer celebrated in the name of the Khalif of Bagdad; but this prudent chief, who knew that the great majority of the people of Egypt were firmly attached to the belief of the Fatimites being the rightful successors of the Prophet, hesitated to comply. At length the death of the Fatimite khalif occurred most opportunely to free him from embarrassment. Adhad-ladin-Allah, the last of the descendants of Moez-ladin-Allah, the founder of the dynasty, died suddenly--of disease, according to the oriental historians,--by the hand of Saladin, according to the rumour which went among the Christians [**]. All obstacles being now removed, public prayer was celebrated in the mosks of Egypt in the name of the Abbasside khalif, and the power of the western Ismailites, after a continuance of 200 years, brought completely to an end.

Noor-ed-deen, who saw that the power of his lieutenant was now too great to be controlled, adopted the prudent plan of soothing him by titles and marks of confidence. The khalif of Bagdad sent him a dress of honour and a letter of thanks for having reduced under his spiritual dominion a province which had been so long rebellious against his house. But the most important consequence of the timely death of the khalif to Saladin was the acquisition of the accumulated treasures of the Fatimites, which fell into his hands, and which he employed as the means of securing the fidelity of his officers and soldiers. As a specimen of oriental exaggeration, we shall give the list of these treasures- as they are enumerated by

[p. 110]

eastern writers. There were, we are assured, no less than 700 pearls, each of which was of a size that rendered it inestimable, an emerald a span long, and as thick as the finger, a library consisting of 2,600,000 books, and gold, both coined and in the in ass; aloes, amber, and military arms and weapons past computation. A large portion of this enormous treasure was distributed by Saladin among his soldiers; the remainder was applied, during ten successive years, to defray the expenses of his wars and buildings. As Saladin's name was Yoossuf (Joseph), the same with that of the son of Jacob, the minister of king Pharaoh, it is not an improbable supposition that, in Egyptian tradition, the two Josephs have been confounded, and the works of the latter been ascribed to the former; for it is the character of popular tradition to leap over centuries, and even thousands of years, and to form out of several heroes one who is made to perform the actions of them all.

As long as Noor-ed-deen lived, Saladin continued to acknowledge his superiority; and when, on his death, he left his dominions to his son Malek-es-Saleh, the coins of Egypt bore the name of the young prince. As Malek-es-Saleh was a minor, and entirely under the guidance of the eunuch Kameshtegin, great discontent prevailed among the emirs; and Seif-ed-deen (Sword of Religion), the cousin of the young prince, who was at the head of an army in Mesopotamia, prepared to wrest the dominion from the young Malek-es-Saleh. All eyes were turned to Saladin, as the only person capable of preserving the country. He left Egypt with only 700 horsemen. The governor and people of Damascus cheerfully opened the gates to him. Hems and Hama followed the example of Damascus. Saladin took the government under the modest title of

[p. 111]

lieutenant of the young atabeg, whose rights he declared himself ready to maintain on all occasions. He advanced to Aleppo, where Malek-es-Saleh was residing; but the militia of that town, moved by the tears of the young prince, who was probably influenced by the eunuch Kameshtegin, who feared to lose his power, marched out and put to flight the small force with which Saladin had approached the town. Having collected a larger army, Saladin laid siege regularly to Aleppo, and Kameshtegin, despairing of force, resolved to have recourse to treachery. He sent accordingly to Sinan, the Sheikh of the Assassins, who resided at Massyat, representing to him how dangerous a foe to the Ismailites was the valiant Koord, who was so ardent in his zeal for the house of Abbas, and had put an end to the dynasty of the Fatimites, who had so long given lustre to the maintainers of the rights of Ismail by the possession of extensive temporal power and dignity. He reminded him that, if Saladin succeeded in his ambitious projects in Syria, he would, in all probability, turn his might against the Assassins, and destroy their power in that country. These arguments were enforced by gold, and the sheikh, readily yielding to them, despatched without delay three Fedavees, who fell on Saladin in the camp before Aleppo. The attempt, however, miscarried, and the murderers were seized and put to death. Saladin, incensed at this attempt on his life, and guessing well the quarter whence it came, now pressed on the siege with greater vigour.

Finding the benefit which might be derived from the daggers of the Fedavee, Kameshtegin resolved to employ them against his personal enemies. The vizir of the young prince, and two of the principal emirs, had laid a plot for his destruction. Coming to the knowledge of it, he determined to be beforehand with

[p. 112]

them, and, watching the moment when Malek-es-Saleh was about to mount his horse to go to the chase, he approached him, requesting his signature to a blank paper, under pretence of its being necessary for some affair of urgent importance. The young prince signed his name without suspicion, and Kameshtegin instantly wrote on the paper a letter to the Sheikh of the Assassins, in which Malek-es-Saleh was made to request him to send men to put those three emirs out of the way. The Ismailite chief readily complied with the request, as he supposed it to be, of his young friend and neighbour, and several Fedavees were despatched to execute his wishes. Two of these fell on the vizir as he was going out of the eastern gate of a mosk near his own house. They were cut to pieces on the spot. Soon after three fell on the emir Mujaheed as he was on horseback. One of them caught hold of the end of his cloak, in order to make more sure of him, but the emir gave his horse the spurs, and broke away, leaving his cloak behind. The people seized the Assassins, two of whom were recognized as being acquaintances of the emir's head groom. One of them was crucified, and along with him the groom as an accomplice: on the breast of the latter was placed this inscription, "This is the reward of the concealer of the Impious." The others were dragged to the castle, and beaten on the soles of their feet to make them confess what had induced them to attempt the commission of such a crime. In the midst of his tortures one of them cried out, "Thou didst desire of our lord Sinan the murder of thy slaves, and now thou dost punish us for performing thy wishes." Full of wrath Malek-es-Saleh wrote a letter to the sheikh Sinan filled with the bitterest reproaches. The sheikh made no other reply than that of sending him back the letter bearing his own subscription. Historians do not tell us what

[p. 113]

the final result was; and it is also in a great measure uncertain at what time this event occurred.

The Assassins did not give over their attempts upon Saladin, whose power became more formidable to them after he had deprived the family of Noor-ed-deen of their honours and dominions; and he was again attacked by them in his camp before the fortress of Ezag. One of them assailed him and wounded him in the head, but the sultan (he had now assumed that title) caught him by the arm and struck him down. A second rushed on--he was cut down by the guards; a third, a fourth, shared the same fate. Terrified at their obstinate perseverance, the sultan shut himself up in his tent during several days, and ordered all strangers and suspicious persons to quit the camp.

Next year (1176) the sultan, being at peace with his other enemies, resolved to take exemplary vengeance on those who had so unprovokedly attempted his life. Assembling an army, he entered the mountains, wasted with fire and sword the territory of the Ismailites, and came and laid siege to Massyat. The power of the Syrian Ismailites would have been now extinguished but for the intercession of the Prince of Hama, the sultan's uncle, who, at the entreaty of Sinan, prevailed on his nephew to grant a peace on condition of no attempt being made at any future time on his life. Sinan gladly assented to these terms, and he honourably kept his engagement, for the great Saladin reigned fifteen years after this time, carried on continual wars, conquered Jerusalem and the Holy Land, exposed himself to danger in the field and in the camp, but no Assassin was ever again known to approach him with hostile intentions.

Footnotes

^106:* The former of these names is Arabic, the latter Persian.

^108:* He was accompanied by Saladin, who gives the following account of his own repugnance to the expedition:--"When Noor-ed-deen ordered me to go to Egypt with my uncle, after Sheerkoh had said to me in his presence, 'Come Yoossuf, make ready for the journey!' I replied, 'By God, if thou wert to give me the kingdom of Egypt I would not go, for I have endured in Alexandria what I shall not forget while I live.' But Sheerkoh said to Noor-ed-deen, 'It cannot be but that he should accompany me.' Whereupon Noor-ed-deen repeated his command, but I persisted in my refusal. As Noor-ed-deen also adhered to his determination, I excused myself by pleading the narrowness of my circumstances. Noor-ed-deen then gave me all that was requisite for my outfit, but I felt as if I was going to death."--Abulfeda.

^109:* William of Tyre xx. 12.

     
Secret Societies of the Middle Ages, by Thomas Keightley, [1837], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 114]

  

CHAPTER IX.

Sinan the Dai-al-Kebir of Syria--Offers to become a Christian--His Ambassador murdered by the Templars--Cardinal de Vitry's Account of the Assassins--Murder of the Marquis of Montferrat--Defence of King Richard.

THE person who had the chief direction of the affairs of the society in Syria in the time of Saladin was one of the most remarkable characters which appear in the history of the Assassins. His name was Rasheed-ed-deen (Orthodox in Religion) Sinan, the son of Suleiman of Basra. Like so many others of the impostors who have appeared from time to time in the east, he had the audacity to give himself out for an incarnation of the Divinity. No one ever saw him eat, drink, sleep, or even spit. His clothing was of coarse hair-cloth. From the rising to the setting of the sun he stood upon a lofty rock, preaching to the people, who received his words as those of a superior being. Unfortunately for his credit, his auditors at length discovered that he had a halt in his gait, caused by a wound which he received from a stone in the great earthquake of 1157. This did not accord with the popular idea of the perfection which should belong to the corporeal vehicle of Divinity. The credit of Sinan vanished at once, and those who had just been adoring the god now threatened to take the life of the impostor. Sinan lost not his self-possession; he calmly entreated them to be patient, descended from his rock, caused food to be brought, invited them to eat, and by the persuasive powers of his eloquence induced them to recognise

[p. 115]

him as their sole chief, and all unanimously swore obedience and fidelity to him.

The neglect of chronology by the oriental historians, or their European translators and followers, is frequently such that we are left in great uncertainty as to the exact time of particular events, and are thus unable to trace them to their real causes and occasions. The mention of the earthquake of 1157 would however seem to make it probable that it was about that time that Sinan put forward his claims to divinity; and as, at that very period, Hassan, the son of Keah Mohammed, was giving himself out for the promised imam, we may suppose that it was his example which stimulated Sinan to his bold attempt at obtaining independent dominion over the Syrian branch of the Ismailites.

Sinan was, like Hassan, a man of considerable learning. His works are held in high estimation by the remains of the sect of the Ismailites still lingering among the mountains of Syria. These works, we are told, consist of a chaotic mixture of mutilated passages of the Gospel and the Koran, of contradictory articles of belief, of hymns, prayers, sermons, and regulations, which are unintelligible even to those who receive and venerate them.

The sacred books of the Christians formed, as we see, a part of the studies of the Sheikh of Massyat, and, as it would appear, he thought he might derive some advantage from his acquaintance with them. The religio-military society of the Knights of the Temple, whose history we shall soon have to record, had possessions in the neighbourhood of those of the Assassins, and their superior power had enabled them, at what time is uncertain, to render the latter tributary. The tribute was the annual sum of 2,000 ducats, and Sinan, to whom probably all religions were alike, and who had unbounded power over the

[p. 116]

minds of his people, conceived the idea of releasing himself from it by professing the same religion with his neighbours. He accordingly sent, in the year 1172, one of his most prudent and eloquent ministers on a secret embassy to Amalric King of Jerusalem, offering, in the name of himself and his people, to embrace the Christian religion, and receive the rite of baptism, provided the king would engage to make the Templars renounce the tribute of 2,000 ducats, and agree to live with them henceforward as good neighbours and friends and brethren. Overjoyed at the prospect of making converts of such importance, the king readily assented to the desires of the Ismailite chief, and he at the same time assured the Templars that their house should not be a loser, as he would pay them 2,000 ducats annually out of his treasury. The brethren of the Temple made no objection to the arrangement; and after the Ismailite ambassador had been detained and treated honourably for some days by the king, he set out on his return, accompanied by a guide and escort sent by the king to conduct him as far as the borders of the Ismailite territory. They passed in safety through the country of Tripolis, and were now in the vicinity of the first castles of the Ismailites, when suddenly some Templars rushed forth from an ambush, and murdered the ambassador. The Templars were commanded by a knight named Walter du Mesnil, a one-eyed, daring, wicked man, but who, on this occasion, it would appear, acted by the orders of his superiors, who probably did not consider the royal promise good security for the 2,000 ducats; for, when Amalric, filled with indignation at the base and perfidious action, assembled his barons at Sidon to deliberate on what should be done, and by their advice sent two of their number to Ado de St. Amand, the Master of the Temple, to demand satisfaction for the iniquitous

[p. 117]

deed, the master contented himself by saying that he had imposed a penance on brother Du. Mesnil, and had moreover directed him to proceed to Rome without delay, to know what farther the apostolic father would order him to do, and that, on this account he must, in the name of the pope, prohibit any violence against the aforesaid brother. The king, however, was not regardless of justice and of his own dignity. Shortly afterwards, when the master and several of the Templars were at Sidon, he assembled his council again, and, with their consent, sent and dragged Du Mesnil from the house of the Templars, and threw him into prison, where he would probably have expiated his crime but for the speedy death of the king. All hopes of the conversion of the Ismailites were now at an end.

It is on this occasion that the Archbishop of Tyre gives an account of what he had been able to learn respecting the Assassins. As what we have previously related of them has been exclusively drawn from eastern sources, it will not be useless to insert in this place the accounts of them given by the Cardinal de Vitry, who has followed and enlarged the sketch of the archbishop [**].

"In the province of Phoenicia, near the borders of the Antaradensian town which is now called Tortosa, dwells a certain people, shut in on all sides by rocks and mountains, who have ten castles, very strong and impregnable, by reason of the narrow ways and inaccessible rocks, with their suburbs and the valleys, which are most fruitful in all species of fruits and corn, and most delightful for their amenity. The number of these men, who are called Assassins, is said to exceed 40,000 [*+]. They set a captain over

[p. 118]

themselves, not by hereditary succession, but by the prerogative of merit, whom they call the Old Man (Veterem seu Senem), not so much on account of his advanced age as for his pre-eminence in prudence and dignity. The first and principal abbot of this unhappy religion of theirs, and the place where they had their origin and whence they came to Syria, is in the very remote parts of the east, near the city of Bagdad and the parts of the province of Persia. These people, who do not divide the hoof, nor make a difference between what is sacred and what is profane, believe that all obedience indifferently shown by them towards their superior is meritorious for eternal life. Hence they are bound to their master, whom they call the Old Man, with such a bond of subjection and obedience that there is nothing so difficult or so dangerous that they would fear to undertake, or which they would not perform with a cheerful mind and ardent will, at the command of their lord. The Old Man, their lord, causes boys of this people to be brought up in secret and delightful places, and having had them diligently trained and instructed in the different kinds of languages, sends them to various provinces with daggers, and orders them to slay the great men of the Christians, as well as of the Saracens, either because he is at enmity with them for some cause or other, or at the request of his friends, or even for the lucre of a large sum of money which has been given him, promising them, for the execution of this command, that they shall have far greater delights, and without end, in paradise, after death, than even those amidst which they had been reared. If they chance to die in this act of obedience they are regarded as martyrs by their companions, and being placed by that people among their saints, are held in the greatest reverence. Their parents are enriched with many gifts by the master, who is called the Old Man, and

[p. 119]

if they were slaves they are let go free ever after. Whence these wretched and misguided youths, who are sent from the convent (conventu) of the aforesaid brethren to different parts of the world, undertake their deadly legation with such joy and delight, and perform it with such diligence and solicitude, transforming themselves in various ways, and assuming the manners and dress of other nations, sometimes concealing themselves under the appearance of merchants, at other times under that of priests and monks, and in an infinity of other modes, that there is hardly any person in the whole world so cautious as to be able to guard against their machinations. They disdain to plot against an inferior person. The great men to whom they are hostile either redeem themselves by a large sum of money, or, going armed and attended by a body of guards, pass their life in suspicion and in dread of death. They kept the law of Mahomet and his institutions diligently and straitly beyond all other Saracens till the times of a certain master of theirs, who, being endowed with natural genius, and exercised in the study of different writings, began with all diligence to read and examine the law of the Christians and the Gospels of Christ, admiring the virtue of the miracles, and the sanctity of the doctrine. From a comparison with these he began to abominate the frivolous and irrational doctrine of Mahomet, and at length, when he knew the truth, he studied to recall his subjects by degrees from the rites of the cursed law. Wherefore he exhorted and commanded them that they should drink wine in moderation and eat the flesh of swine. At length, after many discourses and serious admonitions of their teacher, they all with one consent agreed to renounce the perfidy of Mahomet, and, by receiving the grace of baptism, to become Christians."

We may, from this account, perceive that the Crusaders

[p. 120]

had a tolerably clear idea of the nature and constitution of the society of the Assassins. The Cardinal de Vitry plainly describes them as forming a religion, that is, an order under an abbot; and perhaps the resemblance which Hammer traces between them and the Templars, which we shall notice when we come to speak of this last society, is not quite so fanciful as it might at first sight appear. It is curious, too, to observe that the Christians also believed that the Sheikh-al-Jebal had some mode of inspiring the Fedavee with a contempt of life and an aspiration after the joys of paradise.

The dagger had not been unsheathed against the Christian princes since, forty-two years before (1149), Raymond, the young Count of Tripolis, was murdered as he knelt at his devotions, and the altar was sprinkled with his blood. A more illustrious victim was now to bleed; and, as the question of who twas the real author of his death forms a curious historical problem, we shall here discuss it at some length.

Conrad Marquis of Montferrat, a name celebrated in the history of the third crusade, had just been named King of Jerusalem by Richard Lion-heart King of England. In the latter end of the month of April 1192 the marquis, being at Tyre, went to dine with the Bishop of Beauvais. One writer says that, the marchioness having stayed too long in the bath, and the marquis being averse to dining alone, he mounted his horse and rode to dine with the Bishop; but, finding that that prelate had already finished his meal, he was returning home to his palace. As he passed through a narrow street, and was come near the toll-house, two Assassins, having watched their opportunity, approached him. The one presented a petition, and, while he was engaged reading it, both struck him with their daggers, crying,

[p. 121]

[paragraph continues] "Thou shalt be neither marquis nor king." One of them was cut down instantly, the other sought refuge in a neighbouring church, and, according to an Arabian historian, when the wounded marquis was brought into the same church, he rushed on him anew, and completed his crime. Others relate that the marquis was carried home to his palace, where he lived long enough to receive the holy sacrament and to give his last instructions to his wife. The two accounts, we may perceive, are by no means repugnant.

These Assassins, who were both youths, had been for some time--six months it is said--in Tyre, watching for an opportunity to perform the commission which had been given them. They had feigned a conversion from Islam, or, as some say, had assumed the habit of monks, in order to win the confidence of the marquis, and thus procure more ready access to him. One of them, we are told, had even entered his service, and the other that of Balian of Ibelin.

The question now comes, at whose instigation was the murder committed? Here we find several both oriental and occidental witnesses disposed to lay the guilt on Richard, King of England, those writers who were his own subjects indignantly repelling the accusation, and some indifferent witnesses testifying in his favour. Previous to examining these witnesses we must state that king Richard was at enmity with Philip Augustus, King of France; that though he had given the crown of Jerusalem to the Marquis of Montferrat, there was little kind feeling between them, and they had been enemies; and, finally, that the history of the English monarch exhibits no traits of such a generous chivalrous disposition as should put him beyond suspicion of being concerned in an assassination.

Of the writers who charge king Richard with the

[p. 122]

murder it is to be observed that the only ones that are contemporary are the Arabian historians. The following passage is quoted from the History of Jerusalem and Hebron, by Hammer, who regards it as quite decisive of the guilt of the English king--"The marquis went, on the 13th of the month Rebi-al-Ewal, to visit the Bishop of Tyre. As he was going out he was attacked by two Assassins, who slew him with their daggers. When taken and stretched on the rack, they confessed that they had been employed by the King of England. They died under the torture." Boha-ed-deen, the friend and biographer of Saladin, writes to the same effect. It is therefore evident that, at the time, it was reported that the marquis had been murdered by persons employed by the King of England; and Vinisauf and the other English writers assure us that the French party and the friends of the murdered marquis endeavoured to throw the odium of the deed on king Richard. As that mode of getting rid of an enemy was far too familiar in the east, it was natural enough that the Arabian writers should adopt the report without much inquiry. This consideration alone ought very much to invalidate their testimony. Some German chroniclers also, following the reports which were industriously spread to the disadvantage of the English king at the time he was a prisoner in Austria, did not hesitate to accuse him of the murder of the marquis; but, as has been justly observed, these, as well as the preceding, were either partial or at a distance [**].

In opposition to these assertions, we have the unanimous testimony of all the English writers, such as Vinisauf (the companion and historian of king Richard's crusade), Hoveden, Brompton William of Newbridge.

[p. 123]

[paragraph continues] The Syrian bishop, Aboo-'l-Faraj, mentions the report of the Assassin who was put to the rack having laid the guilt on king Richard, but adds that the truth came afterwards to light. Hugo Plagon, a judicious and impartial writer, so far from imputing the death of the marquis to king Richard, assigns the cause which moved the Assassin prince to order the death of the marquis, namely, the same which we shall presently see stated in the letter ascribed to the Old Man of the Mountain. Rigord, who wrote the history of Philip Augustus, does not by any means impute the murder of the marquis to king Richard, though he says that while Philip was at Pontoise letters were brought to him from beyond sea, warning him to be on his guard, as Assassins (Arsacidae) had been sent, at the suggestion and command of the King of England, to kill him, "for at that time they had slain the king's kinsman, the marquis." Philip, in real, but more probably feigned alarm, immediately surrounded his person with a guard of serjeants-at-mace. The Arabic historian, Ebn-el-Athir, the friend of Saladin, says that the sultan had agreed with the Old Man of the Mountain, for a sum of 10,000 pieces of gold, to deliver him of both king Richard and the marquis, but that Sinan, not thinking it to be for his interest to relieve the sultan of the English king, had taken the money and only put the marquis out of the way. This narrative is wholly improbable, for treachery was surely no part of the character of Saladin; but it serves to prove the impartiality which is so justly ascribed to the Arabic writers in general. The testimony of Abulfeda is as follows: "And in it (the year of the Hejra 588, or A.D. 1192,) was slain the Marquis, Lord of Soor (or Tyre); may God, whose name be exalted, curse him! A Batinee, or Assassin (in one copy Batinees),

[p. 124]

who had entered Soor in the disguise of a monk, slew him [**]."

We thus see that the evidence in favour of the King of England greatly preponderates, not a single writer who was on the spot laying the murder to his charge; on the contrary, those who had the best means of being informed treated the imputation with contempt, as a base calumny devised by the French party. But there is a still more illustrious witness in his behalf, if the testimony ascribed to him be genuine--the Old Man of the Mountain himself. Brompton gives two letters purporting to have been written by this personage, the one to the Duke of Austria, the other to the princes and people of Europe in general. The latter is also given by William of Newbridge, with some variation. Both have been admitted by Rymer into his Foedera. Gibbon, who seems to have known only the last, pronounces it to be an "absurd and palpable forgery." Hammer, whose arguments we shall presently consider, undertakes to demonstrate that these epistles are forgeries. Raumer, more prudently, only says that this last is not genuine in its present form.

The following are translations of these documents:--

"The Old Man of the Mountain to Limpold, Duke of Austria, greeting. Since several kings and princes beyond sea accuse Richard, King of England, and lord, of the death of the marquis, I swear by the God who reigneth for ever, and by the law which we hold, that he had no guilt in his death; for the cause of the death of the marquis was as follows.

"One of our brethren was coming in a ship from Satelia (Salteleya) to our parts, and a tempest chancing to drive him to Tyre the marquis had him taken and slain, and seized a large sum of money

[p. 125]

which he had with him. But we sent our messengers to the marquis, requiring him to restore to us the money of our brother, and to satisfy us respecting the death of our brother, which he laid upon Reginald, the Lord of Sidon, and we exerted ourselves through our friends till we knew of a truth that it was he himself who had had him put to death, and had seized his money.

"And again we sent to him another of our messengers, named Eurisus, whom he was minded to fling into the sea; but our friends made him depart with speed out of Tyre, and he came to us quickly and told us these things. From that very hour we were desirous to slay the marquis; then also we sent two brethren to Tyre, who slew him openly, and as it were before all the people of Tyre.

"This, then, was the cause of the death of the marquis; and we say to you in truth that the lord Richard, King of England, had no guilt in this death of the marquis, and these who on account of this have done evil to the lord King of England have done it unjustly and without cause.

"Know for certain that we kill no man in this world for any hire or money, unless he has first done us evil.

"And know that we have executed these letters in our house at our castle of Messiat, in the middle of September. In the year from Alexander M. D. & V."

 

"The Old Man of the Mountain to the princes of Europe and all the Christian people, greeting.

"We would not that the innocence of any one should suffer by reason of what we have done, since we never do evil to any innocent and guiltless person; but those who have transgressed against us we do not, with God to aid, long suffer to rejoice in the injuries done to our simplicity.

[p. 126]

"We therefore signify to the whole of you, testifying by him through whom we hope to be saved, that that Marquis of Montferrat was slain by no machination of the King of England, but he justly perished, by our will and command, by our satellites, for that act in which he transgressed against us, and which, when admonished, he had neglected to amend. For it is our custom first to admonish those who have acted injuriously in anything to us or our friends to give us satisfaction, which if they despise, we take care to take vengeance with severity by our ministers, who obey us with such devotion that they do not doubt but that they shall be gloriously rewarded by God if they die in executing our command.

"We have also heard that it is bruited about of that king that he has induced us, as being less upright and consistent (minus integros et constantes), to send some of our people to plot against the King of France, which, beyond doubt, is a false fiction, and of the vainest suspicion, when neither he, God is witness, has hitherto attempted anything against us, nor would we, in respect to our honour, permit any undeserved evil to be planned against any man. Farewell."

 

We will not undertake to maintain the genuineness of these two epistles, but we may be permitted to point out the futility of some of the objections made to them. Hammer pronounces the first of them to be an undoubted forgery because it commences with swearing by the law, and ends by being dated from the era of the Seleucides. Both, he says, were equally strange to the Ismailites, who precisely at this time had begun to trample the law under foot, and had abandoned the Hejra, the only era known in Mohammedan countries, for a new one commencing with the reign of Hassan II. He further

[p. 127]

sees, in the circumstance of a letter from the Old Man of the Mountain (Sheikh-al-Jebal) being dated from Massyat, a proof of the ignorance of the Crusaders respecting the true head and seat of the Ismailite power. These objections are regarded by Wilken as conclusive. They will, however, lose much of their force if we bear in mind that the letters are manifestly translations, and that the chief of Massyat at that time was Sinan, who some years before had offered to become a Christian, and who does not seem at all to have adopted the innovations of Hassan the Illuminator. Sinan might easily have been induced by the friends of the King of England, one of the most steady of whom was Henry of Champagne [**], who succeeded Conrad of Montferrat in the kingdom, to write those letters in his justification, and it is very probable that the translations were made in Syria, where the Arabic language was of course better understood than in Europe, and sent either alone or with the originals. The translator might have rendered the title which Sinan gave himself by Senex de Monte, which would be better understood in the west, and he may also have given the corresponding year of the era of the Seleucides (the one in use among the Syrian Christians) for the year of the Hejra used by the Ismailite chief, or indeed Sinan may have employed that era himself. In this case there would remain little to object to the genuineness of the letter to the Duke of Austria. Hammer regards the expression our simplicity (simplicitas nostra) as being conclusive against the genuineness of the second letter. We must confess that we can see no force in the objection. Sinan might wish to represent himself as a very plain, simple, innocent sort of person. It might further be doubted

[p. 128]

if a European forger would venture to represent the prince of the Assassins--the formidable Old M a n of the Mountain--in such a respectable light as he appears in these two epistles [**].

But there is another account of the death of the Marquis of Montferrat, which is probably much better known to the generality of readers than any of the preceding ones. The far-famed author of "Waverley" has, in his romantic tale of the "Talisman," made Conrad to be wounded and vanquished in the lists by the son of the King of Scotland, the champion of king Richard, and afterwards slain by the dagger, not of the Assassins, but of his confederate in villany the Master of the Temple, to prevent his making confession of their common guilt!

Yielding to none in rational admiration of the genius of Sir W. Scott, we cannot avoid expressing a wish that he had ceased to write when he had exhausted that rich field of national feelings and manners with which he was alone familiar, and from which he drew the exquisite delineations of "Waverley" and its Scottish brethren. All his later works, no doubt, exhibit occasional scenes far beyond the power of any of his imitators; but when his muse quits her native soil, she takes leave of nature, truth, and simplicity. Even the genius of a Scott is inadequate to painting manners he never witnessed, scenery he never beheld.

The tale of the "Talisman" is a flagrant instance. Topography, chronology, historic truth, oriental manners, and individual character, are all treated with a most magnanimous neglect, indeed, even, we might say, with contempt; for, careless, from "security to please," as the author is known to have been, his vagaries must sometimes have proceeded from mere

[p. 129]

wilfulness and caprice. It would, we apprehend, perplex our oriental travellers and geographers to point out the site of the fountain named the Diamond of the Desert, not far from the Dead Sea, and yet lying half-way between the camp of the Saracens and that of the Crusaders, which last, we are told, lay between Acre and Ascalon, that is, on the sea-coast, or to show the interminable sandy desert which stretches between the Dead Sea and the Mediterranean. As to historic truth, we may boldly say that there is hardly a single circumstance of the romance in strict accordance with history; and as to the truth of individual character, what are we to say to the grave, serious, religious Saladin, but the very year before his death, being in the flower of his age, rambling alone through the desert, like an errant knight, singing hymns to the Devil, and coming disguised as a physician to the Christian camp, to cure the malady of the English monarch, whom he never, in reality, did or would see [**]? We might enumerate many additional instances of the violation of every kind of unity and propriety in this single tale [*+].

Let not any deem it superfluous thus to point out the errors of an illustrious writer. The impressions made by his splendid pages on the youthful mind

[p. 130]

are permanent and ineffaceable, and, if not corrected, may lead to errors of a graver kind. The "Talisman" moreover affects a delusive show of truth and accuracy; for, in a note in one part of it, the author (ironically, no doubt) affects to correct the historians on a point of history. The natural inference, then, is that he has himself made profound researches, and adhered to truth; and we accordingly find another novelist, in what he terms a history of chivalry, declaring the "Talisman" to be a faithful picture of the manners of the age. Sir W. Scott, however, has himself informed us, in the preface to "Ivanhoe," of his secret for describing the manners of the times of Richard Coeur de Lion. With the chronicles of the time he joined that of Froissart, so rich in splendid pictures of chivalric life. Few readers of these romances perhaps are aware that this was the same in kind, though not in degree, as if, in his tales of the days of Elizabeth and James I., he had had recourse to the manner-painting pages of Henry Fielding; for the distance in point of time between the reign of Richard I. and that of Richard II., in which last Froissart wrote, is as great as that between the reigns of Elizabeth and George Il.; and, in both, manners underwent a proportional change. But we are in the habit of regarding the middle ages as one single period of unvarying manners and institutions, and we are too apt to fancy that the descriptions of Froissart and his successors are equally applicable to all parts of it.

Footnotes

^117:* Gesta Dei per Francos, vol. i. pp. 994, 1062.

^117:+ William of Tyre makes their number 60,000. He declares his inability to give the origin of the name Assassins.

^122:* Raumer, Geschichte der Hohenstauffen, ii., p. 490. Wilken, Geschichte der Kreuzzuge, iv., 489.

^124:* Annales Muslemici, tom. iv., pp. 122, 123. Hafniae, 1792.

^127:* An instance of Henry's intimacy with the Assassins has been given in <page 81>.

^128:* Sir J. Mackintosh (History of England, i. 187) seems to regard the letters as genuine.

^129:* May it not be said that real historic characters should not be misrepresented? Sir W. Scott was at full liberty to make his Varneys and his Bois Gilberts as accomplished villains as he pleased; he might do as he pleased with his own; but what warrant had he from history for painting Conrad of Montferrat and the then Master of the Templars under such odious colours as he does?

^129:+ The author invariably writes Montserrat for Montferrat. The former is in Spain, and never was a marquisate. As it were to show that it was no error of the press, it is said, "The shield of the marquis bore, in reference to his title, a serrated and rocky mountain." We also find naphtha and bitumen confounded, the former being described as the solid, the latter as the liquid substance.

     
Secret Societies of the Middle Ages, by Thomas Keightley, [1837], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 131]

  

CHAPTER X.

Jellal-ed-deen--Restoration of Religion--His Harem makes the Pilgrimage to Mecca--Marries the Princess of Ghilan--Geography of the Country between Roodbar and the Caspian--Persian Romance--Zohak and Feridoon--Kei Kaoos and Roostem--Ferdoosee's Description of Mazanderan--History of the Shah Nameh--Proof of the Antiquity of the Tales contained in it.

THE unhallowed rule of Mohammed II. lasted for the long space of thirty-five years, during which time all the practices of Islam were neglected by the Ismailites. The mosks were closed, the fast of Ramazan neglected, the solemn seasons of prayer despised. But such a state can never last; man must have religion; it is as essential to him as his food; and those pseudo-philosophers who have endeavoured to deprive him of it have only displayed in the attempt their ignorance and folly. The purification of the popular faith is the appropriate task of the true philanthropist.

We may often observe the son to exhibit a character the diametrically opposite of that of his father, either led by nature or struck by the ill effects of his father's conduct. This common appearance was now exhibited among the Assassins. Mohammed disregarded all the observances of the ceremonial law; his son and successor, Jellal-ed-deen (Glory of Religion) Hassan, distinguished himself, from his early years, by a zeal for the ordinances of Islam. The avowal of his sentiments caused considerable enmity and suspicion between him and Mohammed; the father feared the son, and the son the father. On the days of public

[p. 132]

audience, at which Jellal-ed-deen was expected to appear, the old sheikh used the precaution of wearing a shirt of mail under his clothes, and of increasing the number of his guards. His death, which occurred when his son had attained his twenty-fifth year, is ascribed by several historians, though apparently without any sufficient reason, to poison administered to him by his successor.

The succession of Jellal-ed-deen was uncontested. He immediately set about placing all things on the footing which they had been on previous to the time of On his Memory be Peace. The mosks were repaired and reopened; the call to prayer sounded as heretofore from the minarets; and the solemn assemblies for worship and instruction were held once more on every Friday. Imams, Koran-readers, preachers, and teachers of all kinds, were invited to Alamoot, where they were honourably entertained and richly rewarded. Jellal-ed-deen wrote to his lieutenants in Kusistan and Syria, informing them of what he had done, and inviting them to follow his example. He also wrote to the khalif, to the powerful Shah of Khaurism, and to all the princes of Persia, to assure them of the purity of his faith. His ambassadors were everywhere received with honour, and the khalif and all the princes gave to Jellal-ed-deen, in the letters which they wrote in reply, the title of prince, which had never been conceded to any of his predecessors. The imams, and the men learned in the law, loudly upheld the orthodoxy of the faith of the mountain-chief, on whom they bestowed the name of Nev (New) Musulman. When the people of Casveen, who had always been at enmity with the Ismailites, doubted of his orthodoxy, Jellal-ed-deen condescended to ask of them to send some persons of respectability to Alamoot, that he might have an opportunity of convincing them,

[p. 133]

[paragraph continues] They came, and in their presence he committed to the flames a pile of books which he said were the writings of Hassan Sabah, and contained the secret rules and ordinances of the society. He cursed the memory of Hassan and his successors, and the envoys returned to Casveen, fully convinced of his sincerity.

In the second year of his reign Jellal-ed-deen gave a further proof of the purity of his religious faith by permitting, or, perhaps, directing, his harem, that is, his mother, his wife, and a long train of their female attendants, to undertake the pilgrimage to the holy city of Mecca, to worship at the tomb of the Prophet. The sacred banner was, according to custom, borne before the caravan of the pilgrims from Alamoot, and the Tesbeel, or distribution of water to the pilgrims, usual on such occasions [**], was performed by the harem of the mountain-prince on such a scale of magnificence and liberality as far eclipsed that of the great Shah of Khaurism, whose caravan reached Bagdad at the same time on its way to Mecca. The khalif Nassir-ladin-Illah even gave precedence to the banner of the pilgrims from Alamoot, and this mark of partiality drew on him the wrath of the potent prince of Khaurism. Twice did the latter afterwards collect an

[p. 134]

army to make war on the successor of the Prophet. With the first, consisting of nearly 300,000 men, he marched against Bagdad, and had reached Hamadan and Holuan, when a violent snow-storm obliged him to retire. He had collected his forces a second time, when the hordes of Chinghis Khan burst into his dominions. His son and successor resumed his plans, and reached Hamadan, when again a snow-storm came to avert destruction. from the City of Peace. As the power of the Mongol conqueror was now great and formidable, the prudent prince of Alamoot sent in secret ambassadors to assure him of his submission, and to tender his homage.

Jellal ed-deen took a more active part in the politics of his neighbours than his predecessors had done. He formed an alliance with the Atabeg Mozaffer-ed-deen (Causing the Religion to be victorious), the governor of Azerbeijan, against the governor of Irak, who was their common enemy. He even visited the Atabeg at his residence, where he was received with the utmost magnificence, and each day the Atabeg sent 1,000 dinars for the expenses of his table. The two princes sent to the khalif for aid; their request was granted; and they marched against, defeated, and slew the governor of Irak, and appointed another in his place. After an absence of eighteen months Jellal-ed-deen returned to Alamoot, having in the mean time, by his prudent conduct, greatly augmented the fame of his orthodoxy. He now ventured to aspire to a connexion with one of the ancient princely houses of the country, and asked in marriage the daughter of Ky Kaoos, the prince of Ghilan. The latter having expressed his readiness to give his consent, provided that of the khalif could be obtained, envoys were despatched to Bagdad, who speedily returned with the approbation of Nassir-ladin-Illah, and the princess of Ghilan was sent to Alamoot.

[p. 135]

The mention of Ghilan and of Ky Kaoos presents an opportunity, which we are not willing to let pass, of diversifying our narrative by an excursion into the regions of Persian geography and romance, which may cast a gleam of the sunshine of poetry over the concluding portion of our history of the dark and secret deeds of the Ismailites.

The mountain range named Demavend, on the south side of which Roodbar, the territory of the Ismailites, lies, is the northern termination of the province of Irak Ajemee, or Persian Irak. Beyond it stretches to the Caspian Sea a fertile region, partly hilly, partly plain [**]. This country is divided into five districts, which were in those times distinct from and independent of each other. At the foot of the mountains lay Taberistan and Dilem, the former to the east, the latter to the west. Dilem is celebrated as having been the native country of the family of Buyah, which, rising from the humblest station, exercised under the khalifs, and with the title of Ameer-al-Omra (Prince of the Princes), a power nearly regal over Persia during a century and a half [*+]. North of Dilem lay Ghilan, and north of Taberistan Mazenderan, the ancient Hyrcania. In the midst of

[p. 136]

these four provinces lay Ruyan and Rostemdar, remarkable for having been governed for a space of 800 years by one family of princes, while dynasty after dynasty rose and fell in the neighbouring states. In these provinces the names of the royal lines  to our mind the ancient history, both true and fabulous, of Iran (Persia), as we find it in the poem of Ferdoosee, the Homer of that country. The family of Kawpara, which governed Ruyan and Rostemdar, affected to derive their lineage from the celebrated blacksmith Gavah, who raised his apron as the standard of revolt against the Assyrian tyrant Zohak; and the family of Bavend, which ruled for nearly seven centuries, with but two interruptions, over Mazenderan and Taberistan, were descended from the elder brother of Noosheerwan the Just, the most celebrated monarch of the house of Sassan.

This region is the classic land of Persia. When, as their romantic history relates, Jemsheed, the third monarch of Iran after Cayamars, the first who ruled over men, had long reigned in happiness and prosperity, his head was lifted up with pride, and God withdrew from him his favour. His dominions were invaded by Zohak, the prince of the Tauzees (Assyrians or Arabs); his subjects fell away from him, and, after lurking for a hundred years in secret places, he fell into the hands of the victor, who cut him asunder with a saw. A child was born of the race of Jemsheed, named Feridoon, whom, as soon as he came to the light (in the village of Wereghi, in Taberistan), his mother Faranuk gave to a herdsman to rear, and his nourishment was the milk of a female buffalo, whose name was Poormayeh. Zohak meantime had a dream, in which he beheld two warriors, who led up to him a third, armed with a club which terminated in the head of a cow. The warrior struck him on the head with his club, and took him and chained

[p. 137]

him in the cavern of a mountain. He awoke with a loud cry, and called all the priests, and astrologers, and wise men, to interpret his dream. They feared to speak. At last they told him of the birth and nurture of Feridoon, who was destined to overcome him. Zohak fell speechless from his throne at the intelligence. On recovering, he sent persons in all directions to search for and put to death the fatal child; but the maternal anxiety of Faranuk was on the watch, and she removed the young Feridoon to the celebrated mountain Elburz, where she committed him to the care of a pious anchorite. Zohak, after a long search, discovered the place where Feridoon had been first placed by his mother, and in his rage he killed the beautiful and innocent cow Poormayeh.

Zohak is represented as a most execrable tyrant. Acting under the counsel of the Devil, he had murdered his own father to get his throne. His infernal adviser afterwards assumed the form of a young man, and became his cook. He prepared for him all manner of curious and high-seasoned dishes; for hitherto the food of mankind had been rude and plain. As a reward, he only asked permission to kiss the shoulders of the king. Zohak readily granted this apparently moderate request; but from the spots where the Devil impressed his lips grew forth two black snakes. In vain every art was employed to remove them, in vain they were cut away, they grew again like plants. The physicians were in perplexity. At length the Devil himself came in the shape of a physician, and said that the only mode of keeping them quiet was to feed them with human brains. His object, we are told, was gradually in this way to destroy the whole race of man.

The design of the Devil seemed likely to be accomplished. Each day two human beings were slain, and the serpents fed with their brains. At length

[p. 138]

two of the tyrant's cooks discovered that the brain of a man mixed with that of a ram satisfied the monsters, and, of the two men who were given to be killed each day, they always secretly let go one, and those who were thus delivered became the progenitors of the Koords who dwell in the mountains west of Persia. Among those unfortunate persons who were condemned to be food for the serpents was the son of a blacksmith named Gavah. The afflicted father went boldly before the tyrant, and remonstrated with him on the injustice of his conduct. Zohak heard him with patience and released his son. He also made him bearer of a letter addressed to all the provinces of the empire, vaunting his goodness, and calling on all to support him against the youthful pretender to his throne. But Gavah, instead of executing the mandate, tore the tyrant's letter, and, raising his leathern apron on a lance by way of standard, called on all the inhabitants of Iran to arise and take arms in support of Feridoon, the rightful heir to the throne of Jemsheed.

Meantime Feridoon, who had attained the age of twice eight years, came down from Elburz, and, going to his mother, besought her to tell him from whom he derived his birth. Faranuk related to him his whole history, when the young hero, in great emotion, vowed to attack the tyrant, and avenge on him the death of his father; but his mother sought, by representing the great power of Zohak; to divert him from his purpose, and exhorted him to abandon all such thoughts, and to enjoy in quiet the good things of this life. But a numerous army, led by Gavah in search of the true heir to the throne, now came in sight. Feridoon, joyfully advancing to meet them, adorned with gold and precious stones the leathern banner, placed upon it the orb of the moon, and, naming it Direfsh-e-Gavanee (Gavah's Apron),

[p. 139]

selected it for the banner of the empire of Iran. Each succeeding prince, we are told, at his accession, added jewels to it, and Direfsh-e-Gavanee blazed in the front of battle like a sun. Feridoon, then calling for smiths, drew for them in the sand the form of a club, with a cow's head at the end of it,

 

Click to enlarge
From the Shah Nameh, illuminated Persian MS.

 

[p. 140]

and when they had made it he named it Gawpeigor (Cow-face), in honour of his nurse. Taking leave of his mother, he marches against the tyrant; an angel comes from heaven to aid the rightful cause; Zohak is deserted by his troops; he falls into the hands of Feridoon, who, by the direction of the angel, imprisons him in a cavern of the mountain Demavend. Feridoon, on ascending the throne of his forefathers, governed with such mildness, firmness, and justice, that his name is to the present day in Persia significative of the ideal of a perfect monarch [**].

Mazenderan is not less celebrated in Persian romance than the region at the foot of Demavend. It was the scene of the dangers of the light-minded Kej Kaoos (supposed to be the Cyaxares of the Greeks), and of the marvellous adventures called the Seven Fables or Stages of the Hero Roostem, the Hercules of Persia, who came to his aid. When Kej Kaoos mounted the throne of Iran, he exulted in his wealth and in his power. A deev (Demon), desirous of luring him to his destruction, assumed the guise of a wandering minstrel, and, coming to his court, sought to be permitted to sing before the padisha (Emperor). His request was acceded to,--his theme was the praises of Mazenderan, and he sang to this effect:--

"Mazenderan deserves that the shah should think on it; the rose blooms evermore in its gardens, its hills are arrayed with tulips and jessamines, mild is the air, the earth is bright of hue, neither cold nor heat oppresses the lovely land, spring abides there

[p. 141]

evermore, the nightingale sings without ceasing in the gardens, and the deer bound joyously through the woods. The earth is never weary of pouring forth fruits, the air is evermore filled with fragrance, like unto rose-water are the streams, the tulip glows unceasingly on the meads, pure are the rivers, and their banks are smiling: ever mayest thou behold the falcon at the chase. All its districts are adorned with abundance of food, beyond measure are the treasures which are there piled up, the flowers bend in worship before the throne, and around it stand the men of renown richly girded with gold. Who dwelleth not there knoweth no pleasure, as joy and luxuriant pastime are to him unknown."

Kej Kaoos was beguiled by the tempter, and, eager to get possession of so rich a land, he led a large army into it. The Shah of Mazenderan was aided by a potent demon or enchanter named the Deev Seffeed (White Deev), who, by his magic arts, cast a profound darkness over the Iranian monarch and his host, in which they would have all been destroyed but for the timely arrival of Roostem, who, after surmounting all the impediments that magic could throw in his way, slew the Deev Seffeed, and delivered his sovereign.

Kej Kaoos, we are afterwards told by the poet, formed the insane project of ascending to heaven, which he attempted in the following manner. A stage was constructed on which a throne was set for the monarch; four javelins were placed at the corners, with pieces of goat's flesh on them, and four hungry eagles were tied at the bottom, who, by their of arts to reach the meat, raised the stage aloft into the air; but when the strength of the birds was exhausted the whole fell with the royal aeronaut in the desert, where he was found by Roostem and the other chiefs.

[p. 142]

 

Click to enlarge
From the Same.

 

The history of the Shah-nameh (King-book), in which these legends are contained, is one of the most curious in literature. The fanaticism of the Arabs, who conquered Persia, raged with indiscriminate fury  the literature, as well as the religion, of that ; and when, in the time of Al-Mansoor and

[p. 143]

his successors Haroon-er-Rasheed and Al-Mamoon, the Arabs themselves began to devote their attention to literature and science, it was the science of Greece and the poetry of their native language that they cultivated. The Persian literature meantime languished in obscurity, and the traditional, heroic, and legendary tales of the nation were fading fast from memory, when a governor of a province, zealous, as it would appear, for the honour of the Persian nation, made a collection of them, and formed from them a continuous narrative in prose. The book thus formed was called the Bostan-nameh (Garden-book). It was in great repute in the northern part of Persia, where, at a distance from the court of the khalifs, the Persian manners, language, and nationality were better preserved; and when the Turkish family of the Samenee founded an empire in that part of Persia, sultan Mansoor I., of that race, gave orders to a poet named Dakeekee to turn the Bastan-nameh into Persian verse. The poet undertook the task, but he had not made more than a thousand verses when he perished by assassination. There being no one supposed capable of continuing his work, it was suspended till twenty years afterwards, when the celebrated Mahmood of Ghizni, the conqueror of India, meeting with the Bastan-nameh, gave portions of it to three of the most renowned poets of the time to versify. The palm of excellence was adjudged to Anseri, who versified the tale of Sohrab slain by his own father Roostem, one of the most pathetic and affecting narratives in any language. The sultan made him Prince of the Poets, and directed him to versify the entire work; but, diffident of his powers, Anseri shrank from the task, and having some time afterwards met a poet of Toos in Khorasan, named Isaac, the son of Sheriff-Shah, surnamed Ferdoosee

[p. 144]

[paragraph continues] (Paradisal [**]), either from his father's employment as a gardener, or from the beauty of his verses, he introduced him to the sultan, who gladly committed the task to him. Ferdoosee laboured with enthusiasm in the celebration of the ancient glories of his country; and in the space of thirty or, as some assert, of only eight years, he brought the poem to within two thousand lines of its termination, which lines were added by another poet after his death.

The Shah-nameh is, beyond comparison, the finest poem of the Mohammedan east. It consists of 60,000 rhymed couplets, and embraces the history of Persia, from the beginning of the world to the period of its conquest by the Arabs. The verses move on with spirit and rapidity, resembling more the flow of our lyrical, than that of our common heroic, lines [*+].

Ferdoosee wrote his poem in the early part of the eleventh century from a book which had been in existence a long time before, for he always calls it an old book. No proof therefore is needed that he did not invent the tales which compose the Shah-nameh, and they have every appearance of having been the ancient traditionary legends of the Persian nation. But we are able to show that these legends were popular in Persia nearly six centuries before his time; and it was chiefly with a view to establishing this

[p. 145]

curious point that we related the tale of Zohak and Feridoon.

Moses of Choren, the Armenian historian, who wrote about the year 440, thus addresses the person to whom his work is dedicated. "How should the vain and empty fables about Byrasp Astyages gain any portion of thy favour, or why shouldest thou impose on us the fatigue of elucidating the absurd, tasteless, senseless legends of the Persians about him? to wit, of his first injurious benefit of the demoniac powers which were subject to him, and how he could not deceive him who was deception aryl falsehood itself. Then, of the kiss on the shoulders, whence the dragons came, and how thenceforward the growth of vice destroyed mankind by the pampering of the belly, until at last a certain Rhodones bound him with chains of brass, and brought him to the mountain which is called Demavend; how Byraspes then dragged to a hill Rhodones, when he fell asleep on the way, but this last, awaking out of his sleep, brought him to a cavern of the mountain, where he chained him fast, and set an image opposite to him, so that, terrified by it, and held by the chains, he might never more escape to destroy the world."

Here we have evidently the whole story of Zohak and Feridoon current in Persia in the fifth century; and any one who has reflected on the nature of tradition must be well aware that it must have existed there for centuries before. The very names are nearly the same. Taking the first syllable from Feridoon, it becomes nearly Rodon, and Biyraspi Aidahaki (the words of the Armenian text) signify the dragon Byrasp: Zohak is evidently nearly the same with the last word. This fable could hardly have been invented in the time of the Sassanian dynasty, who had not then been more than two centuries on the throne, much less during the period of

[p. 146]

the dominion of the Parthian Arsacides, who were adverse to everything Persian. We are therefore carried back to the times of the Kejanians, the Achaemenides of the Greeks; and it is by no means impossible that the tale of Zohak and Feridoon was known even to the host which Xerxes led to the subjugation of Greece.

It is well known to those versed in oriental history that, when the founder of the house of Sassan mounted the throne of Persia in the year 226, he determined to bring back everything, as far as was possible, to its state in the time of the Kejanians, from whom he affected to be descended, and that his successors trod in his footsteps. But, as Persia had been for five centuries and a half under the dominion of the Greeks and Parthians, there was probably no authentic record of the ancient state of things remaining. Recourse was therefore had to the traditional tales of the country; and, as the legend of Zohak and Feridoon was, as we have seen, one of the most remarkable of these tales, it was at once adopted as a genuine portion of the national history, and a banner formed to represent the Apron of Gavah, which was, as the poet describes it, adorned with additional jewels by each monarch of the house of Sassan at his accession. This hypothesis will very simply explain the circumstance of this banner being unnoticed by the Greek writers, while it is an undoubted fact that it was captured by the Arabs at the battle of Kadiseah, which broke the power of Persia,--a circumstance which has perplexed Sir John Malcolm.

We will finally observe that the historian just alluded to, as well as some others, thinks that the darkness cast by the magic art of the White Deev over Ky Kaoos and his army in Mazanderan coincides with the eclipse of the sun predicted by Thales,

[p. 147]

and which, according to Herodotus, parted the armies of the Medians and the Lydians when engaged in conflict. Little stress is however, we apprehend, to be laid on such coincidences. Tradition does not usually retain the memory of facts of this nature, though fiction is apt enough to invent them. The only circumstances which we have observed in the early part of the Shah-nameh agreeing with Grecian history, are some relating to the youthful days of Kei Khoosroo, which are very like what Herodotus relates of Cyrus.

We now return to the history of the Assassins

Footnotes

^133:* "Sebil, in Arabic 'the way,' means generally the road, and the traveller is hence called Ibn-es-sebil, the son of the road; but it more particularly signifies the way of piety and good works, which leads to Paradise. Whatever meritorious work the Moslem undertakes, he does Fi sebil Allah, on the way of God, or for the love of God; and the most meritorious which he can undertake is the holy war, or the fight for his faith and his country, on God's way. But since pious women can have no immediate share in the contest, every thing which they can contribute to the nursing of the wounded, and the refreshment of the exhausted, is imputed to them as equally meritorious as if they had fought themselves. The distribution of water to the exhausted and wounded warriors is the highest female merit in the holy war on God's way."--Hammer's History of the Assassins, Wood's translation, p. 144.

^135:* This part of Persia also acquires interest from the circumstance of Russia being believed to be looking forward to obtaining it, one day or other, by conquest or cession.

^135:+ Azed-ud-dowlah, one of the most celebrated of these princes, had a dyke constructed across the river Kur, in the plain of Murdasht, near the ruins of Persepolis, to confine the water, and permit of its being distributed over the country. It was called the Bund-Ameer (Prince's Dyke), and travellers ignorant of the Persian language have given this name to the river itself. We must not, therefore, be surprised to find in "Lalla Rookh" a lady singing,

"There's a bower of roses by Bendameer's stream;"

and asking,

Do the roses still bloom by the calm Bendameer?"

[paragraph continues] Calm and still, beyond doubt, is the Bendameer.

^140:* Four lines, quoted by Sir J. Malcolm from the Gulistan of Saadi, may be thus literally rendered in the measure of the original:--

The blest Feridoon an angel was not;
 Of musk or of amber he formed was not;
 By justice and mercy good ends gained he;
 Be just and merciful, thou 'lt a Feridoon be.

^144:* Paradise, we are to recollect, is a word of Persian origin, adopted by the Greeks, from whom we have received it. A Paradise was a place planted with trees, a park, garden, or pleasure-ground, as we may term it.

^144:+ Hammer has, in his "Belles Lettres of Persia" (Schone Redekunst Persians), and in the "Mines de l'Orient," translated a considerable portion of the Shah-nameh in the measure of the original. MM. Campion and Atkinson have rendered a part of it into English heroic verse. Gorres has epitomised it, as far as to the death of Roostem, in German prose, under the title of "Das Heldenbnch von Iran." An epitome of the poem in English prose, by Mr. Atkinson, has also lately appeared.

     
Secret Societies of the Middle Ages, by Thomas Keightley, [1837], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 148]

  

CHAPTER X.

Death of Jellal-ed-deen--Character of Ala-ed-deen, his successor--The Sheikh Jemal-ed-deen--The Astronomer Na-sir- ed-deen--The Vizir Sheref-al-Moolk--Death of Ala-ed-deen--Succession of Rukn-ed-deen, the last Sheikh-al-Jebal.

THE reign of Jellal-ed-deen, which, unfortunately for the society, lasted but twelve years, was unstained by blood; and we see no reason to doubt the judgment of the oriental historians, who consider his faith in Islam as being sincere and pure. It was probably his virtue that caused his death, for his life, it was suspected, was terminated by poison administered by his own kindred. His son Ala-ed-deen [**] (Eminence of Religion), who succeeded him, was but nine years old; but as, according to the maxims of the Ismailites, the visible representative of the imam was, to a certain extent, exempted from the ordinary imperfections of humanity, and his commands were to be regarded as those of him whose authority he bore, the young Ala-ed-deen was obeyed as implicitly as any of his predecessors. At his mandate the blood was shed of all among his relatives who were suspected of having participated in the murder of his father.

Ala-ed-deen proved to be a weak, inefficient ruler. His delight was in the breeding and tending of sheep, and he spent his days in the cotes among the herdsmen, while the affairs of the society were allowed to run into disorder. All the restraints imposed by his father were removed, and every one was left to do

[p. 149]

what was right in his own eyes. The weakness of this prince's intellect is ascribed to his having, in the fifth year of his reign, had himself most copiously bled without the knowledge of his physician, the consequence of which was an extreme degree of debility and a deep melancholy, which never afterwards left him. From that time no one could venture to offer him advice respecting either his health or the state of the affairs of the society, without being rewarded for it by the rack or by instant death. Everything was therefore kept concealed from him, and he had neither friend nor adviser.

Yet Ala-ed-deen was not without some estimable qualities. He had a respect and esteem for learning and learned men. For the sheikh Jemal-ed-deen Ghili, who dwelt at Casveen, he testified on all occasions the utmost reverence, and sent him annually 500 dinars to defray the expenses of his household. When the people of Casveen reproached the learned sheikh with living on the bounty of the Impious, he made answer, "The imams pronounce it lawful to execute the Ismailites, and to confiscate their goods; how much more lawful is it for a man to make use of their property and their money when they give them voluntarily!" Ala-ed-deen, who probably heard of the reproaches directed against his friend, sent to assure the people of Casveen that it was solely on account of the sheikh that he spared them, or else he would put the earth of Casveen into bags, hang the bags about the necks of the inhabitants, and bring them to Alamoot. The following instance of his respect for the sheikh is also related. A messenger coming with a letter to him from the sheikh was so imprudent as to deliver it to him when he was drunk. Ala-ed-deen ordered him to have a hundred blows of the bastinade, at the same time crying out to him, "O foolish and thoughtless man, to give me

[p. 150]

a letter from the sheikh at the time when I was drunk! Thou shouldest have waited till I was come out of the bath, and was come to my senses."

The celebrated astronomer Nasir-ed-deen (Victory of Religion) had also gained the consideration of Ala-ed-deen, who was anxious to enjoy the pleasure of his society. But the philosopher, who resided at Bokhara, testified little inclination to accept of the favour intended him. Ala-ed-deen therefore sent orders to the Dai-al-Kebir of Kuhistan to convey the uncourteous sage to Alamoot. As Nasir-ed-deen was one day recreating himself in the gardens about Bokhara, he found himself suddenly surrounded by some men, who, showing him a horse, directed him to mount, telling him he had nothing to fear if he conducted himself quietly. It was in vain that he argued and remonstrated; he was far on the road to Kuhistan, which was 600 miles distant, before his friends knew he was gone. The governor made every apology for what he had been obliged to do. The philosopher was sent on to Alamoot to be the companion of Ala-ed-deen, and it was while he was there that he wrote his great work called the Morals of Nasir (Akhlaak-Nasiree). [**]

It was during the administration of Ala-ed-deen that the following event, so strongly illustrative of the modes of procedure of the Assassins, took place. The sultan Jellal-ed-deen, the last ruler of Khaurism, so well known for his heroic resistance to Chingis

[p. 151]

[paragraph continues] Khan, had appointed the emir Arkhan governor of Nishaboor, which bordered closely on the Ismailite territory of Kuhistan. Arkhan being obliged to attend the sultan, the deputy whom he left in his stead made several destructive incursions into Kuhistan, and laid waste the Ismailite districts of Teem and Kain. The Ismailites sent to demand satisfaction, but the only reply made to their complaints and menaces by the deputy-governor was one of those symbolical proceedings so common in the east. He came to receive the Ismailite envoy with his girdle stuck full of daggers, which he flung on the ground before him, to signify either his disregard for the daggers of the society, or to intimate that he could play at that game as well as they. The Ismailites were not, however, persons to be provoked with impunity, and shortly afterwards three Fedavees were despatched to Kunja, where Arkhan was residing at the court of the sultan. They watched till the emir came without the walls of the town, and then fell upon and murdered him. They then hastened to the house of Sheref-al-Moolk (Nobleness of the Realm), the vizir, and penetrated into his divan. Fortunately he was at that time engaged with the sultan, and they missed him; but they wounded severely one of his servants, and then, sallying forth, paraded the streets, proclaiming aloud that they were Assassins. They did not however escape the penalty of their temerity, for the people assembled and stoned them to death.

An envoy of the Ismailites, named Bedr-ed-deen (Full Moon of Religion) Ahmed, was meantime on his way to the court of the sultan. He stopped short on hearing what had occurred, and sent to the vizir to know whether he should go on or return. Sheref-al-Moolk, who feared to irritate the Assassins, directed him to continue his journey, and, when he was

[p. 152]

arrived, showed him every mark of honour. The object of Bedr-ed-deen's mission was to obtain satisfaction for the ravages committed on the Ismailite territory and the cession of the fortress of Damaghan. The vizir promised the former demand without a moment's hesitation, and he made as little difficulty with regard to the second. An instrument was drawn out assigning to the Ismailites the fortress which they craved, on condition of their remitting annually to the royal treasury the sum of 30,000 pieces of gold.

When this affair was arranged the sultan set out for Azerbeijan, and the Ismailite ambassador remained the guest of the vizir. One day, after a splendid banquet, when the wine, which they had been drinking in violation of the law, had mounted into their heads, the ambassador told the vizir, by way of confidence, that there were several Ismailites among the pages, grooms, guards, and other persons who were immediately about the sultan. The vizir, dismayed, and at the same time curious to know who these dangerous attendants were, besought the ambassador to point them out to him, giving him his napkin as a pledge that nothing evil should happen to them. Instantly, at a sign from the envoy, five of the persons who were attendants of the chamber stepped forth, avowing themselves to be concealed Assassins. "On such a day, and at such an hour," said one of them, an Indian, to the vizir, "I might have slain thee without being seen or punished; and, if I did not do so, it was only because I had no orders from my superiors." The vizir, timid by nature, and rendered still more so by the effects of the wine, stripped himself to his shirt, and, sitting down before the five Assassins, conjured them by their lives to spare him, protesting that he was as devotedly the slave of the sheikh Ala-ed-deen as of the sultan Jellal-ed-deen.

[p. 153]

As soon as the sultan heard of the meanness and cowardice of his vizir, he sent a messenger to him with the keenest reproaches, and an order to burn alive the five Ismailites without an instant's delay. The vizir, though loth, was obliged to comply, and, in violation of his promise, the five chamberlains were cast on the flaming pyre, where they died exulting at being found worthy to suffer in the service of the great Sheikh-al-Jebal. The master of the pages was also put to death for having admitted Ismailites among them. The sultan then set out for Irak, leaving the vizir in Azerbeijan. While he was there an envoy arrived from Alamoot, who, on being admitted to an audience, thus spake, "Thou hast given five Ismailites to the flames; to redeem thy head, pay 10,000 pieces of gold for each of these unfortunate men." The vizir heaped honours on the envoy, and directed his secretary to draw out a deed in the usual forms, by which he bound himself to pay the Ismailites the 'annual sum of 10,000 pieces of gold, besides paying for them the 30,000 which went to the treasury of the sultan. Sheref-al-Moolk was then assured that he had nothing to apprehend.

The preceding very characteristic anecdote rests on good authority, for it is related by Aboo-'l-Fetah Nissavee, the vizir's secretary, in his life of sultan Jellal-ed-deen.

The astronomer Nasir-ed-deen was not the only involuntary captive of Alamoot. Ala-ed-deen sent once to Farsistan to the atabeg Mozaffer-ed-deen, to request that he would send him an able physician. Requests from Alamoot were not lightly to be disregarded, and the atabeg despatched the imam Beha-ed-deen, one of the most renowned physicians of the time, to the mountains of Jebal. The skill of the imam proved of great benefit to the prince, but when the physician applied for leave to return to his family

[p. 154]

he found that he was destined to pass the remainder of his days in Alamoot, unless he should outlive his patient.

The imam's release, however, was more speedy than he expected. Ala-ed-deen, who had several children, had nominated the eldest of them, Rukn-ed-deen (Support of Religion), while he was yet a child, to be his successor. As Rukn-ed-deen grew up the people began to hold him in equal respect with his father, and to consider his commands as equally binding on them. Ala-ed-deen took offence, and declared that he would give the succession to another of his children; but, as this directly contravened one of the Ismailite maxims, namely, that the first nomination was always the true one, it was little heeded. Rukn-ed-deen, in apprehension for his life, which his father threatened, retired to a strong castle to wait there the time when he should be called to the succession. Meantime the tyranny and caprice of Ala-ed-deen had given many of the principal persons about him cause to be apprehensive for their lives, and they resolved to anticipate him. There was a man at Alamoot named Hassan, a native of Mazenderan, who, though no Ismailite, was of a vile and profligate character. He was the object of the doating attachment of Ala-ed-deen, and consequently had free and constant access to him. Him they fixed upon as their agent, and they found no difficulty in gaining him, Ala-ed-deen, whose fondness for breeding and tending sheep had never diminished, had built for himself a wooden house close by his sheepcotes, whither he was wont to retire, and where he indulged himself in all the excesses in which he delighted. Hassan of Mazenderan seized the moment when Ala-ed-deen was lying drunk in this house, and shot him through the neck with an arrow. Rukn-ed-deen, who is said to have been engaged in

[p. 155]

the conspiracy, assuming the part of the avenger of blood, the murderer and all his family were put to death, and their bodies committed to the flames; but this act of seeming justice did not free Rukn-ed-deen from suspicion, and the bitter reproaches of his mother were poured forth on him as a parricide.

The termination of the power of the Ismailites was now at hand. Rukn-ed-deen had hardly ascended the throne of his murdered father when he learned that an enemy was approaching against whom all attempts at resistance would be vain.

Footnotes

^148:* This is the name which, in the form of Aladdin, is so familiar to us from the story of the Wonderful Lamp.

^150:* Malcolm's History of Persia, vol. i. In the clever work called "Traits and Stories of the Irish Peasantry," which is the best picture ever given of the language, manners, and modes of thinking of that class, there is an amusing account (and an undoubtedly true one) of the "Abduction of Mat Kavanagh," one of that curious order of men called in that country hedge-schoolmasters, which, as indicative of a passion for knowledge, may be placed in comparison with this anecdote of Ala-ed-deen.

     
Secret Societies of the Middle Ages, by Thomas Keightley, [1837], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 156]

  

CHAPTER XI.

The Mongols--Hoolagoo sent against the Ismailites--Rukn-ed-deen submits--Capture of Alamoot--Destruction of the Library--Fate of Rukn-ed-deen--Massacre of the Ismailites--St. Louis and the Assassins--Mission for the Conversion of the People of Kuhistan--Conclusion.

HALF a century had now elapsed since the voice of the Mongol seer on the banks of the Selinga had announced to the tribes of that race that he had seen in a vision the Great God sitting on his throne and giving sentence that Temujeen, one of their chiefs, should be Chingis Khan (Great Khan), and the obedient tribes had, under the leading of Temujeen, commenced that career of conquest which extended from the eastern extremity of Asia to the confines of Egypt and of Germany. At this time the chief power over the Mongols was in the hands of Mangoo, the grandson of Chingis, a prince advantageously made known to Europe by the long abode of the celebrated Venetian Marco Polo at his court. The Mongols had not yet invaded Persia, though they had, under Chingis himself, overthrown and stripped of his dominions the powerful sultan of Khaurism. It was however evident that that country could not long escape the fate of so many extensive and powerful states, and that a pretext would soon be found for pouring over it the hordes of the Mongols.

We are told, though it seems scarcely credible, that ambassadors came from the Khalif of Bagdad to Nevian, the Mongol general who commanded on the northern frontier of Persia, requiring safe conduct

[p. 157]

to the court of Mangoo. The object of their mission was to implore the great khan to send his invincible troops to destroy those pests of society the bands of the Ismailites. The prayer of the envoys of the successor of the Prophet was supported by the Judge of Casveen, who happened to be at that time at the court of Mangoo, where he appeared in a coat of mail, to secure himself, as he professed, from the daggers of the Assassins. The khan gave orders to assemble an army; his brother Hoolagoo was appointed to command it, and, as he was setting forth, Mangoo thus addressed him:--

"With heavy cavalry and a mighty host I send thee from Tooran to Iran, the land of mighty princes. It behoves thee now strictly to observe, both in great and in small things, the laws and regulations of Chinghis Khan, and to take possession of the countries from the Oxus to the Nile. Draw closer unto thee by favour and rewards the obedient and the submissive; tread the refractory and the rebellious, with their wives and children, into the dust of contempt and misery. When thou hast done with the Assassins begin the conquest of Irak. If the Khalif of Bagdad comes forward ready to serve thee, thou shalt do him no injury; if he refuses, let him share the fate of the rest."

The army of Hoolagoo was reinforced by a thousand families of Chinese firemen to manage the battering machines and fling the flaming naphtha, known in Europe under the name of Greek fire. He set forward in the month Ramazan of the 651st year of the Hejra (A. D. 1253). His march was so slow that he did not cross the Oxus till two years afterwards. On the farther bank of this river he took the diversion of lion-hunting, but the cold came on so intense that the greater part of his horses perished, and he was obliged to wait for the ensuing

[p. 158]

spring before he could advance. All the princes of the menaced countries sent embassies to the Mongol camp announcing their submission and obedience. The head-quarters of Hoolagoo were now in Khorassan, whence he sent envoys to Rukn-ed-deen, the Ismailite chief, requiring his submission. By the advice of the astronomer Nasir-ed-deen, who was his counsellor and minister, Rukn-ed-deen sent to Baissoor Noobeen, one of Hoolagoo's generals, who had advanced to Hamadan, declaring his obedience and his wish to live in peace with every one. The Mongol general recommended that, as Hoolagoo himself was approaching, Rukn-ed-deen should wait on him in person. After some delay, the latter agreed to send his brother Shahinshah, who accompanied the son of Baissoor to the quarters of the Mongol prince. Meantime Baissoor, by the orders of Hoolagoo, entered the Ismailite territory and drew near to Alamoot. The troops of the Assassins occupied a steep hill near that place. The Mongols attacked them, but were repelled each time they attempted the ascent. Being forced to give over the attack, they contented themselves with burning the houses and ravaging the country round.

When Shahinshah reached the camp of Hoolagoo and notified the submission of his brother, orders to the following effect were transmitted to the mountain-chief:--"Since Rukn-ed-deen has sent his brother unto us, we forgive him the offences of his father and his followers. He shall himself, as, during his short reign, he has been guilty of no crime, demolish his castles and come to us." Orders were sent at the same time to Baissoor to give over ravaging the district of Roodbar. Rukn-ed-deen began casting down some of the battlements of Alamoot, and at the same time sent to beg the delay of a year before appearing in the presence of Hoolagoo. But the

[p. 159]

orders of the Mongol were imperative; he was required to appear at once, and to commit the defence of his territory to the Mongol officer who was the bearer of Hoolagoo's commands. Rukn-ed-deen hesitated. He sent again to make excuses and ask more time; and, as a proof of his obedience, he directed the governors of Kuhistan and Kirdkoh to repair to the Mongol camp. The banners of Hoolagoo were now floating at the foot of Demavend, close to the Ismailite territory, and once more orders came to Maimoondees, where Rukn-ed-deen and his family had taken refuge:--"The Ruler of the World is now arrived at Demavend, and it is no longer time to delay. If Rukn-ed-deen wishes to wait a few days he may in the mean time send his son." The affrighted chief declared his readiness to send his son, but, at the persuasion of his women and advisers, instead of his own, he sent the son of a slave, who was of the same age, requesting that his brother might be restored to him. Hoolagoo was soon informed of the imposition, but disdained to notice it otherwise than by sending back the child, saying he was too young, and requiring that his elder brother, if he had one, should be sent in place of Shahinshah. He at the same time dismissed Shahinshah with these words:--"Tell thy brother to demolish Maimoondees and come to me; if he does not come, the eternal God knows the consequences."

The Mongol troops now covered all the hills and valleys, and Hoolagoo in person appeared before Maimoondees. The Assassins fought bravely, but Rukn-ed-deen had not spirit to hold out. He sent his other brother, his son, his vizir Nasir-ed-deen, and the principal persons of the society, bearing rich presents to the Mongol prince. Nasir-ed-deen was directed to magnify the strength of the Ismailite fortresses in order to gain good terms for his master;

[p. 160]

but, instead of so doing, he told Hoolagoo not to regard them, assuring him that the conjunction of the stars announced the downfal of the Ismailites, and that the sun of their power was hastening to its setting. It was agreed that the castle should be surrendered on condition of free egress. Rukn-ed-deen, his ministers, and his friends, entered the Mongol camp on the first day of the month Zoo-l-Kaadeh. His wealth was divided among the Mongol troops. Hoolagoo took compassion on himself, and spoke kindly to him, and treated him as his guest. Nasir-ed-deen became the vizir of the conqueror, who after-. wards built for him the observatory of Meragha.

Mongol officers were now dispatched to all the castles of the Ismailites in Kuhistan, Roodbar, and even in Syria, with orders from Rukn-ed-deen to the governors to surrender or demolish them. The number of these strong castles was upwards of one hundred, of which there were forty demolished in Roodbar alone. Three of the strongest castles in this province, namely, Alamoot, Lamseer, and Kirdkoh, hesitated to submit, their governors replying to the summons that they would wait till Hoolagoo should appear in person before them. In a few days the Mongol prince and his captive were at the foot of Alamoot. Rukn-ed-deen was led under the walls, and he ordered the governor to surrender. His command was disregarded, and Hoolagoo, not to waste time, removed his camp to Lamseer, leaving a corps to blockade Alamoot. The people of Lamseer came forth immediately with their homage, and a few days afterwards envoys arrived from Alamoot entreating Rukn-ed-deen to intercede for the inhabitants with the brother of Mangoo. The conqueror was moderate; he allowed them free egress, and gave them three days to collect and remove their families and property. On the third day the Mongol

[p. 161]

troops received permission to enter and plunder the fortress. They rushed, eager for prey, into the hitherto invincible, now deserted, Vulture's Nest, and rifled it of all that remained in it. As they hurried through its subterrane recesses in search of treasure they frequently, to their amazement, found themselves immersed in honey, or swimming in wine; for there were large receptacles of wine, honey, and corn, hewn into the solid rock, the nature of which was such that, though, as we are told, they had been filled in the time of Hassan Sabah, the corn was perfectly sound, and the wine had not soured. This extraordinary circumstance was regarded by the Ismailites as a miracle wrought by that founder of their society.

When Alamoot fell into the hands of the Mongols Ata-Melek (King's father) Jowainee, a celebrated vizir and historian, craved permission of Hoolagoo to inspect the celebrated library of that place, which had been founded by Hassan Sabah and increased by his successors, and to select from it such works as might be worthy of a place in that of the khan. The permission was readily granted, and he commenced his survey of the books. But Ata-Melek was too orthodox a Mussulman, or too lazy an examiner, to make the best use of his opportunity; for all he did was to take the short method of selecting the Koran and a few other books which he deemed of value out of the collection, and to commit the remainder, with all the philosophical instruments, to the flames, as being impious and heretical. All the archives of the society were thus destroyed, and our only source of information respecting its doctrines, regulations, and history, is derived from what Ata-Melek has related in his Own history as the result of his search among the archives and books of the library of Alamoot, previous to his making an auto da fe of them.

The fate of the last of a dynasty, however worthless

[p. 162]

and insignificant his character may be, is always interesting from the circumstance alone of his being the last, and thus, as it were, embodying in himself the history of his predecessors. We shall therefore pause to relate the remainder of the story of the feeble Rukn-ed-deen.

When Hoolagoo, after the conclusion of his campaign against Roodbar, retired to Hamadan, where he had left his children, he took with him Rukn-ed-deen, whom he continued to treat with kindness. Here the Assassin prince became enamoured of a Mongol maiden of the very lowest class. He asked permission of Hoolagoo to espouse her, and, by the directions of that prince, the wedding was celebrated with great solemnity. He next craved to be sent to the court of Mangoo Khan. Hoolagoo, though surprised at this request, acceded to it also, and gave him a corps of Mongols as an escort. He at the same time directed him to order on his way the garrison of Kirdkoh, who still held out, to surrender, and demolish the fortress. Rukn-ed-deen, as he passed by Kirdkoh, did as directed, but sent at the same time a private message to the governor to hold out as long as possible. Arrived at Kara-Kooroom, the residence of the khan, he was not admitted to an audience, but the following message was delivered to him:--"Thus saith Mangoo: Since thou affectest to be obedient to us, wherefore has not the castle of Kirdkoh been delivered up? Go back, and demolish all the castles which remain; then mayest thou be partaker of the honour of viewing our imperial countenance." Rukn-ed-deen was obliged to return, and, soon after he had crossed the Oxus, his escort, making him dismount under pretext of an entertainment, ran him through with their swords.

Mangoo Khan was determined to exterminate the whole race of the Ismailites, and orders to that effect

[p. 163]

had already reached Hoolagoo, who was only waiting to execute them till Kirdkoh should have surrendered. As the garrison of that place continued obstinate, he no longer ventured to delay. Orders for indiscriminate massacre were issued, and 12,000 Ismailites soon fell as victims. The process was short; wherever a member of the society was met he was, without any trial, ordered to kneel down, and his head instantly rolled on the ground. Hoolagoo sent one of his vizirs to Casveen, where the family of Rukn-ed-deen were residing, and the whole of them were put to death, except two (females it is said), who were reserved to glut the vengeance of the princess Boolghan Khaloon, whose father Jagatai had perished by the daggers of the Assassins

The siege of Kirdkoh was committed by Hoolagoo (who was now on his march to Bagdad to put an end to the empire of the khalifs) to the princes of Mazenderan and Ruyan. The castle held out for three years, and the siege was rendered remarkable by the following curious occurrence:--It was in the beginning of the spring when a poet named Koorbee of Ruyan came to the camp. He began to sing, in the dialect of Taberistan, a celebrated popular song of the spring, beginning with these lines:--

When the sun from the fish to the ram doth return,
 Spring's banner waves high on the breeze of the morn. [**]

[p. 164]

[paragraph continues] The song awoke in the minds of princes and soldiers the recollection of the vernal delights they had left behind them; an invincible longing after them seized the whole army; and, without reflecting on the consequences, they broke up the siege, and set forth to enjoy the season of flowers in the fragrant gardens of Mazenderan. Hoolagoo was greatly incensed when he heard of their conduct, and sent a body of troops against them, but forgave them on their making due apologies and submissions.

The Ismailite power in Persia was now completely at an end; the khalifat, whose destruction had been its great object, was also involved in its ruin, and the power of the Mongols established over the whole of Iran. The Mongol troops failed in their attempts on the Ismailite castles in Syria; but, at the end of fourteen years, what they could not effect was achieved by the great Beibars, the Circassian Mamlook sultan of Egypt, who reduced all the strongholds of the Assassins in the Syrian mountains, and extinguished their power in that region.

The last intercourse of the Assassins with the western Christians which we read of was that with St. Louis. William of Nangis relates--but the tale is evidently apocryphal--that in the year 1250 two of the Arsacidae were sent to France to murder that prince, who was then only twenty-two years of age. The Senex de Monte however repented, and sent others to warn the French monarch. These arriving in time, the former were discovered, on which the

[p. 165]

king loaded them all with presents, and dismissed them with rich gifts for their master.

Rejecting this idle legend, we may safely credit the account of Joinville, that in 1250, when St. Louis was residing at Acre, after his captivity in Egypt, he was waited on by an embassy from the Old Man of the Mountain, the object of which was to procure, through his means, a remission of the tribute which he paid to the Templars and the Hospitaliers. As if to obviate the answer which might naturally be made, the ambassador said that his master considered that it would be quite useless to sacrifice the lives of his people by murdering the masters of these orders, as men as good as they would be immediately appointed to succeed them. It being then morning, the king desired them to return in the evening. When they appeared again, he had with him the masters of the Temple and the Hospital, who, on the propositions being repeated, declared them to be most extravagant, and assured the ambassadors that, were it not for the sacredness of their character, and their regard for the word of the king, they would fling them into the sea. They were directed to go back, and to bring within fifteen days a satisfactory letter to the king. They departed, and, returning at the appointed time, said to the king that their chief, as the highest mark of friendship, had sent him his own shirt and his gold ring. 'They also brought him draught and chess-boards, adorned with amber, an elephant and a giraffe (orafle) of crystal. The king, not to be outdone in generosity, sent an embassy to Massyat with presents of scarlet robes, gold cups, and silver vases, for the Ismailite chief.

Speculative tenets will continue and be propagated long after the sect or society which holds them may have lost all temporal influence and consideration. Accordingly, seventy years after the destruction of

[p. 166]

[paragraph continues] Alamoot, in the reign of Aboo-Zeid, the eighth successor of Hoolagoo, it was found that nearly all the people of Kuhistan were devoted to the Ismailite opinions. The monarch, who was an orthodox Soonnee, advised with the governor of the province, and it was resolved to send a mission, composed of learned and zealous divines, for the conversion of the heretics. At the head of the mission was placed the pious and orthodox sheikh Emad-ed-deen of Bokhara; the other members of it were the sheikh's two sons and four other learned ulemas (Doctors of law), in all seven persons. Full of enthusiasm and zeal for the good cause which they had in hand, the missionaries set forth. They arrived at Kain, the chief place of the province, and found with grief and indignation none of the ordinary testimonies of Moslem devotion. The mosks were in ruins, no morning or evening call to prayer was to be heard, no school or hospital was to be seen. Emad-ed-deen resolved to commence his mission by the solemn call to prayer. Adopting the precaution of arraying themselves in armour, he and his companions ascended the terrace of the castle, and all at once from its different sides shouted forth, "Say God is great! There is no god but God, and Mohammed is his prophet. Up to prayer; to good works!" The inhabitants, to whom these sounds were unusual and offensive, ran together, determined to bestow the crown of martyrdom on the missionaries; but these good men, whose zeal was of a prudent complexion, did not, though armed, abide the encounter. They took refuge in an aqueduct, where they concealed themselves till the people had dispersed, when they came forth once more, ascended the terrace, and gave the call to prayer. The people collected again, and again the missionaries sought their retreat. By perseverance, however, and the powerful support of the governor of the province, they

[p. 167]

gradually accustomed the ears of the people to the forms of orthodoxy. Many years afterwards sultan Shahrokh, the son of Timoor, resolved to send a commission to ascertain the state of religion in Kohistan. At the head of it he placed Jelalee of Kain, the grandson of Emad-ed-deen, a man of learning and talent and a distinguished writer. Jelalee deemed himself especially selected by heaven for this purpose, as his grandsire had headed the former mission, and the Prophet had appeared to himself in a dream, and given to him a broom to sweep the land, which he interpreted to be a commission to sweep away the impurity of infidelity out of the country. He therefore entered on his office with joy, and, after a peregrination of eleven months, reported favourably of the faith of the people of Kohistan, with the exception of some dervishes and others, who were addicted to Soofeeism.

At the present day, nearly six centuries after the destruction of the Ismailite power, the sect is still in existence both in Persia and in Syria. But, like that of the Anabaptists, it has lost its terrors, and the Ismailite doctrine is now merely one of the speculative heresies of Islam. The Syrian Ismailites dwell in eighteen villages around Massyat, and pay an annual sum of 16,500 piastres to the governor of Hama, who nominates their sheikh or emir. They are divided into two sects or parties, the Sooweidanee, so named from one of their former sheikhs, and the Khisrewee, so called on account of their great reverence for Khiser, the guardian of the Well of Life. They are all externally rigid observers of the precepts of Islam, but they are said to believe in the divinity of Ali, in the untreated light as the origin of all things, and in the sheikh Rasheed-ed-deen Sinan as the last representative of God upon earth.

The Persian Ismailites dwell chiefly in Roodbar,

[p. 168]

but they are to be met all over the east, and even appear as traders on the banks of the Ganges. Their imam, whose pedigree they trace up to Ismail, the son of Jaaffer-es-Sadik, resides, under the protection of the Shah of Persia, at the village of Khekh, in the district of Koom. As, according to their doctrine, he is an incarnate ray of the Divinity, they hold him in the utmost veneration, and make pilgrimages from the most distant places to obtain his blessing.

We have thus traced the origin, the growth, and the decline of this formidable society, only to be paralleled by that of the Jesuits in extent of power and unity of plan and purpose. Unlike this last, however, its object was purely evil, and its career was one of blood: it has therefore left no deeds to which its apologists might appeal in its defence. Its history, notwithstanding, will always form a curious and instructive chapter in that of the human race.

Footnotes

^163:*

"And Day, with his banner of radiance unfurled,
   Shines in through the mountainous portal that opes
 Sublime from that valley of bliss to the world,"

says Mr. Moore in his "Lalla Rookh," undoubtedly without any knowledge of the eastern song. His original was perhaps Campbell's

              "Andes, giant of the western star,
 His meteor standard to the winds unfurled,
 Looks from his throne of clouds o'er half the world;"

which was again, in all probability, suggested, like Gray's [p. 164]

"Loose his beard, and hoary hair
 Stream'd like a meteor to the troubled air,"

by Milton's

"Imperial ensign, which, full high advanced,
 Shone like a meteor streaming to the wind."

It is thus that the particles of poetry, like those of matter, are in eternal circulation, and forming new combinations.

     
Secret Societies of the Middle Ages, by Thomas Keightley, [1837], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 169]

  

THE TEMPLARS.

  

CHAPTER I.

Introduction--The Crusades--Wrong Ideas respecting their Origin--True Causes of them--Pilgrimage--Pilgrimage of Frotmond--Of the Count of Anjou--Striking Difference between the Christianity of the East and that of the West--Causes of their different Characters--Feudalism--The Extent and Force of this Principle.

AMONG the many extraordinary phenomena which the middle ages present, none is more deserving of attention, or more characteristic of the times and the state of society and opinion, than the institution of the religio-military orders of the Hospitaliers, the Templars, and the Teutonic Knights. Of these orders, all of which owed their origin to the Crusades, and commenced in the 12th century, the last, after the final loss of the Holy Land, transferring the scene of their activity to the north of Germany, and directing their arms against the heathens who still occupied the south coast of the Baltic, became the founders, in a great measure, of the Prussian power; while the first, planting their standard on the Isle of Rhodes, long gallantly withstood the forces of the Ottoman Turks, and, when at length obliged to resign that island, took their station on the rock of Malta, where they bravely repelled the troops of the greatest of the Ottoman sultans, and maintained at least a nominal independence till the close of the 18th century.

[p. 170]

[paragraph continues] A less glorious fate attended the Knights of the Temple. They became the victims of the unprincipled rapacity of a merciless prince; their property was seized and confiscated; their noblest members perished in the flames; their memory was traduced and maligned; the foulest crimes were laid to their charge; and a secret doctrine, subversive of social tranquillity and national independence, was asserted to have animated their councils. Though many able defenders of these injured knights have arisen, the charges against them have been reiterated even in the present day; and a distinguished Orientalist (Von Hammer) has recently even attempted to bring forward additional and novel proofs of their secret guilt. [**] To add one more to the number of their defenders, to trace the origin, develope the internal constitution of their society, narrate their actions, examine the history of their condemnation and suppression, and show how absurd and frivolous were the charges against them, are the objects of the present writer, who, though he is persuaded, and hopes to prove, that they held no secret doctrine, yet places them among the secret societies of the middle ages, because it is by many confidently maintained that they were such.

As the society of the Templars was indebted for its origin to the Crusades, we will, before entering on our narrative, endeavour to correct some erroneous notions respecting the causes and nature of these celebrated expeditions.

The opinion of the Crusades having been an emanation

[p. 171]

of the spirit of chivalry is one of the most erroneous that can be conceived, yet it is one most widely spread. Romancers, and those who write history as if it were romance, exert all their power to keep up the illusion, and the very sound of the word Crusade conjures up in most minds the ideas of waving plumes, gaudy surcoats, emblazoned shields, with lady's love, knightly honour, and courteous feats of arms. A vast deal of this perversion of truth is no doubt to be ascribed to the illustrious writer of the splendid epic whose subject is the first Crusade. Tasso, who, living at the time when the last faint gleam of expiring chivalry was fitfully glowing through the moral and political gloom which was overspreading the former abodes of freedom and industry in Italy, may be excused if, young and unversed in the philosophy of history, he mistook the character of European society six centuries before his time, or deemed himself at liberty to minister to the taste of a court which loved the fancied image of former times, and stimulate it to a generous emulation by representing the heroes of the first Crusade as animated with the spirit and the virtues of the ideal chivalry. But the same excuse is not to be made for those who, writing at the present day, confound chivalry and the Crusades, give an epitome of the history of the latter under the title of that of the former, and venture to assert that the valiant Tancred was the beau ideal of chivalry, and that the "Talisman" contains a faithful picture of the spirit and character of the Crusades. [**]

[p. 172]

We venture to assert that the Crusades did not originate in chivalry, and that the first Crusade, the most important of them, and that which gave the tone and character to all the succeeding ones, does not present a single vestige of what is usually understood by the term chivalry, not a trace of what the imagination rather than the knowledge of Burke described as embodying "the generous loyalty to rank and sex, the proud submission, the dignified obedience, and that subordination of the heart which kept alive, even in servitude itself, the spirit of an exalted freedom--that sensibility of principle, that chastity of honour, which felt a stain like a wound, which inspired courage whilst it mitigated ferocity, which ennobled whatever it touched, and under which vice itself lost half its evil by losing all its grossness." Little surely does he know of the 11th century and its spirit who can suppose any part of the foregoing description to apply to those who marched in arms to Asia to free the sepulchre of Christ; slightly must he have perused the Gesta Tancredi of Radulphus Cadomens, who can conceive that gallant warrior, as he undoubtedly was, to have been the mirror of chivalry.

Chivalry and the Crusades commenced in the same century, and drew their origin from the same source. One was not the cause of the other, but both were effects of the same cause, and that cause was feudalism. This inculcated "the proud submission, the dignified obedience," &c., &c., which were gradually idealised into chivalry; it impressed on the mind of the vassal those principles of  to the rights and property of his lord which seemed to justify and sanction the Holy War. Previously, however, to explaining the manner in which this motive acted, we must stop to notice another concurring cause of the Crusades, without

[p. 173]

which it would perhaps never have begun to operate.

Man has at all periods been led by a strong impulse of his nature to visit those spots which have been distinguished as the scenes of great and celebrated actions, or the abode of distinguished personages. The operation of this natural feeling is still stronger when it is combined with religion, and there arises a conviction that the object of his worship is gratified by this act of attention, and his favour thereby secured to the votary. Hence we find pilgrimage, or the practice of taking distant journeys to celebrated temples, and other places of devotion, to have prevailed in all ages of the world. In the most remote periods of the mythic history of Greece, where historic truth is not to be sought, and only manners and modes of thinking are to be discerned, we constantly meet the theoria, or pilgrimage to Delphi, mentioned in the history of the heroes, whence we may with certainty collect that it formed at all times a portion of the manners of the Greeks. India, at the present day, witnesses annually the pilgrimage of myriads to the temple of Juggernaut, and Jerusalem has been for thousands of years the resort of pious Israelites.

The country which had witnessed the life and death of their Lord naturally acquired importance in the eyes of the early Christians, many of whom, moreover, were Jews by birth, and had always viewed Jerusalem with feelings of veneration. All, too, confounded--as has unfortunately been too much the case in later times--the old and the new law, and saw not that the former was but "beggarly elements" in comparison with the latter, and deemed that the political and economical precepts designed for a single nation, inhabiting one small region, were obligatory on the church of Christ, which was intended.. to comprise the whole human race. Many of the practices

[p. 174]

of Judaism were therefore observed by the Christians, and to this principle we are perhaps in a great measure to ascribe the rapid progress of the practice, and the belief in the efficacy, of pilgrimage to the Holy City.

The abuses of pilgrimage were early discerned, and some of the more pious Fathers of the Church preached and wrote against the practice. But piety and eloquence were vain, and could little avail to stem the torrent when men believed that the waters of Jordan had efficacy to wash every sin, though unattended by sincere repentance. The Church, as she advanced in corruption, improved in worldly wisdom, and, taking pilgrimage under her protection, made it a part of her penal discipline. The sinner was now ordered a journey to the Holy Land as a means of freeing his soul from the guilt of his perhaps manifold enormities. Each year saw the number of the pilgrims augment, while the growing veneration for relics, of which those which came from the Holy Land were esteemed the most efficacious, stimulated pilgrimage by adding the incentive of profit, as a small stock of money laid out in the purchase of the generally counterfeit relics always on sale at Jerusalem would produce perhaps a thousand per cent. on the return of the pilgrim to his native country. A pilgrim was also held in respect and veneration wherever he came, as an especial favourite of the Divinity, having been admitted by him to the high privilege of visiting the sacred places, a portion of whose sanctity it would be supposed might still adhere to him.

The 11th century was the great season of pilgrimage. A strange misconception of the meaning of a portion of Scripture had led men to fancy that the year 1000 was to be that of the advent of Christ, to judge the world. As the valley of Jehoshaphat was

[p. 175]

believed to be the spot on which this, awful event would take place, the same feeling which leads people at the present day to lay a flattering unction to their souls by supposing that death-bed repentance will prove equivalent in the sight of God to a life passed in obedience to his will and in the exercise of virtue, impelled numbers to journey to the Holy Land, in the belief that this officiousness, as it were, of hitherto negligent servants would be well taken by their Lord, and procure them an indulgent hearing before his judgment-seat. Pilgrimage, therefore, increased greatly; the failure of their expectations, the appointed time having passed away without the Son of Man coming in the clouds of Heaven, gave it no check, but, on the contrary, rather an additional impulse; and during this century the caravans of pilgrims attained to such magnitude and strength as to be deserving of the appellation of The armies of the Lord--precursive of the first and greatest Crusade.

In truth the belief in the merit and even the obligation of a pilgrimage to Jerusalem, in the sight of God, was now as firmly impressed on the mind of every Christian, be his rank what it might, as that of the necessity and advantage of one to the Kaaba of Mecca is in the apprehension of the followers of Mohammed; and in the degraded state of the human intellect at that period a pilgrimage was deemed adequate to the removal of all sin. As a proof of this we shall narrate the pilgrimages of two distinguished personages of those times. The first occurred in the 9th, the second in the 11th century.

In the reign of Lothaire, son of Louis the , a nobleman of Brittany, named Frotmond, who had murdered his uncle and his youngest brother, began to feel remorse for his crimes. Arrayed in the habit of a penitent, he presented himself before the monarch and an assembly of his prelates, and made confession

[p. 176]

of his guilty deeds. The king and bishops had him straitly bound in chains of iron, and then commanded him, in expiation of his guilt, to set forth for the East, and visit all the holy places, clad in hair-cloth, and his forehead marked with ashes. Accompanied by his servants and the partners of his crime, the Breton lord directed his course to Palestine, which he reached in safety. Having, in obedience to the mandates of his sovereign and of the church, visited all the holy places, he crossed the Arabian desert, which had been the scene of the wanderings of Israel, and entered Egypt. He thence traversed a part of Africa, and went as far as Carthage, whence he sailed for Rome. Here the Pope, on being consulted, advised him to make a second pilgrimage, in order to complete his penance, and obtain the perfect remission of his sins. Frotmond accordingly set forth once more, and having performed the requisite duties at the Holy City, proceeded to the shore of the Red Sea, and there took up his abode for three years on Mount Sinai, after which time he made a journey to Armenia, and visited the mountain on which the ark of Noah had rested. His crimes being now, according to the ideas of those times, expiated, he returned to his native country, where he was received as a saint, and taking up his abode in the convent of Redon, passed there the remainder of his days, and died deeply regretted by his brethren. [**]

Fulk de Nerra, Count of Anjou, had spilt much innocent blood; he had had his first wife burnt alive, and forced his second wife to seek refuge from his barbarity in the Holy Land. The public odium pursued him, and conscience asserting her rights presented to his disturbed imagination the forms of those who had perished by him issuing from their tombs, and reproaching him with his crimes. Anxious to

[p. 177]

escape from his invisible tormentors, the count put on him the habit of a pilgrim, and set forth for Palestine. The tempests which he encountered in the Syrian seas seemed to his guilty soul the instruments of divine vengeance, and augmented the fervour of his repentance. Having reached Jerusalem in safety, he set heartily about the work of penance. He traversed the streets of the Holy City with a cord about his neck, and beaten with rods by his servants, while he repeated these words, Lord, have mercy on a faithless and perjured Christian, on a sinner wandering far from his home. During his abode in Jerusalem he gave abundant alms, relieving the wants of the pilgrims, and leaving numerous monuments of his piety and munificence.

Deep as was the penitence of the Count of Anjou, it did not stand in the way of the exercise of a little pious fraud. By an ingenious device he deceived the impious malignity of the profane Saracens, who would have made him defile the holy sepulchre; and the chroniclers tell us that as he lay prostrate before the sacred tomb he contrived to detach from it a precious stone, which he carried back with him to the West. On his return to his duchy he built, at the castle of Loches, a church after the model of that of the Resurrection at Jerusalem, and here he every day implored with tears the divine forgiveness. His mind, however, could not yet rest; he was still haunted by the same horrid images; and he once more visited the Holy Land, and edified the faithful by the austerity of his penance. Returning home by the way of Italy, he delivered the supreme pontiff from a formidable enemy who was ravaging his territory, and the grateful pope conferred on him in return the full absolution of all his sins. Fulk brought with him to Anjou a great quantity of relics, with which he adorned the churches of Loches and Angers; and his

[p. 178]

chief occupation thenceforward was the building of towns and monasteries, whence he acquired the name of The Great Builder. His people, who blessed heaven for his conversion, honoured and loved him; the guilt of his sins had been removed by the means which were then deemed of sovereign efficacy; yet still the monitor placed by God in the human breast, and which in a noble mind no power can reduce to perfect silence, did not rest; and the Holy Land beheld, for the third time, the Count of Anjou watering the sepulchre of Christ with his tears, and groaning afresh over his transgressions. H e quitted Jerusalem for the last time, recommending his soul to the prayers of the pious brethren whose office it was to receive the pilgrims, and turned his face homewards. But Anjou he was never more to behold; death surprised him at Metz. His body was transferred to Loches, and buried in his church of the Holy Sepulchre.

These instances may suffice to show what the opinion of the efficacy and merit of pilgrimage to the Holy Land was at the time of which we write. We here find convincing proof that in the minds of princes and prelates, the highest and most enlightened order of society, it was confidently believed to avail to remove the guilt of crimes of the deepest die. And let not any one say that the clergy took advantage of the ignorance of the people, and made it the instrument of extending their own power and influence; for such an assertion would evince ignorance both of human nature in general and of the temper and conduct of the Romish hierarchy at that, and we might almost say at all periods of its existence. However profligate the lives of many of the clergy may have been, they never called in question the truth of the dogmas of their religion. Even the great and daring Gregory VII., in the midst of what appear to us his arrogant and almost impious assumptions, never for

[p. 179]

moment doubted of the course which he was pursuing being the right one, and agreeable to heaven. The clergy, as well as the laity, were firmly persuaded of the efficacy of pilgrimage, and in both the persuasion was naturally stronger in proportion to the ignorance of the believer. We accordingly find that vast numbers of all ranks, and both sexes, clergy as well as laity, annually repaired to the tomb of Christ.

It remains to be explained what the principle was which gave origin to the idea of the right and justice of recovering the Holy Land, which was now in. the hands of the fanatic Turks, instead of those of the tolerant Saracens. This cause was, as we have above asserted, the feudal spirit, that is, the spirit of the age, and not that emanation of it termed chivalry.

Religion, whatever its original nature and character, will always take a tinge from the manners and temper of those who adopt it. Nothing can be more illustrative of the truth of this observation than the history of the Christian religion. Any one who opens the Gospel, and reads it without preconception or prejudice, cannot fail at once to recognise the rational and fervent piety, the active benevolence, the pure morality, the noble freedom from the trammels of the world, joined with the zealous discharge of all the social duties, which every page of it inculcates. Yet we find this religion in the East degenerating into abject grovelling superstition and metaphysical quibbling, pursued with all the rancour of the odium theologicum, while in the West it assumed a fiery fanatic character, and deemed the sword an instrument of conversion superior to reason and argument. This difference, apparently so strange, arose from the difference of the social state and political institutions of the people of the East and of the West at the time when they embraced Christianity.

The free spirit had long since fled from Greece

[p. 180]

when the first Christian missionaries preached the faith among its people. But the temper of the Greek was still lively, and his reasoning powers acute. Moreover, he had still the same leaning towards a sensible and material religion which has at all times distinguished him, and the increasing despotism of the empire depressed and enfeebled more and more every day the martial spirit which he had displayed in the days of his freedom. No field remained for his mental activity but that of philosophy and religion. The former, which had long been his delight, he had contrived to subtilize into an almost unintelligible mysticism; and in this form it speedily" spread its infection through his new faith, which was besides further metamorphosed and changed in character by an infusion from the dualistic system of Persia. Meantime the ascetic spirit which had come from the East joined with the timidity engendered by the pressure of despotism to make him mistake the spirit of the Gospel, and convert Christianity into a crouching cowardly superstition. When the emperor Nicephorus Phocas sought to infuse a martial and fanatic spirit into his subjects, and to rouse them to vigorous exertion against the Saracens, his bishops replied to his exhortations by citing a canon of St. Basil, which directed that he who had slain an enemy in battle should abstain during three years from participation in the holy sacraments. The priest of a little town in Cilicia was engaged one day in saying mass when a band of Saracens burst in, and began to plunder the town. Without waiting to take off his sacerdotal vestments, he seized the hammer, which in the churches of the East frequently serves the purpose of a bell, and, flying among the infidels, plied his weapon to such effect that he forced them to a precipitate flight, and saved the town. What was the reward of the gallant priest? He was censured by his diocesan,

[p. 181]

interdicted the exercise of his ghostly functions, and so ill-treated in other respects, that he flung off his robes and joined the Saracens, whose more martial and energetic creed accorded better with his manly sentiments. When the pilgrims of the first Crusade began to arrive in such terrific numbers at Constantinople, the Greek emperor and his subjects could hardly persuade themselves of the possibility of religion being the actuating cause of such a portentous movement--so little did religion and deeds of arms accord in their minds!

But with the nations of the West the case was different. In these the ruling portion, that which gave tone to the whole, were of the Gothic and Germanic races, whose hardy bands had dashed to pieces the worn-out fabric of the Western empire. Worshippers in their native forests of Thor and Odin, and the other deities of Valhalla, who admitted none but the valiant dead to share in the celestial pork and mead which each day crowned the board in their lucid abode, their manners, their sentiments, their whole being was martial, and they infused this spirit into the religion which they adopted from their Roman subjects. In making this change in its tone they derived aid from the Jewish portion of the sacred volume, which has been in all ages abused, by men ignorant of its character and original use, to purposes of fanaticism and persecution; and the religion of Christian Europe, from the fifth century downwards, became of a martial and conquering character. By the sword Charlemagne converted the pagan Saxons; his successors employed the sword against the heathen Vends; and by fire and sword Olof Triggva-son spread Christianity throughout the North. In former times this mode of conversion had been in a great degree foreign to the Western church; and persuasion had

[p. 182]

been chiefly employed in the dissemination of the faith among the heathen nations.

The religion of the West we thus see was martial; but this spirit alone would not have sufficed to produce the Crusade which was to interest and appear as a duty to all orders of men. Here the feudal principle came into operation, and gave the requisite impulse.

In the 11th century the feudal system was completely developed in France and Germany, and the modes of thinking, speaking, and acting derived from it pervaded all the relations of life. From the top to the bottom of society the mutual obligations of lords and vassals were recognised and acted upon, and each vassal deemed it a most sacred duty to defend by arms the honour and property of his superior lord There was also a kind of supreme temporal chief of the Christian world acknowledged in the person of the Emperor of Germany, who was viewed as the successor of Charlemagne, and the representative of the Roman emperors. The feudal ideas extended even to the hierarchy, which now put forth such exorbitant claims to supremacy over the temporal power. The head of the church was an acknowledged vicegerent of Him who was styled in scripture Lord of all the kingdoms of the earth. Jesus Christ was, therefore, the apex of the pyramid of feudal society; he was the great suzerain and lord paramount of all princes and peoples, and all were equally under obligation to defend his rights and honour. Such were evidently the sentiments of the age.

It is hardly necessary to remind the reader that the religion of the period which we treat of was of a gross and material character, and that the passions and infirmities of human nature were freely bestowed on the glorified Son of God. He was deemed to take a peculiar interest in the spot of land where he

[p. 183]

had sojourned when on earth, and more especially in the tomb in which his body had been deposited, and. with grief and indignation to see them in the hands of those who contemptuously derided his divinity, and treated with insult and cruelty those of his faithful vassals who underwent the toils and dangers of a distant journey to offer their homage at his tomb. Nothing could, therefore, be more grateful to his feelings than to behold the sacred soil of Palestine free from heathen pollution, and occupied and defended by his faithful vassals, and no true son of the church could hesitate a moment to believe that it was his bounden duty to arm himself in the cause of his lord, and help to reinstate him in his heritage. Here, then, without having recourse to the romantic principle of chivalry, we have an adequate solution of the phenomenon of the first Crusade. Here we have a motive calculated to operate on the minds of all orders, equally effectual with men of piety, virtue, and wealth, like Godfrey of Bouillon and Stephen of Chartres, who looked for no temporal advantages, as with the meanest and most superstitious of the vassals and serfs who might be supposed to have only sought a refuge from misery and oppression by assuming the cross. We would not by any means be supposed to deny that many other causes and motives were in operation at the same time; but this we deem the grand one. This was the motive which gave dignity to and hallowed all others, and which affected the mind of every Crusader, be his rank or station in society what it might.

Pilgrimage then was esteemed a duty, and a powerful mean of removing guilt and appeasing the wrath of the Almighty; the spirit of the age was martial, and its religion, tinged by the ancient system of the North of Europe, was of the same character; the feudal principle was in its vigour, and extended even

[p. 184]

to the relations of man with the deity; the rude and barbarous Turks had usurped the heritage, the very crown-lands, as we may say, of Jesus Christ, and insulted his servants, whose duty it plainly was to punish them, and free the tomb of their lord;--the natural result of such a state of circumstances aria opinion was the first Crusade.

Footnotes

^170:* The principal works on the subject of the Templars are Raynouard Monumens historiques relatifs a la Condamnation des Templiers; Dupuy Histoire de la Condamnation des Templiers; Munter Statutenbuch des Ordens der Tempelherren, and Wilike Geschichte des Tempelherrenordens. There is scarcely anything on the subject in English.

^171:* On the subject of chivalry see Ste. Palaye Memoires sur la Chevalerie, Sir W. Scott's Essay on the same subject, and Mills's and James's histories of chivalry. We do not recollect that any of these writers has fairly proved that the chivalry which they describe ever existed as an institution, and we must demur to the principle which they all assume of romances like Perceforest being good authority for the manners of the age in which they were composed.

^176:* Michaud, Histoire des Croisades, I., p. 59.

     
Secret Societies of the Middle Ages, by Thomas Keightley, [1837], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 185]

  

CHAPTER II.

First Hospital at Jerusalem--Church of Santa Maria de Latina--Hospital of St. John--The Hospitallers--Origin of the Templars--Their original Poverty--They acquire Consideration--St. Bernard--His Character of the Templars--The Order approved of and confirmed by the Council of Troyes--Proofs of the Esteem in which they were held.

IN consequence of the resort of pilgrims and traders from the West to Jerusalem it had been found necessary to build there, with the consent of the Saracens, hospitia, or places of entertainment for them during their abode in the holy city. For they could not, consistently with the religious animosity which prevailed between them and the Moslems, seek the hospitality of these last, and the Christians of the Greek church who dwelt in the Holy City, besides that they had no very friendly feeling towards their Catholic brethren, were loth to admit them into their houses, on account of the imprudent language and indecorous acts in which they were too frequently in the habit of indulging, and which were so likely to compromise their hosts with their Saracen lords. Accordingly the monk Bernard, who visited Jerusalem in the year 870, found there, in the valley of Jehoshaphat, near the church of the Holy Virgin, a hospital consisting of twelve mansions, for western pilgrims, which was in the possession of some gardens, vineyards, and corn-fields. It had also a good collection of books, the gift of Charlemagne. There was a market held in front of it, which was much resorted to, and every

[p. 186]

dealer paid two pieces of gold to the overseer for permission to have a stand there.

In the 11th century, when the ardour of pilgrimage was inflamed anew, there was a hospital within the walls of Jerusalem for the use of the Latin pilgrims, which had been erected by Italian traders, chiefly of Amalfi. Near this hospital, and within a stone's cast of the church of the Holy Sepulchre, they erected, with the permission of the Egyptian khalif, a church dedicated to the Holy Virgin, which was usually called Sta. Maria de Latina. In this hospital abode an abbot and a good number of monks, who were of the Latin church, and followed the rule of St. Benedict. They devoted themselves to the reception and entertainment of pilgrims, and gave alms to those who were poor, or had been rifled by robbers, to enable them to pay the tax required by the Moslems for permission to visit the holy places. When the number of the pilgrims became so great that the hospital was incapable of receiving them all, the monks raised another hospitium close by their church, with a chapel dedicated to a canonized patriarch of Alexandria, named St. John Eleemon, or the Compassionate. This new hospital had no income of its own; the monks and the pilgrims whom they received derived their support from the bounty of the abbot of the convent of the Holy Virgin, or from the alms of pious Christians.

At the time when the army of the crusaders appeared before the walls of Jerusalem the Hospital of St. John was presided over by Gerard, a native of Provence, a man of great uprightness and of exemplary piety. His benevolence was of a truly Christian character, and far transcended that of his age in general; for during the period of the siege he relieved all who applied to him for succour, and not merely did the schismatic Greek share his bounty,

[p. 187]

even the unbelieving Moslem was not repelled when he implored his aid. When the city was taken, numbers of the wounded pilgrims were received, and their wounds tended in the hospital of St. John, and the pious Duke Godfrey, on visiting them some days afterwards, heard nothing but the praises of the good Gerard and his monks.

Emboldened by the universal favour which they enjoyed, Gerard and his companions expressed their wish to separate themselves from the monastery of Sta. Maria de Latina, and pursue their works of charity alone and independently. Their desire met no opposition: they drew up a rule for themselves, to which they made a vow of obedience in presence of the patriarch, and assumed as their dress a black mantle with a white cross on the breast. The humility of these Hospitallers was extreme. They styled the poor and the sick their lords and themselves their servants; to them they were liberal and compassionate, to themselves rigid and austere. The finest flour went to compose the food which they gave to the sick and poor; what remained after they were satisfied, mingled with clay, was the repast of the monks.

As long as the brotherhood were poor they continued in obedience to the abbot of Sta. Maria de Latina, and also paid tithes to the patriarch. But a tide of wealth soon began to flow in upon them. Duke Godfrey, enamoured of their virtue, bestowed on them his lordship of Montboire, in Brabant, with all its appurtenances; and his brother and successor, Baldwin, gave them a share of all the booty taken from the infidels. These examples were followed by other Christian princes; so that within the space of a very few years the Hospital of St. John was in possession of numerous manors both in the East and in Europe, which were placed under the management

[p. 188]

of members of their society. The Hospitaliers now coveted a total remission of all the burdens to which they were subject, and they found no difficulty in obtaining all that they desired. Pope Paschal II., in the year 1113, confirmed their rule, gave them permission, on the death of Gerard, to elect their own head, without the interference of any temporal or spiritual power whatever, freed them from the obligation of paying tithes to the patriarch, and confirmed all the donations made or to be made to them. The brotherhood of the Hospital was now greatly advanced in consideration, and reckoned among its members many gallant knights, who laid aside their arms, and devoted themselves to the humble office of ministering to the sick and needy.

The worthy Gerard died in the same year with King Baldwin I. (1118), and Raymond Dupuy, a knight of Dauphine, who had become a brother of the order, was unanimously elected to succeed him in his office. Raymond, who was a man of great vigour and capacity, drew up a series of rules for the direction of the society, adapted to its present state of consequence and extent. From these rules it appears that the order of St. John admitted both the clergy and the laity among its members, and that both were alike bound to yield the most implicit obedience to the commands of their superior. Whether Raymond had any ulterior views is uncertain, but in the regulations which he made we cannot discern any traces of the spirit which afterwards animated the order of St. John.

Just, however, as Raymond had completed his regulations there sprang up a new society, with different maxims, whose example that of St. John found itself afterwards obliged to adopt and follow. The Holy Land was at that time in a very disturbed and unquiet state; the Egyptian power pressed it on the

[p. 189]

south, the Turkish on the north and east; the Arab tribes indulged in their usual predatory habits, and infested it with hostile incursions; the Mussulman inhabitants were still numerous; the Syrian Christians were ill affected towards the Latins, from whom they frequently experienced the grossest ill-treatment; the Latins were few and scattered. Hence the pilgrim was exposed to numerous dangers; peril beset him on his way from the port at which he landed to the Holy City, and new perils awaited him when he visited the banks of the Jordan, or went to pluck his branch of consecrated palm in the gardens of Jericho. Many a pilgrim had lost his life on these occasions.

Viewing these evils, nine valiant and pious knights resolved to form themselves into an association which should unite the characters of the monk and the knight, by devoting themselves to a life of chastity and piety at the tomb of the Saviour, and by employing their swords in the protection of the pilgrims on their visits to the holy places. They selected as their patroness the sweet Mother of God (La dote Mere de Dieu), and their resolution, according so perfectly with the spirit of the Crusades, which combined piety and valour, gained at once the warm approbation of the king and the patriarch. In the presence of. the latter they took the three ordinary vows of chastity, poverty, and obedience, and a fourth of fighting incessantly in the cause of pilgrims and the Holy Land against the heathen. They bound themselves to live according to the rule of the canons of St. Augustine, and elected as their first master Hugh de Payens. The king, Baldwin II., assigned them a portion of his palace for their abode, and he and his barons contributed to their support. As the palace stood close by the church and convent of the Temple, the abbot and canons gave them a street leading from it to the palace, for keeping their magazines and equipments

[p. 190]

in, and hence they styled themselves the Soldiery of the Temple (Militia Templi), and Templars. They attracted such immediate consideration, owing in great part, no doubt, to the novelty of their plan, that the very year after their establishment (1120), Fulk, Count of Anjou, who was come on pilgrimage to Jerusalem, joined their society as a married brother, and on his return home annually remitted them thirty pounds of silver in furtherance of their pious objects, and the example of the Count of Anjou was followed by several other princes and nobles of the West.

The English historian, Brompton, who wrote in the 12th century, asserts that the founders of the order of the Temple had originally been members of that of St. John. We know not what degree of credit this may be entitled to [**], but it is certain that there had been as yet nothing of a military character in this last, and that its assumption of such a character was an imitation of the society of the Temple; for, urged by the praise which they saw lavished on the Templars for their meritorious conduct, the Hospitallers resolved to add the task of protecting to that of tending and relieving pilgrims, and such of their members as were knights resumed their arms, joyful to employ them once more in the cause of God. The amplitude of their revenues enabled them to take a number of knights and footmen into their pay--a practice in which they had probably been preceded by the Templars, who thus employed the money which was remitted to them from Europe. But during the lifetime of Raymond Dupuy the order of the Hospital did not become completely a military one; he always

[p. 191]

bore the simple title of director (procurator) of the Hospital, and it was not till some time afterwards that the head of the society was, like that of the Templars, styled master, and led its troops to battle. At all times the tendence of the poor and the sick formed a part of the duties of the brethren of the Hospital, and this was always a marked distinction between them end the rival order of the 'Temple, whose only task was that of fighting against the infidels.

During the first nine years which elapsed after the institution of their order the knights of the Temple lived in poverty, religiously devoting all the money which was sent to them from Europe to the advantage of the Holy Land, and the service of pilgrims. They had no peculiar habit, their raiment was such as the

 

Click to enlarge

 

[p. 192]

charity of the faithful bestowed upon them; and though knights, and engaged in constant warfare against the infidels, their poverty and moderation were such that Hugh des Payens and his companion, Godfrey, of St. Omer, had but one war-horse between them--a circumstance which they afterwards, in their brilliant period, commemorated by their seal, which represented two knights mounted on the one horse, a device chosen with a view to inculcating humility on the brethren, now beginning to wax haughty and insolent.

A chief cause of the extraordinary success of the first Crusaders had been the want of union among their enemies. The Saracens and Turks mutually hated each other, and would not combine for a common object, and the Turks were, moreover, at enmity among themselves, and one prince frequently allied himself with the Christians against another. But they were now beginning to perceive the necessity of union, and were becoming every day more formidable to their Christian neighbours. King Baldwin II., who had been a prisoner in their hands, made every effort when he had obtained his freedom to strengthen his kingdom, and, among other means for this purpose, he resolved to gain for the Templars, whose valour, humility, and single-mindedness were the theme of general applause, additional consideration, by obtaining from the Holy Father the confirmation of their order. With this view he despatched, in the year 1127, two of their members, named Andreas and Gundemar, to Rome, with this request to the Pope, to whom they were also to make a strong representation of the perilous state of the Holy Land. The king, moreover, furnished them with a letter of recommendation to St. Bernard, Abbot of Clairvaux, whose influence was then all-powerful in the Christian world, and who was nephew of the envoy Andreas.

[p. 193]

[paragraph continues] Shortly afterwards Hugh de Payens himself arrived in Europe with five others of the brethren.

Nothing could be more advantageous to the new order than the favour and countenance of the illustrious Abbot of Clairvaux, who had been for some time past an admirer of its objects and deeds. Three years before this time he had written a letter to the Count of Champagne, who had entered the order of the Templars, praising the act as one of eminent merit in the sight of God. He now, on occasion of the visit of the Master [**], wrote, at his request, an eloquent work, exhorting the brethren of the new order to persevere in their toilsome but highly laudable task of fighting against the tyranny of the heathens, and commending their piety to the attention of all the faithful, setting in strong opposition to the luxury of the knights of his time the modesty and simplicity of these holy warriors. He extolled the unlimited obedience of the Templars to their Master, both at home and in the field. "They go and come," says he, "at a sign from their Master; they wear the clothing which he gives them, and ask neither food nor clothing from any one else; they live cheerfully and temperately together, without wives and children, and, that nothing may be wanting for evangelical perfection, without property, in one house, endeavouring to preserve the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, so that one heart and one soul would appear to dwell in them all. They never sit idle, or go about gaping after news. When they are resting from warfare against the infidels, a thing which rarely occurs, not to eat the bread of idleness, they employ themselves in repairing their clothes and arms, or do something which the command of the Master or the common need enjoins. There is with

[p. 194]

them no respect of persons; the best, not the noblest, are the most highly regarded; they endeavour to anticipate one another in respect and to lighten each other's burdens. No unseemly word or light mocking, no murmur or immoderate laughter, is let to pass unreproved, if any one should allow himself to indulge in such. They avoid games of chess and tables; they are adverse to the chase, and equally so to hawking, in which others so much delight. They hate all jugglers and mountebanks, all wanton songs and plays, as vanities and follies of this world. They cut their hair in obedience to these words of the apostle, 'it is not seemly in a man to have long hair;' no one ever sees them dressed out; they are seldom ever washed; they are mostly to be seen with disordered hair, and covered with dust, brown from their corslets and the heat of the sun. When they go forth to war they arm themselves within with faith, without with iron, but never adorn themselves with gold, wishing to excite fear in the enemy, and not the desire of booty. They delight in horses which are strong and swift, not in such as are handsomely marked and richly caparisoned, wishing to inspire terror rather than admiration. They go not impetuously and headlong into battle, but with care and foresight, peacefully, as the true children of Israel. But as soon as the fight has begun, then they rush without delay on the foes, esteeming them but as sheep; and know no fear, even though they should be few, relying on the aid of the Lord of Sabaoth. Hence one of them has often put a thousand, and two of them ten thousand, to flight. Thus they are, in union strange, at the same time gentler than lambs and grimmer than lions, so that one may doubt whether to call them monks or knights. But both names suit them, for theirs is the mildness of the monk and the valour of the knight. What remains to be said but that this is the Lord's doing,

[p. 195]

and it is wonderful in our eyes? Such are they whom God has chosen out of the bravest in Israel, that, watchful and true, they may guard the holy sepulchre, armed with swords, and well skilled in war."

Though in these expressions of St. Bernard there may be perceived some marks of rhetorical exaggeration, they prove  the high character and sincere virtue of the founders pf the society of the Templars, and that it was organized and regulated with none but worthy objects in view. They also offer, if such were required, an additional proof that the crusade was no emanation of chivalry; for those to whom St. Bernard throughout sets the Templars in opposition were the chivalry of the age.

This epistle of the Abbot of Clairvaux had been circulated, and every other just and honest mean employed to conciliate the public favour for the Templars, when, on the 31st January, 1128, the Master, Hugh de Payens, appeared before the council of Troyes, consisting of the Archbishops of Rheims and Sens, ten bishops, and a number of abbots, among whom was St. Bernard himself, and presided over by the Cardinal of Albano, the papal legate. The Master having given an account of the principles and exploits of the Templars, the assembled fathers approved of the new order, and gave them a new rule, containing their own previous regulations, with several additions drawn from that of the Benedictines, and chiefly relating to spiritual matters. The validity of this rule was made to depend on the approbation of it by the Holy Father and by the Patriarch of Jerusalem, neither of whom hesitated to confirm it. By the direction of the Pope Honorius, the synod appointed a white mantle to be the distinguishing dress of the brethren of the Temple, that of those of the Hospital being black. This mantle was plain, without any cross, and such it remained till the pontificate

[p. 196]

of Pope Eugenius III., who, in 1146, appointed the Templars to wear a red cross on the breast, as a symbol of the martyrdom to which they stood constantly exposed: the cross worn on their black mantles, by the knights of St. John, was, as we have seen [**], white. The order now assumed, or were assigned, a peculiar banner, formed of cloth, striped black and. white, called in old French, Bauseant [*+], which word became the battle-cry of the knights of the Temple, and often struck terror into the hearts of the infidels. It bore on it the ruddy cross of the order, and the pious and humble inscription, Non nobis, Domine, non nobis, sed nomini tuo, da gloriam, (Not to us, O Lord, not to us, but to thy name give the glory!)

Several knights now assumed the habit of the order, and in a progress which Hugh de Payens, accompanied by some of the brethren, made through France and England, he acquired for it universal favour. He did not neglect the charge, committed to him by the king of Jerusalem, of invoking aid for the Holy Land, now so hard bested, and his exhortations were not without effect. Fulk, Count of

[p. 197]

[paragraph continues] Anjou, now rejoined his Master and brethren; but as he had gotten an invitation to repair to Jerusalem, and espouse the only daughter of the King, he set out before them to the East.

Hugh de Payens would admit no knight into the order who did not terminate all his feuds and enmities, and amend his life. Thus, when a knight, named Hugh d'Amboise, who had oppressed the people of Marmoutier, and had refused obedience to the judicial sentence of the Count of Anjou, was desirous to enter the order, he refused to admit him to take the vows till he had given perfect satisfaction to those whom he had injured.

Honour and respect awaited the Templars wherever they appeared, and persons of all ranks were eager to do what might be grateful to them. When the Templar who came with the seal of Godfrey of St. Omer, as his credential to the governor of that place, to demand his goods which Godfrey had given the order, he met with a most favourable reception, not only from the governor, but from the bishop; and on their applying, as was necessary in this case, to the Count of Flanders and Alsatia, that prince was so far from throwing any impediments in the way, that, in a very short space of time, the buildings which had belonged to Godfrey were converted into a church and a temple-house. Many Flemish gentlemen followed the example of Godfrey, and bestowed a part or their property on the Templars. King Henry I. of England, who met and conversed with Hugh de Payens in Normandy, was so pleased with his account of the new order, that he presented him with many rich gifts, and gave him strong recommendations to the principal of the English barons. The Emperor Lothaire bestowed in 1130 on the order a large part of his patrimony of Supplinburg. The old Count Raymond Berenger, of Barcelona and Provence, weary of the world and of the toils of government,

[p. 198]

became a Templar, and took up his abode in the temple-house at Barcelona; and, as he could not go personally to combat the infidels in the Holy Land, he continually sent rich gifts to the brethren at Jerusalem, and he complied rigorously with all the other duties of the order. In 1133 Alfonso, king of Arragon and Navarre, a valiant and warlike monarch, who had been victor in nine and twenty battles against the Moors, finding himself old and without children, made a will, by which he appointed the knights of the Temple and of the Hospital, together with the canons of the Holy Sepulchre, to be his joint-heirs, deeming, perhaps, that the most gallant defenders of the Holy Land would best prosecute his favourite object of breaking the power of the infidels. The aged monarch fell the following year in the battle of Fraga, against the Moors; and, negligent of his disposition of the realm, the nobles of Arragon and Navarre met and chose sovereigns out of his family. The orders were not strong enough to assert their rights; and this instance, therefore, only serves to show the high degree of consideration to which they had so early attained.

 

Click to enlarge
Seal of the Templars.

 

Footnotes

^190:* The other writers of that century agree in the account given above. Brompton's authority has been preferred by some modern writers, who probably wished to pay their court to the order of Malta.

^193:* Wilken I. 28, gives 1135 as the year in which this piece was written.

^196:* See <page 187>. Sir W. Scott describes his Templar in Ivanhoe, as wearing a white mantle with a black cross of eight points. The original cross of the Hospitaliers, we may observe, had not eight points. That of the order of Malta was of this form.

^196:+ Bauseant, or Bausant, was, in old French, a piebald horse, or a hoi se marked white and black. Ducange, Roquefort. The word is still preserved with its original meaning in the Scotch dialect, in the form Bawsent:

"His honest, sonsie, baws'nt face
 Aye gat him friends in ilka place,"

says Burns, describing the "ploughman's collie," in his tale of the "Twa Dogs;" and in the Glossary, Dr. Currie explains Baws'nt as meaning "having a white stripe down the face" As, however, some notion of handsomeness or attractiveness of appearance seems to be involved in the epithet, Bauseant, or Beauseant, may possibly be merely an older form of the present French word, Bienseant.

     
Secret Societies of the Middle Ages, by Thomas Keightley, [1837], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 199]

  

CHAPTER III.

Return of the Templars to the East--Exoneration and Refutation of the Charge of a Connection with the Ismailites--Actions of the Templars--Crusade of Louis VII.--Siege of Ascalon--Siege of Nassir-ed-deen--Corruption of the Hospitallers--The bull, Omne Datum Optimum--Refusal of the Templars to march against Egypt--Murder of the Ismailite Envoy.

IN the year 1129 Hugh de Payens, accompanied by 300 knights of the noblest families in Europe, who had become members of the order, and followed by a large train of pilgrims, returned to the Holy Land. Shortly after his arrival, the unlucky expedition to Damascus above narrated [**], was undertaken, and the Templars formed a portion of the troops which marched, as they fancied, to take possession of that city. As has been observed, this is the first occasion on which we find the Christians in alliance and connection with the Ismailites; and as Hammer, the historian of the last, makes the grave charge against Hugh de Payens, of having modelled his new society on the plan of that deadly association, and of having been the chief planner and instigator of the treacherous attempt on Damascus, we will suspend the course of our narration, to discuss the probability of that opinion, though in so doing we must anticipate a little respecting the organisation of the Order of the Temple.

Hammer argues an identity between the two

[p. 200]

orders, as he styles them, of the Ismailites and the Templars, from the similarity of their dress, their internal organisation, and their secret doctrine; and as the two societies existed in the same country, and that of the Ismailites was first instituted, he infers that this was the original, and that of the Templars the copy.

First, with respect to the outward habiliment, the dress of the order. Nothing, as appears to us, can be weaker than to lay any stress on so casual a circumstance as similarity of forms or colours, more especially when a true and distinct cause for the assumption of them on either side can be assigned. The colour of the khalifs of the house of Ommiyah was white; hence the house of Abbas, in their contest with them, adopted black, as their distinguishing hue; and hence, when the Abbasides were in possession of the supreme power, all those who, under pretence of supporting the rights of the family of Ali, or on any other pretext, raised the standard of revolt against them, naturally selected white, as the sign of their opposition. Hassan Sabah, therefore, only retained the use of the colour which he found already established. When he formed the institution of the Fedavee, or the Devoted to Death, what more suitable mark of distinction could he assign them than a red girdle or cap, which indicated their readiness to spill their own blood or that of others? With respect to the Templars, the society of the Hospitaliers was already existing when Hugh de Payens and his companions resolved to form themselves into a new association. The mantle worn by the members of the Hospital was black: what colour then was so natural for them to adopt as its opposite, white? and when, nearly thirty years after their institution, the pope appointed them or gave them permission to wear a cross on their mantle, like the rival order, no colour could

[p. 201]

present itself so well suited to those who daily and hourly exposed themselves to martyrdom, as that of blood, in which there was so much of what was symbolical.

With respect to internal organisation, it will, we apprehend, be always found that this is, for the most part, the growth of time and the product of circumstances, and is always nearly the same where these last are similar. The dominion of the Assassins extended over large tracks of country; hence arose the necessity of appointing lieutenants. In like manner, when the Templars got large possessions in the West and the East, they could not avoid, after the example of the Hospitaliers, appointing persons to manage the affairs of the society in different countries. Hence, then, as the Ismailites had their Sheikh-al-Jebal, with his Dais-al-Kebir of Kuhistan and Syria, so the Templars had their Master and their Priors of different provinces. The resemblance is so far exact, but, as we see, easily accounted for. That which Hammer goes on to draw between the component parts of each society is altogether fanciful. To the Refeek, Fedavee and Lazik of the Ismailites, he sets as counterparts the knights, esquires, and serving-brethren of the Templars. It is needless to point out the arbitrariness of this comparison. The chaplains of the Templars, we may see, are omitted, and it was, perhaps, they who bore the greatest resemblance to the Refeeks, while neither knights nor esquires had the smallest similarity to the Fedavee.

As to a secret doctrine, we shall hereafter discuss the question whether the Templars had one or not. Here we shall only observe, that the proof of it, and of the ultimate object of the Templars being the same with that of the Ismailites, namely, the acquisition of independent power, adduced by Hammer, is by no means satisfactory. He says.

[p. 202]

that it was the object of both societies to make themselves masters of the surrounding country, by the possession of fortresses and castles, and thus become formidable rivals to princes; and he sees, in the preceptories or houses of the Templars, the copies of the hill-forts of the Ismailites. That such was the design of this last society is quite apparent from the preceding part of our work; but what resemblance is there between such formidable places of defence as Alamoot and Lamseer, and the simple structures in which a few knights and their attendants dwelt in the different parts of Europe, and which were hardly, if at all, stronger than the ordinary baronial residences? and what resistance could the Temple of London or that of Paris offer to the royal strength, if put forth? Hammer has here again fallen into his usual error of arguing too hastily from accidental resemblances. The preceptories of the Templars were, as we shall show, the necessary consequence of the acquisition of property by the order, and had nothing hostile to society in their nature.

When we reflect on the character of the first crusaders, and particularly on that of the first Templars, and call to mind their piety, ignorance. and simplicity, nothing can appear more absurd than to ascribe to them secret philosophical doctrines of impiety, imbibed from those whose language they did not even understand, and whose religion and manners they held in abhorrence, and to suppose that the first poor knights of the Temple could have had visions of the future power of their order, and have looked forward to its dominion over the Christian world. "But this is a common mistake with ingenious men, who are for ever ascribing to the founders of empires, religions, and societies, that attribute of divinity which sees from the beginning the ultimate end, and forms all its plans and projects with a view to it. It .is thus that some

[p. 203]

would fain persuade us that Mahommed, in his solitary cave at Mecca, saw clearly and distinctly the future triumphs of Islam, and its banners floating at the Pyrenees and the Oxus; that Cromwell, when an obscure individual, already in fancy grasped the sceptre of England; and that Loyola beheld the members of his order governing the consciences of kings, and ruling an empire in Paraguay. All such results are in fact the slow and gradual growth of time; one step leads to another, till the individual or the society looks back with amazement to the feeble commencement."

The Templars and the Ismailites are mentioned together by history in only one more relation, that is, on occasion of the tribute paid to the former by the Syrian branch of the latter, and the murder of the Ismailite ambassador above related [**]. As this act was very probably committed by order of the Master of the Temple, who, it might be, doubted the ability or the future inclination of the kin; to pay the 3000 byzants a year, it testifies but little for any very friendly feeling between the Templars and the Ismailites. Yet Hammer opines that the 3000 byzants were paid, not as the tribute of the weaker to the stronger, but by way of pension for the secret services which the Templars were in the habit of rendering their cause; such, for example, as refusing on one occasion to join in the expedition against the khalif of Egypt, the great head of the society of the Assassin s.

To narrate the various exploits of the knights of the Temple would be to write the history of the Crusades; for, from the time that the order acquired strength and consistency, no action with the Infidels ever was fought in which the chivalry of the Temple

[p. 204]

did not bear a distinguished part. Their war-cry was ever heard in the thickest of the fray, and rarely was Bauseant seen to waver or give back in the conflict. The knights of St. John fought with emulative valour; the example of the rival orders stimulated all parts of the Christian army; and to this influence may be, in great measure, ascribed many of the most wonderful triumphs of the Cross during the twelfth century.

In the year 1147, when Pope Eugenius III. came to Paris to arrange the proposed crusade with Louis VII., both the pope and the king honoured with their presence a general chapter of the order of the Temple, which was holden at that place. It was probably on this occasion that the supreme pontiff conferred on the order the important privilege of having mass said once a year in places lying under interdict. The newly-elected Master of the Temple, Eberhard de Bar, and 130 knights, accompanied the king on his march for the Holy Land; and their valour and their skill greatly contributed towards the preservation of the crusading army in their unfortunate march through Lesser Asia. The siege of Damascus, which was undertaken after the arrival of the French and German kings in the Holy Land, miscarried, as is well known, through treachery. The traitors were doubtless the Pullani, as the Latins of Syria were called, who were at this time capable of every thing that is bad. Some writers most unjustly charge the Templars with this guilt; but those who are the best informed on the subject make no accusation against them. The charge, however, while it shows the power and consideration of the Templars at that time, may be considered to prove also that they had degenerated somewhat from their original virtue; for otherwise it could never have been made.

The Christian army laid siege in 1153 to the town

[p. 205]

of Ascalon, which the Saracens still held, and would have taken it, but for the cupidity of the Templars. A large heap of wood had been piled by the besiegers against a part of the wall, and set fire to. The wind blew strong towards the town during an entire night, earning the smoke and heat into the town, so that the garrison was forced to retire from that quarter. The Christians fed the flames with pitch, oil, and other inflammable substances, and the wall next the pile, cracked by the heat, fell down, leaving a considerable breach. The army was preparing to enter at this opening when Bernard de Tremelai, the Master of the Temple, taking his station at it with his knights, refused all ingress. It was the law of war in those days, among the crusaders, that whatever house or spoil any one took when a town was stormed, became his property. The Templars, therefore, were eager to have the first choice; and having kept off all others, Tremelai, with forty of his knights, boldly entered a strongly-garrisoned town. But they paid the penalty of their rashness and cupidity; for the garrison surrounded and slew them all, and then closed up the breach.

One of the most disgraceful acts which stain the annals of the Templars occurred in the year 1155, when Bertrand de Blancford, whom William of Tyre calls a "pious and God-fearing man," was Master of the order. In a contest for the supreme power in Egypt, which the viziers, bearing the proud title of Sultan, exercised under the phantom-khalifs, Sultan Abbas, who had put to death the khalif his master, found himself obliged to fly from before the vengeance of the incensed people. With his harem, and his own and a great part of the royal treasures, he took his way through the Desert. A body of Christians, chiefly Templars, lay in wait for the fugitives near Ascalon; the resistance offered by the

[p. 206]

[paragraph continues] Moslems was slight and ineffectual; Abbas himself was either slain or fled, and his son Nassir-ed-deen and the treasures became the prize of the victors. The far larger part of the booty of course fell to the Templars; but this did not satisfy their avarice; and though Nassir-ed-deen had professed his desire to become a Christian, and had begun, by way of preparation for that change, to learn the Latin language they sold him to his father's enemies for 60,000 pieces of gold, and stood by to see him bound hand and foot, and placed in a sort of cage or iron-latticed sedan, on a camel, to be conducted to Egypt where a death by protracted torture awaited him.

The Hospitaliers were at this time become as corrupt as the Templars; and in this same year, when the patriarch demanded from them the, tithes which they were bound to pay him, they treated the demand with scorn; raised, to show their superior wealth, stately and lofty buildings, before the humble church of the Holy Sepulchre; and whenever the patriarch entered it to exhort the people, or pronounce the absolution of sins, they rang, by order of their Master, the bells of the Hospital so loud, that, with the utmost efforts, he could not succeed in making himself heard. One day, when the congregation was assembled in the church, the Hospitaliers rushed into it in arms, and shot arrows among them as if they were robbers or infidels. These arrows were collected and hung up on Mount Calvary, where Christ had been crucified, to the scandal of these recreant knights. On applying to the Pope Adrian IV. for redress, the Syrian clergy found him and his cardinals so prepossessed in favour of their enemies,--bribed by them, as was said,--that they had no chance of relief. The insolence of the Hospitaliers became in consequence greater than ever.

[p. 207]

In fact, as an extremely judicious writer [**] observes, valiantly as the knights of the spiritual orders fought against the heathens, and great as was their undoubted merit in the defence of the helpless pilgrims, it cannot be denied that these knights were, if not the original promoters, at least active participators in all the mischiefs which prevailed in the Holy Land, and that they were often led to a shameful dereliction of their duties, by avarice and thirst after booty.

The year 1162 is conspicuous in the annals of the Templars, as the date of the bull Omne Datum Optimum, the Magna Charta of the order, and the great key-stone of their power. On the death of Adrian IV. two rival popes were elected,--Alexander III. by the Sicilian,--Victor III. by the Imperial party. The Templars at first acknowledged the latter; but at a synod, held at Nazareth, in 1161, they took the side of his rival. Alexander, who came off victor, was not ungrateful; and on the 7th January, of the following year, the aforesaid bull was issued. By this document, which would almost appear to be the dictation of the order, the Templars were released from all spiritual obedience except to the Holy See; they were allowed to have peculiar burial-grounds at their houses, and to have chaplains of their own; they were freed from the obligation to pay tithes, and could, with the consent of the bishop, receive them. It was also prohibited to any one who had once entered the order, to leave it, unless it were to enter into a stricter one. These great privileges necessarily awakened the envy and enmity of the clergy against the Templars and the Hospitaliers, which last were equally favoured by the pontiffs; but these artful prelates, who were now aiming at universal power, knew well the advantage which they might derive from attaching firmly to them

[p. 208]

these associations, which united the valour of the knight to the obedience of the monk, whose members were of the noblest families in Europe, and whose possessions were extensive and spread over all parts of the Christian world.

In 1167 occurred one of the few instances of cowardice, or rather, we might say, treachery, which the annals of the Templars present. Almeric, king of Jerusalem, had committed to the Templars the charge of guarding one of those strong fortified caverns which were on the other side of the Jordan. Here they were besieged by the Turks. and, though the king was hastening to their relief; they capitulated. Almeric, incensed at their conduct, though he was a great friend of the order, and particularly of the Master, Philip of Naploos, instantly had twelve of the cowardly or treacherous knights hanged, and he experienced no opposition whatever on the part of the order. Philip, we may observe, was the first Master of the Temple who was a born Syrian; but he appears to have been a man of fair and honourable character. He was lord of the fortress of Krak and Montreal in the Stony Arabia, which he had obtained with his wife. It was not till after her death that he became a Templar. Alter holding the dignity of Master for three years he resigned it. The cause of his resignation is unknown; but he was highly honoured and respected during the remainder of his life, and was employed on various important occasions.

It was during the mastership of Philip of Naploos, that King Almeric, at the instigation of the Master of the Hospital, and in violation of a solemn treaty, undertook an unprosperous expedition into Egypt. The Templars loudly protested against this act of perfidy, and refused to take any share in the war, either, as William, the honest Archbishop of Tyre, observes, "because it was against their conscience, or

[p. 209]

because the Master of the rival order was the author and projector of it." The prelate seems to regard the more honourable as the true cause. Perhaps we should express ourselves correctly if we said that in this, as in many other cases, duty and prejudice happily combined, and the path which was the most agreeable was also the most honourable.

In the mastership of Ado of St. Amando, the successor of Philip of Naploos, occurred the treacherous murder of the Ismailite envoy above narrated [**]--an act which brought the Templars into great disrepute with pious Christians, as it was quite manifest that they preferred money to winning souls to Christ.

Footnotes

^199:* See <page 88>.

^203:* Page <page 116>.

^207:* Wilken Geschichte der Kreuzzuge, Vol. iii. pt. ii. p. 39.

^209:* Page 116.

     
Secret Societies of the Middle Ages, by Thomas Keightley, [1837], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 210]

  

CHAPTER IV. 1

Heroism of the Templars and Hospitallers--Battle of Hittin--Crusade of Richard of England and Philip of France--Corruption of the Order--Pope Innocent III. writes a Letter of Censure--Frederic II.--Great Slaughter of the Templars--Henry III. of England and the Templars--Power of 4 the Templars in Moravia--Slaughter of them by the Hospitallers--Fall of Acre.

THE fall of the Christian power in the East was now fast approaching, and it was not a little hastened by the enmity of the rival orders. The truth of the old sentence, that the Deity deprives of sense those whom he will destroy, was manifested on this as on so many other similar occasions; and while the great and able Saladin was consolidating his power and preparing for the accomplishment of the object which, as a true Moslem, lay nearest his heart, the recovery of the Holy City, discord, enmity, and animosity, prevailed among those who should have been actuated by one soul and by one spirit.

Yet the two orders of religious chivalry had not derogated from their original valour, and the last days of Jerusalem were illumined by some noble feats of prowess. On the 1st of May, 1187, when Malek-el-Afdal, the son of Saladin, was returning from an expedition into the Holy Land, which he had undertaken with the consent of the Count of Tripolis, regent of the kingdom, the Masters of the Temple and of the Hospital, having collected about 140 knights and 500 footmen, met the , who were

[p. 211]

[paragraph continues] 7,000 in number, at the celebrated brook Kishon. They immediately charged them with the utmost impetuosity; the Turks. according to custom, turned and fled; the Christian knights pursued, leaving their infantry unprotected. Suddenly a large body of the Turks emerged from a valley, and fell on and slaughtered the footmen. Their cries brought back the knights to their aid, but, impeded by the narrowness of the ground, they could neither lay their lances in rest nor run their horses against the enemy, and all fell beneath the weapons of the Turks, with the exception of the Master of the Temple and three of his knights, who were saved by the fleetness of their horses. The Master of the Hospital was among the slain. In this unfortunate fight, James De Mailly, the marshal of the Templars, and a Hospitaller, named Henry, especially distinguished themselves. After all their brave companions had been slain around them, they still maintained the conflict; the Turks, filled with admiration of their valour, repeatedly offered them quarter, but in vain; and they fell at last, overwhelmed with darts flung from a distance, no one venturing to approach them. The historian, Vinisauf, tells us that De Mailly was mounted on a white horse, which, joined with his relucent arms and white mantle, made him appear to the infidels to be St. George, and they exulted greatly in having slain the tutelar saint of the Christians. He adds, what is not an unlikely circumstance, that the Turks covered his body with dust, which they afterwards powdered on their heads, thinking thereby to acquire some portion of his valour.

At the fatal battle of Hittin, where 30,000 Christians lost their lives, where the king and all his princes became captives, and where the Latin power in the East was broken for ever, the Master of the Temple, Gerard of Ridefort, and several of his

[p. 212]

knights and those of the Hospital, were among the captives. Saladin, who bore a particular hatred to the spiritual knights, would spare them on no condition but that of their renouncing their faith. To a man they gallantly refused; and, with the exception of the Master, the heads of all were struck off. Many who belonged not to the orders, smit with desire for the glory of martyrdom, cast the mantles of Templars around them, and went cheerfully to death as such. One Templar, named Nicolaus, evinced such joy and impatience for this glorious fate, that, according to the ideas of those times, heaven was believed to testify its approbation by a visible sign, and during three nights a celestial light illumined the unburied corpse of the Christian martyr.

It was indeed rare for a Templar to renounce his faith: prejudice, or honour, we may style it, or a better principle, always kept him steady in it, whatever the irregularities of his life might be. We recollect but one instance of a brother of the Temple abjuring his faith, and he was unhappily an English knight, named Robert of St. Albans. From some unassigned cause, he flung away the dress of his order, broke his vows, went over to Saladin, and became a Musselman. The sultan gave him one of his female relatives in marriage, and the recreant knight appeared before  at the head of an army of the infidels. He had promised to Saladin to reduce the Holy City; but her hour was not yet come; and after wasting all the country from Mont- royal to Jericho with fire and sword, he was forced to retreat before the chivalry of Jerusalem, who came forth with the holy cross, and gave him a signal defeat. This event occurred in the year 1184; and the apostacy of this Templar caused extreme dismay among the Christians, and excited great ill-will against the order in general.

[p. 213]

It had hitherto been the maxim of the order, not to redeem any of their members out of captivity with any higher ransom than a girdle, or a knife, or some other insignificant matter, acting in this on the same principle with the old Romans, who never redeemed prisoners. The Master, Ado de St. Amando, had died in captivity; but to redeem Gerard de Ridefort, no less a ransom was given than the city of Ascalon.--Gerard died of a wound received in battle the following year.

During the memorable crusade of Philip of France and Richard of England to the Holy Land, which their rivalry and animosity rendered utterly ineffectual, we find the Hospitaliers on the side of the king of England, and of course the Templars the warm partizans of the king of France. Yet, when Richard was on his return to Europe, he sent for the Master of the Temple, and said to him, that he knew by many he was not loved, and that he ran great risk of his life on his way to his kingdom; he therefore besought him that he would permit him to assume the dress of the order, and send two of the brethren with him. The Master readily granted the request of so potent a monarch, and the king went on board in the habit of a Templar. It was probably on account of the known enmity of the order to him, that King Richard adopted this expedient, thinking that one would ever suspect him of being with the Templars. His brother John, we may here observe, was, on the contrary, a great favourer of the order, to whom he gave Lundy Island, at the mouth of the Bristol Channel. Throughout his reign, this odious prince attached himself to the Templars as the faithful servants of his lord the pope, reckoning on their aid against his gallant barons, who would not leave the liberties of the nation at the feet of a faithless tyrant. It was now very much the custom for monarchs to

[p. 214]

deposit their treasures in the Temple houses; and in the year 1213 we find King John demanding 20,000 marks which he had committed to the Templars to keep. We meet with no instance of breach of trust on the part of the knights.

The Templars shared in the common dishonesty of the church with respect to false miracles, and they felt no scruple at augmenting their wealth by deceptions calculated to impose on the ignorance and zeal of the laity. In the year 1204 it was given out that an image of the Virgin, in a convent not far from Damascus, had become clothed with flesh, and that there issued from its breasts a kind of juice or liquor of wondrous efficacy in removing the sins of pious pilgrims. As the place was distant, and the road beset with danger, the knights of the Temple took upon themselves the task of fetching the mirific fluid to the part of the coast still held by the Latins, and accommodating pilgrims with it, and the coffers of the order were largely replenished by this pious traffic.

Though, like all other proprietors in the Holy Land, the order of the Temple had been losers in consequence of the conquest of it by Saladin, their possessions in the West were so extensive that they hardly felt the loss. At this very time we find the number of their possessions of various kinds in Europe stated at 7050, principally situated in France and in England. Their arrogance and luxury naturally kept pace with their wealth; and, though writers of the twelfth century, and even the Troubadours--the satirists of the age--always speak of the knights of the Temple with honour, there was a secret dislike of them gaining ground, especially with the clergy, in consequence of the great privileges granted to them by the bull Omne Datum Optimum, and the insolent manner in which these privileges were exercised.

Accordingly we find, in the year 1208, the great

[p. 215]

[paragraph continues] Innocent III. the most ambitious of popes, and one who was a steady friend to the order, under the necessity of passing the first public censure of them, and endeavouring to set, by authority, a limit to their excesses. In his epistle to the Master on this occasion, the holy father says that they abused the privilege of having mass celebrated in places which were under interdict, by causing their churches to be thrown open, and mass to be said every day, with loud ringing of bells, bearing the cross of Christ on their breast, but not caring to follow his doctrines, who forbids to give offence to any of the little ones who believe on him. He goes on to state that, following the doctrines of demons, they affixed the cross of their order on the breast of (i.e. affiliated) every kind of scoundrel, asserting that whoever, by paying two or three pence a year, became one of their fraternity, could not, even though interdicted, be deprived of Christian burial; and that hence, known adulterers, usurers, and others who were lying under sentence of interdict, were honourably interred in their cemeteries; "and thus they themselves, being captive to the devil, cease not to make captive the souls of the faithful, seeking to make alive those whom they know to be dead." The pontiff laments, that instead of, like religious men, using the world for the sake of God, they employed their religious character as a means of indulging in the pleasures of the world. Though, on account of these and such abuses, they deserved to be deprived of the privileges which had been conferred on them, the holy father will not proceed to extremity, relying on the exertions of the Master to effect a reformation.

In this epistle we have all the charges, which, as will hereafter appear, could be at any time brought with justice against the order, whose corruption proceeded

[p. 216]

in the ordinary course of human nature, and no otherwise,--privileges and exemptions producing insolence and assumption, and wealth generating luxury and relaxation of morals. It was the lavish generosity of popes, princes, and nobles, that caused the ruin of the Templars.

The Templars bore a distinguished part in the expedition to Egypt and siege of Damietta, in 1219, as the chief commander on that occasion was the papal legate, whose conduct, under show of obedience, they chiefly directed. But when, in 1228, the Emperor Frederic II., then under the sentence of the church, undertook the crusade which he had vowed, he found nothing but opposition and treachery from these staunch adherents of the pope. Considering the spirit of the age, their opposition is, perhaps, not so much to be blamed; but no principle will excuse the act of their writing to inform the Egyptian sultan of the plans of the emperor. The generous Moslem, instead of taking advantage of this treachery, sent the letter to Frederic, to the confusion of its authors. Frederic checked his indignation at the time, but on his return to Europe he took his satisfaction on those who were most guilty, and he seized the property of the order in Sicily and his Italian dominions. Though he was excommunicated again for so doing, Frederic persisted in his enmity both to them and the Hospitallers; and though, perhaps, the least given to superstition and illiberality of any man of his age, he did not disdain to make friendly intercourse with the Moslems a serious charge against them. "The haughty religion of the Templars," writes he, "reared on the pleasures of the native barons of the land, waxes wanton. . . . . We know, on good authority, that sultans and their trains are received with pompous alacrity within the gates of the Temple, and that the

[p. 217]

[paragraph continues] Templars suffer them to celebrate secular plays, and to perform their superstitious rites with invocation of Mahommet."

The hostility between the Templars and the Hospitallers still continued, though the Christian power was now nearly restricted to the walls of Acre. The Templars were in alliance with the prince of Damascus: the Hospitaliers were the friends of the sultan of Egypt. The Templars extended their enmity against the emperor to the Teutonic knights, whom they deprived of their possessions in Syria. The appearance of a new enemy, however, brought concord for a time among them. The Turks of Khaurizm, on the east of the Caspian, were now in flight before the hordes of the Mongols, and 20,000 of their horsemen burst into the Holy Land. They took and plundered Jerusalem, which was unfortified and open, and then united themselves with the troops of Egypt. The Christians applied to the prince of Damascus for aid, who forthwith sent the required troops, and their combined forces went in quest of the foes. In the battle the Templars and the militia occupied the centre; the Hospitaliers were posted on the left wing, the light horse on the right. The battle lasted two days, and ended in the total defeat of the Christians, a result which is ascribed, though probably with injustice, to the treachery of the Damascenes. The Master of the Temple and the whole chapter, with the knights, in all 300, were slain; only four knights and fourteen esquires escaped.

The improvident and needy Henry III. of England, in general such a dutiful son of the holy father, who, for a share of the spoil, usually aided him in the pious work of robbing his subjects, summoned courage in 1252 to speak of seizing some of the property of the church and the military orders. "You prelates and religious," said he, "especially you

[p. 218]

[paragraph continues] Templars and Hospitaliers, have so many liberties and charters, that your enormous possessions make you rave with pride and haughtiness. What was imprudently given, must be therefore prudently revoked; and what was inconsiderately bestowed must be considerately recalled. . . . I will break this and other charters which my predecessors and myself have rashly granted." But the prior of the Templars immediately replied, "What sayest thou, O king? Far be it that thy mouth should utter so disagreeable and silly a word. So long as thou dost exercise justice thou wilt reign; but if thou infringe it, thou wilt cease to be a king!" These bold words appear to have checked the feeble king, who next year besought the two orders to become his security for a large sum of money which he owed. They refused his request, and Henry thenceforth did them all the injury in his power.

There occurred an event in Moravia in 1252, which may serve to show the power of the order in Europe. A nobleman, named Vratislaf, who had been obliged to fly from that country, became a Templar in France. He made over all his property, among which was the castle of Eichhorn in Moravia, to the order. But his elder brother, Burian, took possession of his property, as having fallen to himself as head of the family. King Winzel, on being applied to, decided in favour of the order. Burian, however, still kept possession. The next year the Templars collected some thousands of men, and marched, under the command of their Great Prior, to take the castle. Burian, assembling 6000 men, 900 of whom he placed in the castle, advanced to give them battle. The engagement was bloody; 1700 men, among them the Great Prior of the Templars, lay slain, when night terminated the conflict. A truce was made for three days, at the end of which Burian and his men

[p. 219]

were driven into the castle, which they defended bravely, till king Attocar sent to threaten them with his wrath if they did not give it up. Burian surrendered it, and Vratislaf, returning to Moravia, became Prior of Eichhorn, in which thirty Templars took up their abode.

Though the Templars were so extremely numerous in Europe, they were little disposed to go out to the East to encounter toil and danger, in the performance of their duties. They preferred living in ease and luxury on their rich possessions in the West; and the .members of the chapter alone, with a few knights, and other persons attached to the order, abode in Syria. It would even seem that the heads of the society were meditating a final retreat from the East, where they probably saw that nothing of permanent advantage was to be achieved. The Hospitaliers, on the other hand, whatever may have been the cause, appear to have been more zealous in their calling, and to have had a greater number of their members in Syria; and it is, probably, to this cause, that we are to assign the total defeat which they were enabled to give their rivals in 1259: for the animosity between the orders had come to such a height, that, in this year, they came to open war. A bloody battle was fought, in which the Templars were defeated, when, such was the bitterness of their enmity, that the victors made no prisoners, but cut to pieces every Templar who fell into their hands, and scarce a Templar remained to carry the intelligence to Europe.

From this period till the capture of Acre and final destruction of the Latin power in the East in 1291, after a continuance of nearly two centuries, the annals of the Templars are bare of events. The rivalry between them and the other orders still continued; and in the opinion of some historians, it was their jealousy that hastened the fall of that last remnant of

[p. 220]

the Christian dominion in the East. Not more than ten knights of the Temple escaped in the storm of the town, and these, with the remnants of the other orders, and the garrison, sought a retreat in Cyprus.

We have now traced the history of the order from its institution to within a few years of the period of its suppression. Of this most important event we shall delay the consideration for some time, and shall occupy the intervening space with an account of the internal organisation of the society, its officers, its wealth, and various possessions. This will, we trust, prove no slight contribution to our knowledge of one of the most curious portions of the history of the world--that of the middle ages--and gratify the reader by the display of manners and institutions which have long since passed away [**].

Footnotes

^220:* The organisation and the rules of the Hospitaliers were similar to those of the Templars; but as that order existed down to modern times, the rules, &c., given by Vertot, contain a great number of modern additions.

     
Secret Societies of the Middle Ages, by Thomas Keightley, [1837], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 221]

  

CHAPTER V.

Classes of the Templars--The Knights--Their Qualifications--Mode of Reception--Dress and Arms of the Knight--Mode of Burial--The Chaplains--Mode of Reception--Dress--Duties and Privileges--The Serving-Brethren--Mode of Reception--Their Duties--The Affiliated--Causes and Advantages of Affiliation--The Donates and Oblates.

THE founders of the order of the Templars were, as we have seen, knights; and they were the first who conceived the novel idea, and happy one, as we may call it in accordance with the sentiments of those times, of uniting in the same person the two characters held in highest estimation--the knight and the monk. The latter added sanctity to the former, the former gave dignity and consideration to the latter, in the eyes of a martial generation. Hence, the Templar naturally regarded himself as the first of men; and the proudest nobles of the Christian world esteemed it an honour to belong to the order. The knights were, therefore, the strength, the flower, the ornament of the society.

The order of the Templars, when it was fully developed, consisted not of degrees, but of distinct and separate classes. These were the knights, the chaplains, and the serving-brethren; to which may be added the affiliated, the donates, and the oblates, or persons attached to the order without taking the vows.

I. THE KNIGHTS.--Whoever presented himself to be received as a knight of the order must solemnly

[p. 222]

aver that he was sprung from a knightly family, and that his father was or might have been a knight. He was further to prove, that he was born in lawful wedlock, for, like the church in general, the Templars excluded bastards from their society. In this rule there was prudence, though, possibly, it was merely established in accordance with the ideas of the time; for, had a king of France or an emperor of Germany been able to get his natural child into the order, and should he then have been chosen Master of it, as he probably would, it might have lost its independence, and become the mere tool of the monarch. The candidate was, moreover, to declare that he was free from all previous obligations; that he was neither married nor betrothed; had not made any vows, or received any consecration in another order; and that he was not involved in debt. He had finally to declare himself to be of a sound and healthy constitution, and free from disease. When the order was grown great and powerful, and candidates for admission were numerous and of the highest families, it became the custom to require the payment of a large fee on admission.

It was necessary that the candidate for admission among the knights of the Temple should already be  knight; for as knighthood was a secular honour, the order would have regarded it as derogating from its dignity if any of its members were to receive it. The Hospitaliers and Teutonic knights thought differently, and with them the aspirant was knighted on his admission. If the candidate Templar, therefore, had not been knighted, he was obliged to receive knighthood, in the usual manner, from a secular knight, or a bishop, previous to taking his vows.

A noviciate forms an essential and reasonable part of the course of admission into the spiritual orders in general; for it is but right that a person should become, in some measure, acquainted with the rules and

[p. 223]

duties of a society before he enters it. But, though the original rule of the Templars enjoined a noviciate, it was totally neglected in practice; a matter which was afterwards made one of the charges against the order. Perhaps there was in their case little necessity for this preparatory process; the Templars were so much in the world, and those who joined them had been in general so frequently among them, and were consequently so well acquainted with their mode of life, that they hardly required any such preliminary discipline to familiarize them with their duties. The neglect of the practice at the same time gave the Templars an advantage over the rival orders who enjoined it; for a young nobleman would, in all likelihood feel most disposed to join the society into which he could be admitted at once; and perhaps no small part of the corruption of the Templars, in which they undoubtedly surpassed their rivals, may be ascribed to the facility which was thus afforded to unworthy persons entering among them.

With respect to the age at which persons were admitted, it is plain, from the previously required reception of knighthood, that it must have been that of adolescence or manhood. All that is said by the statutes is, that no child could be received; and that the parents or relatives of a child destined to be a member of the order, should keep and breed him till he could manfully and with armed hand extirpate the enemies of Christ out of the land. This formed a marked distinction between the Templars and the mere religious orders, who, even at the present day, we believe, admit children, taking the charge of their rearing and education; whereas, children could only be destined to the order of the Temple, and could not be presented for admission, till able to bear arms, that is, usually in the twenty-first year of their age.

[p. 224]

The reception of a knight took place in one of the chapels of the order, in presence of the assembled chapter. It was secret, not even the relatives of the candidate being allowed to be present. The ceremony commenced by the Master [**] or prior, who presided. saying, "Beloved brethren, ye see that the majority are agreed to receive this man as a brother. If there be any among you who knows any thing of him, on account of which he cannot lawfully become a brother, let him say it; for it is better that this should be signified beforehand than after he is brought before us."

The aspirant, if no objection was made, was then led into a chamber near the chapter-room; and two or three reputable knights of the oldest in the house were sent to lay before him what it was needful for him to know. They commenced by saying, "Brother, are you desirous of being associated to the order?" If he replied in the affirmative, they stated to him the whole rigour of the order. Should he reply that he was willing to endure everything for God's sake, and to be all his life long the servant and slave of the order, they asked him if he had a wife or was betrothed? if he had made profession or vows in any other order? if he owed to any man in the world more than he could pay? if he was of sound body, and had no secret infirmity, and if he was the servant of any one? Should his answers be in the negative, the brethren went back to the chapter and informed the Master or his representative of the result of the examination. The latter then asked once more, if any one knew any thing to the contrary. If all were silent, he said "Are you willing that he should be brought in in God's name?" The knights then

[p. 225]

said, "Let him be brought in in God's name." Those who had been already with him then went out again, and asked him if he persisted in his resolution. If he said that he did, they instructed him in what he was to do when suing for admission. They then led him back to the chapter, where, casting himself on his knees, with folded hands, before the receptor, he said, "Sir, I am come, before God, and before you and the brethren, and pray and beseech you, for the sake of God and our dear Lady, to admit me into your society, and the good deeds of the order, as one who will be, all his life long, the servant and slave of the order." The receptor then replied, "Beloved brother, you are desirous of a great matter, for you see nothing but the outward shell of our order.  is only the outward shell when you see that we have fine horses and rich caparisons, that we eat and drink well, and are splendidly clothed. From this you conclude that you will be well off with us. But you know not the rigorous maxims which are in our interior. For it is a hard matter for you, who are your own master, to become the servant of another. You will hardly be able to perform, in future, what you wish yourself. For when you may wish to be on this side of the sea, you will be sent to the other side; when you will wish to be in Acre, you will be sent to the district of Antioch, to Tripolis, or to Armenia; or you will be sent to Apulia, to Sicily, or to Lombardy, or to Burgundy, France, England, or any other country where we have houses and possessions. When you will wish to sleep you will be ordered to watch; when you will wish to watch, then you will be ordered to go to bed; when you will wish to eat, then you will be ordered to do something else. And as both we and you might suffer great inconvenience from  you have, mayhap, concealed from us, look here

[p. 226]

on the holy Evangelists and the word of God, and; answer the truth to the questions which we shall put to you; for if you lie you will be perjured, and may be expelled the order, from which God keep you!"

He was now asked over again, by the receptor, the same questions as before; and, moreover, if he had made any simoniacal contract with a Templar or any other for admission. If his answers proved satisfactory, the receptor proceeded, "Beloved brother, take good care that you have spoken the truth to us; for should you have spoken false in any one point, you might be put out of the order, from which God keep you! Now, beloved brother, attend strictly to what we shall say unto you. Do you promise to God, and our dear Lady Mary, to be, all your life long, obedient to the Master of the Temple, and to the prior who shall be set over you?"

"Yea, Sir, with the help of God!"

"Do you promise to God, and our dear Lady Mary, to live chaste of your body all your life long?"

"Yea, Sir, with the help of God!"

"Do you promise to God, and our dear Lady Mary, to observe, all your life long, the laudable manners and customs of our order, both those which are already in use, and those which the Master and knights may add?"

Yea, Sir, with the help of God!"

"Do you promise to God, and our dear Lady Mary, that you will, with the strength and powers which God has bestowed on you, help, as long as you live, to conquer the Holy Land of Jerusalem; and that you will, with all your strength, aid to keep and guard that which the Christians possess?"

"Yea, Sir, with the help of God!"

"Do you promise to God, and our dear Lady Mary, never to hold this order for stronger or weaker,

[p. 227]

for better or worse, than with permission of the Master, or of the chapter which has the authority [**]?"

"Yea, Sir, with the help of God!"

"Do you finally promise to God, and our dear Lady Mary, never to be present when a Christian is unjustly and unlawfully despoiled of his heritage, and that you will never, by counsel or by act, take part therein?"

"Yea, Sir, with the help of God!"

"In the name, then, of God, and our dear Lady Mary, and in the name of St. Peter of Rome, and of our father the pope, and in the name of all the brethren of the Temple, we receive to all the good works of the order which have been performed from the beginning, and shall be performed to the end, you, your father, your mother, and all of your family whom you will let have share therein. In like manner do you receive us to all the good works which you have performed and shall perform. We assure you of bread and water, and the poor clothing of the order, and labour and toil enow."

The Master then took the distinguishing habit of the order, namely, the white mantle with the red cross, and putting it about the neck of the candidate, clasped it firmly. The chaplain then repeated the 132d psalm, Ecce quam bonum, and the prayer of the Holy Ghost, Deus qui corda fidelium, and each brother repeated a Pater noster. The Master and the chaplain then kissed him on the mouth; and he sat down before the Master, who delivered to him a discourse, of which the following is the substance.

He was not to strike or wound any Christian; not to swear; not to receive any service or attendance from a woman without the permission of his superiors; not on any account to kiss a woman, even if

[p. 228]

she was his mother or his sister; to hold no child at the baptismal font, or be a god-father; to abuse no man or call him foul names; but to be always courteous and polite. He was to sleep in a linen shirt, drawers, and hose, and girded with a small girdle. He was to attend divine service punctually, and at table he was to commence and conclude with prayer; during the meal he was to preserve silence. When the Master died, he was, be he where he might, to repeat 200 Pater nosters for the repose of his soul.

Each knight was supplied with clothes, arms, and equipments, out of the funds of the order. His dress was a long white tunic, nearly resembling that of priests in shape, with a red cross on the back and front of it; his girdle was under this, over his linen shirt. Over all he wore his white mantle with its red cross of four arms (the under one being the longest, so that it resembled that on which the Saviour suffered) on the left breast. His head was covered by a cap or a hood attached to his mantle. His arms were shield, sword, lance, and mace; and, owing to the heat of the East, and the necessity of activity in combats with the Turks and Saracens, his arms and equipments in general were lighter than those used by the secular knights. He was allowed three horses and an esquire, who was either a serving-brother of the order or some layman who was hired for the purpose. At times this office was performed by youths of noble birth, whom their parents and relatives gladly placed in the service of distinguished knights of the Temple, that they might have an opportunity of acquiring the knightly virtues; and these often became afterwards members of the order.

When a knight had become, from age or wounds, incapable of service, he took up his abode in one of the temple-houses, where he lived in ease, and was treated with the utmost respect and consideration.

[p. 229]

 

Click to enlarge
Costume of Knight Templar.

 

[p. 230]

[paragraph continues] These emeriti knights are frequently mentioned under the name of Prodomes (Good men); they were present at all deliberations of importance; and their experience and knowledge of the rules of the order were highly prized and attended to.

When the Templar died, he was placed in a coffin in his habit, and with his legs crossed, and thus buried. Masses were said for his soul; his arms and clothes were partly given back to the marshal or draper of the order--partly distributed among the poor.

II. THE CHAPLAINS.--The order of the Templars, being purely military in its commencement, consisted then solely of laymen. That of the Hospital, on the contrary, on account of its office of attending the sick, had, necessarily, priests in it from its origin, This advantage of the latter society excited the jealousy of the Templars, and they were urgent with the popes to be allowed a similar privilege. But the pontiffs were loth to give offence to the oriental prelates, already displeased at the exemption from their control granted in this case to the Hospitaliers and it was not till the year 1162, that is, four years after the founding of the order, when their great favourer, Alexander III., occupied the papal throne, that the Templars attained their object.

The bull, Omne Datum Optimum, issued on this occasion, gave permission to the Templars to receive into their houses spiritual persons, in all countries, who were not bound by previous vows. If they were clergy of the vicinity, they were to ask them of the bishop; and if he refused his consent, they were empowered, by the bull, to receive them without it. The clergy of the Temple were to perform a noviciate of a year--a practice which, as in the case of the knights, was dispensed with in the days of the power and corruption of the order. The reception of the clergy was the same as that of the knights, with the omission

[p. 231]

 

Click to enlarge
Knights in Temple Church, London.

 

[p. 232]

 

Click to enlarge
Effigies of Knights in Temple Church, London.

 

[p. 233]

of such questions as did not apply to them. They were only required to take the three vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience. The ritual of their reception was in Latin, and was almost precisely the same with that of the Benedictines. Like that of the knights, their reception was secret. When the psalms had been sung the Master put on the recipient the dress of the order and the girdle, and, if he was a priest, the cap called baret.

The habit of the chaplains of the order was a white close-fitting tunic, with a red cross on the left breast. Though, according to the statutes, they were to have the best clothes in the order, they were not permitted to assume the white mantle as long as they were mere priests. But should one of them, as was not unfrequently the case, arrive at the episcopal dignity, he was, if desirous of it, cheerfully granted that privilege. It was a further distinction between the knights and the chaplains, that the former wore their beards, while the latter were close-shaven. The chaplains were also to wear gloves, out of respect to the body of the Lord.

All who had received the first tonsure were eligible to the office of chaplain to the order. When those who were only sub-deacons and deacons were to be raised to the rank of priests, the Master or his deputy sent them with letters dimissory to a bishop of the vicinity, who was bound to confer the required order.

The clergy were, like all other members of the order, bound to obey the Master and the chapter. The Master and the chief officers of the order had always chaplains in their train to celebrate mass and other religions offices, as also to act as secretaries, the knights being in general as illiterate as their secular brethren. It was by this last office that the chaplains acquired their chief influence in the society mind and superior

[p. 234]

knowledge vindicating, as they always do, their natural rights. For though it was specially provided that the clergy should take no share in the government of the society without being invited thereto by their superiors, the opinion of the secretary was naturally taken in general, and if he was a man of sense and talent, it was most commonly followed [**].

The duties of the clergy of the order were nearly the same as those of monks in general. They performed all religious offices, and officiated at all the ceremonies of the order, such as the admission of members, the installation of a Master, &c. Their privileges were very unimportant; they had merely the best clothes, sat next the Master in the chapter and in the refectory, and were first served at table; when they committed any offence, they were also more lightly punished than others. They could, however, if it so pleased the heads of the order, arrive at high rank in it; and we find that they were not unfrequently among the preceptors. The attorney-general of the order at Rome, who was always a person of considerable importance, was most probably a priest of the order; at least we know that Peter de Bononia, the last of them, was such.

It is worthy of notice, that even in the most flourishing period of the order it never had a sufficient number of chaplains, and was always obliged to have recourse to the ministry of secular priests. The causes of this were probably the circumstance of the order having attained its full form and consistency long before the clergy formed a part of it, and they consequently had not an opportunity of arranging it so as

[p. 235]

to give themselves their due share of power and importance. It must have been galling to the pride of those who were used to rule, obeying only their spiritual superiors, to find themselves subject to the command of mere laymen, as they esteemed the knights of the order. Further, though they shared in the good things of the order and enjoyed the advantage of the consideration in which it stood, yet they had no dignities to look forward to; whereas an entrance into a Benedictine order held out to the ambitious a prospect of rich priories, abbacies, and bishoprics, and, at the least, a voice in the chapter. It may well be supposed that' the pride of the knights of the Temple refused to admit into their society such persons as those who afterwards joined the mendicant orders--peasants and others who preferred a life of ease and idleness to the labours of the plough and the workshop. The number consequently of those who presented themselves for admission was small. But the knights felt no disadvantage thereby; enow of secular priests were to be had, who were willing to have the master of the Temple as their ordinary, and to share in the good things of the order, and as neither party was bound to the other, they could easily part if they disagreed.

III. THE SERVING-BRETHREN. The order, consisting at first of only knights and men of noble birth, had no serving-brethren in it. The knights probably found esquires for a limited time among those who fought under their banner and received their pay. The Hospitallers seem to have set the example of introducing into the order the class of serving-brethren, which is not to be found with the Templars till some time after the council of Troyes. The advantage of this alteration was very apparent. Hitherto only knights and nobles were interested in the fate of the society to which their relatives belonged; the regards of burghers and

[p. 236]

traders would now be obtained by the formation of this class, to admission into which their sons and brothers were eligible. They felt themselves honoured by their relatives coming into contact with knights, and were therefore liberal in the admission-fee and in other contributions to the quetes of the order.

We should be wrong in supposing the serving-brethren to have been all persons of mean birth. The high consideration in which the order stood induced many men of wealth, talent, and valour, but who were not of noble birth, to join it. We thus find among the serving-brethren William of Arteblay, almoner to the king of France; Radulf de Gisi, collector of the taxes in Champagne; John de Folkay, an eminent lawyer. Bartholomew Bartholet gave property to the amount of 1,000 livres Tournois to be admitted; William of Liege gave 200 livres Tournois a year. The serving-brother, indeed, could never arrive at the dignity of knight (for which he was disqualified by birth), and consequently never exercise any of the higher offices of the order, but in other respects he enjoyed the same advantages and privileges as the knights and priests.

The reception of the serving-brethren was the same as that of the two higher classes, the necessary difference being made in the questions which were asked. As the order would receive no slave into their body, the candidate was required to aver that he was a free-born man: he was moreover obliged to declare that he was not a knight. This last condition may cause surprise, but it was probably justified by experience, as it is not unlikely that evil may have been felt or apprehended from men of noble birth, out of humility, or by way of atoning for the sins of their youth, or from some other of the causes which might operate on the minds of superstitious men, or even from poverty, if, as is likely, the admission-fee was lower for

[p. 237]

a serving-brother than for a knight, concealing their birth, and entering the order as serving-brethren. As the more disagreeable duties of the order probably fell to their share, the general duties and obligations were laid before them in stronger and more explicit terms than were thought necessary in the case of knights and priests.

In the times of the poverty of the order, the clothing of the serving-brethren was the cast-off garments of the knights. But this custom did not long continue, and as some abuses arose from all the members of the order being clad in white, the serving-brethren were appointed to wear black or brown kirtles, with the red cross upon them, to indicate that they belonged to the order. In battle, their arms were nearly the same as those of the knights, but of a lighter kind, as they had frequently to jump down from their horses, and fight on foot. A serving-brother was allowed but one horse by the order, but the Master was empowered to lend him another if he thought it expedient, which horse was to be afterwards returned.

The serving-brethren were originally all of one kind; they fought in the field; they performed the menial offices in the houses of the order; but, in after-times, we find them divided into two classes--the brethren-in-arms (Freres servons des armes), and the handicraft-brethren (Freres servons des mestiers). These last, who were the least esteemed of the two, dwelt in the houses and on the lands of the order, exercising their various trades, or looking after the property of the society. We read in the statutes of the smiths and bakers of the order, and we hear of preceptors (as was the phrase) of the mares, cows, swine, &c. of the. order. These handicraft-brethren practised the usual religious duties of the order, and were even allowed to be present at chapters. The

[p. 238]

farrier, who was also armourer, enjoyed a much higher degree of consideration than the other handicraft-brethren, for this profession was highly prized by the martial generation of the middle ages [**].

The other class were more highly regarded. The knights associated with them on a footing of equality. They ate in the same refectory with the knights and priests, although at separate tables, and with always one dish less than the higher classes. They were, however, strictly subordinate to the knights; the master and all the great officers of the order had each several serving-brethren to attend him, and each knight had some of the serving-brethren among his esquires. The statutes provided carefully against their being tyrannized over or otherwise ill-treated by the knights.

The statutes make a distinction between the serving-brethren who were armed with iron and those who were not. The former were the proper light-horse of the order; they were chiefly intended to support the knights in the action, and were usually placed in the second rank. The place of the unarmed was with the baggage; and as they were exposed to little danger, they wore only linen corslets. The others were enjoined to fight, without flinching, as long as a Christian banner flew on the field: it was matter of praise to these last if they managed to come safe out of the fight. When the troops of the Temple were on their march, the esquires rode before the knights with their baggage. When the knights were going to action, one esquire rode before each with his lance, another behind with his war-horse.

There were various offices in the society, hereafter to be noticed, which were appropriated to the serving-brethren, or to which they were eligible.

[p. 239]

The knights, the chaplains, and the serving-brethren, were the proper members of the order, and it is to them alone that the name Templars applies. But both the Templars and the Hospitaliers devised a mode of attaching secular persons to their interest, and of deriving advantages from their connexion with them, in which they were afterwards imitated by the mendicant orders of the Franciscans and Dominicans; the Jesuits also, who were always so keen at discerning what might be for the advantage of their society, adopted it; and it is, we believe, still. practised in Catholic countries. This system is styled affiliation.

The affiliated were persons of various ranks in society, and of both sexes, who, without giving up their secular mode of life, or wearing any peculiar habit, joined the order, with a view to the advantages, both spiritual and temporal, which they expected to derive from it. These advantages will appear to have been very considerable when we recollect that all who joined the order were admitted to a share in the merits of its good works, which were what those times esteemed of the highest order. Nothing could have more contributed to the extent of affiliation than the exemption which the Templars enjoyed from the effects of interdict. At a time when it was in the power of every bishop to lay entire towns under this formidable sentence it must have been highly consolatory to pious or superstitious minds to belong to a society who disregarded this spiritual thunder, and who could afford them an opportunity of at least occasionally hearing mass and receiving the sacraments, and secured them, if they should die while the interdict continued, the advantage of Christian burial. In those days also, when club-law prevailed so universally, and a man's safety depended not so much on his innocence or the justice of his cause as on the

[p. 240]

strength of his party, it was a matter of no small consequence to belong to so powerful a body as the Templars, and it must have been highly gratifying to both the secular and spiritual pride of a lawyer or a burgher to be a member of the same body with the high-born soldier-monks of the Temple.

These important advantages were not conceded by the Templars without equivalent considerations. This ambitious and covetous order required that he who sought the honour of affiliation with them should, besides taking the three vows, pledge himself to lead a reputable life, to further the interests of the order to the best of his power, and leave it the entire of his property at his death. If he was married, and died before his wife, he might leave her a competent provision for life; but from the day of his admission into the order he was to abstain from her bed, though he might continue to reside in the same house with her; for were he to have children, he might provide for them to the disadvantage of the order, or on his death they might give trouble to it by claiming his property. For a similar reason tie affiliated were forbidden to be sponsors, lest they might covertly or openly give some of their property to their godchildren. They were not even permitted to give offerings to the clergy. If they dared to violate these injunctions, a severe punishment--in general, confinement for life--awaited them.

All orders of men were ambitious of a union with this honourable and powerful society. We find among the affiliated both sovereign princes and dignified prelates: even the great Pope Innocent III., in one of his bulls, declares himself to stand in this relation to the order. Many of the knights who dwelt with the Templars, and fought under their banner, were also affiliated, and the history of the order more than once makes mention of the sisters--that is, women

[p. 241]

who were affiliated to it, for there were no nuns of the Temple similar to those of the order of Malta in later times.

In less intimate connexion with the order than the affiliated stood those who were styled Donates and Oblates. These were persons who, as their titles denote, were given or presented to the order. They were either children whom their parents or relations destined to the service of the order when they should have attained a sufficient age, or they were full-grown persons who pledged themselves to serve the order as long as they lived without reward, purely out of reverence to it, and with a view to enjoying its protection, and sharing in its good works. Persons of all ranks, princes and priests, as well as others, were to be found among the oblates of the Temple.

Footnotes

^224:* When we use the word "Master," we would always be understood to mean the Master or his representative.

^227:* That is. never to quit the order.

^234:* This influence of the clergy excited the spleen of the knights. Gerard de Caux, in his examination hereafter to be noticed, said, "The aged men of the order were unanimous in maintaining that the order had gained nothing in internal goodness by the admission of learned members."

^238:* Sir W. Scott is perfectly correct in making the smith so important a character in his St. Valentine's Eve.

     
Secret Societies of the Middle Ages, by Thomas Keightley, [1837], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 242]

  

CHAPTER VI.

Provinces of the Order--Eastern Provinces--Jerusalem--. Houses of this Province--Tripolis--Antioch--Cyprus--Western Provinces--Portugal--Castile and Leon--Aragon--France and Auvergne--Normandy--Aquitaine--Provence--England--Germany--Upper and Central Italy--Apulia and Sicily.

WE have thus seen what a number of persons of all ranks were more or less intimately connected with the order of the Temple, and how powerful its influence must have been throughout the Christian world. To enable the reader to form some conception of its wealth and power, we shall, previous to explaining its system of internal regulation, give a view of its possessions in various countries.

The extensive possessions of the order of the Temple, in Asia and in Europe, were divided into provinces, each containing numerous preceptories or temple-houses, and each under its appointed governor. These provinces may be classified under the heads of Eastern and Western.

The eastern provinces of the order were,

I. JERUSALEM.--This province was always regarded as the ruling one; the chief seat and capital of the order. The Master and chapter resided here as long as the Holy City was in the hands of the Christians. This being the province which was first established, its regulations and organization served as a model for all others. Its provincial Master, or, as he was styled, the Preceptor of the Land and Kingdom

[p. 243]

of Jerusalem, took precedence of all others of the same rank.

The bailiwicks, or commanderies, in this province, were,--

1. The Temple of Jerusalem, the cradle of the order, and the original residence of the Master and the chapter.

2. Chateau Pelerin, or the Pilgrim's Castle, renowned in the history of the crusades. This castle was built by the Templars in 1217, in order that it might be their chief seat after the loss of Jerusalem. It was situated on the east side of Mount Carmel, which runs out into the sea between Caipha and Caesarea. The Templars had long had a tower at a pass of this mountain, called Destruction, or the Tower of the Pass, for the defence of pilgrims against the robbers who lurked in the gorges of the mountains They were aided in building the castle, which was also designed to be a defence to Acre, by Walter D'Avesnes and by the German knights and pilgrims who were at that time in the Holy Land, and hence, perhaps, they called it Chateau Pelerin. The Cardinal de Vitry, who was at that time bishop of Acre, thus describes it. It was built on the promontory, three sides of which were washed by the sea. As they were sinking the foundation, they came to two walls of ancient masonry, and to some springs of remarkably pure water; they also found a quantity of ancient coins with unknown inscriptions, given, as the bishop piously deems, by God to his beloved sons and warriors, to alleviate the toil and expense which they were at. The place had probably been fortified in former times by the Jews or the Romans. The builders raised two huge towers of large masses of rock on the landward side, each 100 feet high, and 74 broad; these were united by a lofty wall, broad enough at its summit for

[p. 244]

an armed knight to stand at his ease upon it. It had a parapet and battlements, with steps leading up to them. In the space within this wall were a chapel, a palace, and several houses, with fish-ponds, salt-works, woods, meads, gardens, and vineyards. Lying at a distance of six miles from Mount Tabor, it commanded the interjacent plain and the sea-coast to Acre. There the Master and the chapter took up their final abode, after having dwelt from 1118 to 1187 at Jerusalem, from 1187 to 1191 at Antioch, and from this last year till 1217 at Acre. "The chief use," says D'Vitry, "of this edifice is, that the whole chapter of the Templars, withdrawn from the sinful city of Acre, which is full of all impurity, will reside under the protection of this castle till the walls of Jerusalem are rebuilt." A prophecy never to be fulfilled! On the fall of Acre, in 1291, Chateau Pelerin was abandoned by the knights, and its walls were levelled by the infidels.

3. The castle of Safat, at the foot of Mount Tabor. This strong castle was taken by Saladin. It was demolished in 1220, by Coradin, but afterwards rebuilt by the Templars, who then held it till 1266, when they lost it finally.

4. The temple at Acre, a remarkably strong building, the last place taken in the capture of that town.

5. The hill-fort, Dok, between Bethel and Jericho.

6. Faba, the ancient Aphek, not far from Tyre, in the territory of the ancient tribe of Ashur.

7. Some small castles near Acre, mentioned in the history of the war with Saladin, such as La Cave, Marle, Citerne-rouge, Castel-blanc, La Sommellerie du Temple.

8. The house at Gaza.

9. The castle of Jacob's-ford, at the Jordan, built in 1178 by King Baldwin IV., to check the incursions

[p. 245]

of the roving Arabs. When Saladin took this castle, he treated the Templars whom he found in it with great cruelty.

10. The house at Jaffa.

11. The castle of Assur, near this town.

12. Gerinum parvum.

13. The castle of Beaufort, near Sidon, purchased by the order, in 1260, from Julian, the lord of that town.

We may observe that most of these abodes of the Templars were strong castles and fortresses. It was only by means of such that possession could be retained of a country like Palestine, subject to the constant inroads of the Turks and Saracens. The Templars possessed, besides these strongholds, large farms and tracts of land, of which, though their names are unknown, frequent mention is made in the history of the order.

II. TRIPOLIS.--The principal houses of the order in this province were at Tripolis itself; Tortosa, the ancient Antaradus; Castel-blanc, in the same neighbourhood; Laodicea, Tyre, Sidon, and Berytus.

III. ANTIOCH.--Of this province but little is known. There was a house at Aleppo; and the jurisdiction of the prior probably extended into Armenia [**], where the order had estates to the value of 20,000 byzants.

IV. CYPRUS.-AS long as the Templars maintained their footing on the continent, Cyprus, it would appear, formed no distinct province, but belonged either to that of Tripolis or of Antioch. At the time when Richard, King of England, made the conquest of this island, he sold the sovereignty of it for 25,000 marks of silver to the Templars, who had already extensive possessions in it. The following year, with the consent of the order, who were, of course, reimbursed, he

[p. 246]

transferred the dominion to Guy de Lusignan, King of Jerusalem. On the capture of Acre the chief seat of the order was fixed at Limesal, also called Limissa and Nemosia, in this island, which town, having an excellent harbour, they strongly fortified. They had also a house at Nicosia, and one at the ancient Paphos, named Gastira, and, at the same place, the impregnable castle of Colossa.

Some idea of the value of the possessions of the Templars in Cyprus may be formed from the circumstance, that when, in 1316, after the suppression of the order, the Pope directed the Bishop of Limissa to transfer their property there to the Hospitaliers, there were found, in the house in that town, 26,000 byzants of coined money, and silver plate to the value of 1,500 marks. As the last Master, when setting out for France ten years before, had carried with him the treasure of the order, this property must have been accumulated during that time out of the surplus revenue of the possessions of the order in the island

The Western provinces of the order were--

I. PORTUGAL.--So early as the year 1130 (a strong proof of the rapid increase of the order) Galdin Paez, the first provincial master of the Temple in Portugal, built the castles of Tomar, Monsento, and Idanna. The Templars had also settlements at Castromarin, Almural, and Langrovia. Tomar was the residence of the great-prior.

II. CASTILE AND LEON.--In this province the possessions of the order were so extensive as to form twenty-four bailiwicks in Castile alone. It is needless to enumerate their names [**].

III. ARAGON.--In this province, which abounded in castles, several belonged to the Templars; and the bailiwick of Majorca, where they were also settled,

[p. 247]

was under the jurisdiction of the great-prior of Aragon.

It is to be observed that most of the castles possessed by the order in Spain and Portugal were on the borders of the Moorish territory. Some of these had been given to the Templars as the inveterate foes of the infidels; others had been conquered by them from the Moors.

France, where the possessions of the order were so considerable, was divided into four provinces, namely--

IV. FRANCE AND AUVERGNE, including Flanders and the Netherlands,

V. NORMANDY.

VI. AQUITAINE, or POITOU.

VII. PROVENCE.

The residences of the great-priors of these four provinces were, for France, the capacious and stately Temple at Paris, which was, as we are informer! by Matthew Paris, large and roomy enough to contain an army; for Normandy, as is supposed, La ville Dieu en la Montagne; for Poitou, the Temple at Poitiers; for Provence, that at Montpellier.

VIII. ENGLAND.--The province of England included Scotland and Ireland. Though each of these two last kingdoms had its own great-prior, they were subordinate to the great-prior of England, who resided at the Temple of London.

The principal bailiwicks of England were--1. London; 2. Kent; 3 Warwick; 4. Waesdone; 5. Lincoln; 6. Lindsey; 7. Bolingbroke; 8. Widine; 9. Agerstone; 10. York. In these were seventeen preceptories; and the number of churches, houses, farms, mills, &c., possessed by the order was very considerable [**].

[p. 248]

 

Click to enlarge
Interior of Round Tower, in Temple Church, London.

 

[p. 249]

 

Click to enlarge
Saxon Doorway, Temple Church, London.

Click to enlarge
Details of Saxon Capitals.

 

[p. 250]

 

Click to enlarge
Round Temple Church, Cambridge.

 

[p. 251]

The chief seat of the order in Scotland appears to have been Blancradox. Its possessions were not extensive in that poor and turbulent country; and in Ireland the Templars seem to have been few, and confined to the Pale. We hear of but three of their houses in that country--namely, Glaukhorp, in the diocese of Dublin; Wilbride, in that of Ferns; and Siewerk, in that of Kildare.

IX. GERMANY.--It is difficult to ascertain how the order was regulated in Germany, where its possessions were very extensive. We hear of three great-priors: those of Upper Germany, of Brandenburg, and of Bohemia and Moravia; one of whom, but it cannot be determined which, had probably authority over the others. Though the Templars got lands in Germany as early as the year 1130, their acquisitions were not large in that country till the thirteenth century. Poland was included in the province of Germany. Great-prior in Alemania and Slavia was a usual title of the great-prior of Germany. Though the possessions of the Templars in Hungary were very considerable, there are no grounds for supposing that it formed a separate province: it was probably subject to the great-prior of Germany.

X. UPPER AND CENTRAL ITALY.--There was no town of any importance in this part of the Italian peninsula in which the Templars had not a house. The principal was that on the Aventine Hill at Rome, in which the great-prior resided. Its church still remains, and is called Il Priorato, or the Priory.

XL APULIA AND SICILY.--The possessions of the Templars in Sicily were very considerable. They had houses and lands at Syracuse, Palermo, Trapani, Butera, Lentini, &c.; all of which were dependent on the principal house, which was in Messina. The great-prior resided either at Messina or at Benevento in Apulia. Possibly the seat was removed to this last

[p. 252]

place, after the Emperor Frederic II. had seized so much of the property of the order in Sicily.

In Denmark, Norway, and Sweden, the order had no possessions whatever. Though the people of these countries took some share in the crusades, and were, therefore, not deficient in religious zeal, their poor and little-known lands offered no strong inducements to the avarice or ambition of the knights of the Temple, and they never sought a settlement in them.

We thus see that, with the exception of the northern kingdoms, there was no part of Europe in which the order of the Temple was not established. Everywhere they had churches, chapels, tithes, farms, villages, mills, rights of pasturage, of fishing, of venery, and of wood. They had also, in many places, the right of holding annual fairs, which were managed, and the tolls received, either by some of the brethren of the nearest houses or by their donates and servants. The number of their preceptories is, by the most moderate computation, rated at 9,000; and the annual income of the order at about six millions sterling--an enormous sum for those times! Masters of such a revenue, descended from the noblest houses of Christendom, uniting in their persons the most esteemed secular and religious characters, regarded as the chosen champions of Christ, and the flower of Christian knights, it was not possible for the Templars, in such lax times as the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, to escape falling into the vices of extravagant luxury and overweening pride. Nor are we to wonder at their becoming objects of jealousy and aversion to both the clergy and the laity, and exciting the fears and the cupidity of an avaricious and faithless prince.

Footnotes

^245:* The Armenia of the crusades was a part of Cilicia.

^246:* They will be found in Campomanes, p. 80, and Munter p. 421.

^247:* The possessions of the Templars in England will be found in the works of Dugdale and Tanner.

     
Secret Societies of the Middle Ages, by Thomas Keightley, [1837], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 253]

  

CHAPTER VII.

Officers of the Order--The Master--Mode of Election--His Rights and Privileges--Restraints on him--The Seneschal--The Marshal--The Treasurer--The Draper--The Turcopilar--Great-Priors--Commanders--Visitors--Sub-Marsh al--Standard-bearer.

AN order consisting of so many members, and whose wealth and possessions were of such extent, must necessarily have had numerous officers and various ranks and dignities. The elucidation of this branch of their constitution is now to engage our attention.

At the head of the order stood the Master, or, as he was sometimes called, the Great-Master [**] of the Temple. This personage was always a knight, and had generally held one of the higher dignities of the order. Though, like the Doge of Venice, his power was greatly controlled by the chapter, he enjoyed very great consideration, and was always regarded as the representative of the order. In the councils, the Masters of the Temple and the Hospital took precedence of all ambassadors, and sat next the prelates. All monarchs conceded princely rank and place to the Master of the Temple.

A situation which offered so much state and consideration

[p. 254]

must, of necessity, have been an object of ambition; but the scanty records remaining of the society do not enable us to point out any specific cases of intrigue employed for the attainment of it. That of the last Master, hereafter to be mentioned, is somewhat problematic.

The election of a Master of the Temple was as follows:--

When the Master was dead, an event which always occurred in the East, as he was bound to reside there, if it took place in the kingdom of Jerusalem, and the marshal of the order was on the spot, he took upon him the exercise of the vacant dignity till, with the aid of the chapter and of all the bailiffs on this side of the sea (i.e. in the East), he had appointed a great-prior to represent the Master. But this election did not take place till after the funeral. Should the death of the Master have occurred in the province of Tripolis, or that of Antioch, the prior of the province took the direction of the order till the great-prior was appointed.

Owing to the constant state of war which prevailed in the East, and to other causes, a considerable space of time occasionally intervened between the death of one Master and the appointment of his successor. During the interregnum the society was directed by the great-prior who bore the seal of the Master.

When the day appointed for the election was arrived, the great officers of the order and all the bailiffs who were invited to be present assembled in the place selected for holding the election--generally the chapel of the order. The great-prior, taking several of the knights aside, consulted with them; and they then made two or three or more of the knights who were most highly-esteemed retire. The great-prior took the voices of those present on the merits

[p. 255]

of the absent knights; and he who had most in his favour was declared the electing-prior. The knights were then called in, and the choice of the assembly notified to them. A knight, possessing the same virtues of piety, love of peace, and impartiality with himself, was then assigned for an assistant to the electing-prior: and the whole assemblage withdrew, leaving the two alone in the chapel, where they passed the entire night in prayer.

Early next morning, after performing their usual devotions and hearing the mass of the Holy Ghost, the chapter re-assembled. The great-prior then exhorted the two electing brethren to perform their duty truly and honestly. These, then retiring, chose two other brethren; these four chose two more, and so on, till the number amounted to twelve, in honour of the apostles. The twelve then chose a brother-chaplain to represent the person of Jesus Christ, and maintain peace and concord. It was necessary that these thirteen should be of different provinces--eight of them knights, four serving-brethren, and one priest. The thirteen electors then returned to the chapter, and the electing-prior besought all present to pray for them, as a great task had been laid on them. All then fell on their knees and prayed; and the great-prior solemnly reminded the electors of their duty, and conjured them to perform it truly and uprightly. Having again implored the prayers of the assembly, the electing-prior and his companions retired to the place appointed for their deliberations. If the electors, or the majority of them, declared for any knight on this or the other side of the sea, he was appointed; if they were divided into parties, the electing-prior came with one of the knights, and, informing the assembly of the circumstance, asked their prayers. All fell on their knees, and the two

[p. 256]

electors returned to their companions; if they now agreed, the person whom they chose was declared Master.

Should the object of their choice be, as was not unfrequently the case, actually present in the chapter, the thirteen came in; and the electing-prior speaking in their name, said, "Beloved sirs, give praise and thanks to our Lord Jesus Christ, and to our dear Lady, and to all the saints, that we are agreed, and have, according to your command, chosen, in the name of God, a Master of the Temple. Are ye content with what we have done?" All then replied, "In the name of God!" "Do ye promise to yield him obedience as long as he lives?" "Yea, with the help of God!" The electing-prior then turned to the great-prior, and said, "Prior, if God and we have chosen thee for the Master, wilt thou promise to obey the chapter as long as thou live, and to maintain the good morals and good usages of the order?" and he answered, "Yea, with the aid of God!" The same question was then put to some of the most distinguished knights; and if the person elected was present, the electing-prior went up to him, and said, "In the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, we have chosen you brother, N. N., for Master, and do choose you!'' He then said, "Beloved sirs and brethren, give thanks unto God: behold our Master." The chaplains then chanted aloud the Te Deum laudamus, the brethren arose, and, with the utmost reverence and joy, taking the new Master in their arms, carried him into the chapel, and placed him before the altar, where he continued kneeling while the brethren prayed, the chaplains repeating Kyrie Eleison, Pater noster, and other devotional forms.

The election of the Master of the Temple required

[p. 257]

no papal confirmation: the choice of the chapter was conclusive. Two knights were assigned to him as his companions.

The allowances and train of the Master were suitable to the rank which he was to support in the world, and to the dignity of the order which he represented. He was allowed four horses, and an esquire of noble birth. He had a chaplain and two secretaries; one for managing his Latin correspondence, whom he might, after a time, admit to become a knight of the order; the other, who was called his Saracenic secretary, and who was probably an eastern Christian, for carrying on his Arabic correspondence with the Infidels. He had, moreover, a farrier, a cook, and a Turcopole [**], two footmen, and a Turcoman [*+], to serve as guide. On a march, the Turcoman rode on a horse behind an esquire: during the time of war he was led by a cord, to prevent his escape. On any ordinary journey, the Master might take two beasts of burden with him; but in war-time, or in case of his going beyond the Jordan, or the Dog's Pass [*++], he might extend the number to four, which the statutes thriftily direct to be put into the stable when he arrives at the house where he is going to stop, and to be employed in the service of the house. The Master was finally commander-in-chief

[p. 258]

of the order in the field; and then, like the Spartan kings, he could act in some degree unfettered by the chapter. When he died, he was buried with great solemnity and pomp, by the light of torches and wax tapers--an honour bestowed by the order on no other of its members. All the knights were required to attend the funeral; and the prelates were invited to give their presence at it. Each brother who was present was to repeat 200 Pater nosters within seven days, for the repose of the soul of the deceased; and 100 poor persons were fed at home in the evening, with the same design.

On the other hand, the Master was bound to obey the chapter; and he could do nothing without consulting some of the brethren. He could not nominate to any of the higher dignities of the order; but he might, with the advice and consent of some of the most reputable knights, appoint to the inferior priories and preceptories. He could not sell, or in any other way dispose of, any of the lands of the order, without the consent of the chapter; neither could he make peace or truce without their approbation. Their consent was also required to enable him to make any alteration in the laws of the society, to receive any person into it, or to send a brother beyond sea. He could take no money out of the treasury without the consent of the prior of Jerusalem, who was the treasurer of the society. In fact, the Master of the Temple was so curbed and restrained in every way, and his office made so much an honorary one, that his dignity may best he compared with that of a Spartan king or a Venetian doge. It is rather curious that the Master of the Temple should be thus limited in authority, when the abbot of the Benedictines, whose rules the Templars in a great measure adopted, enjoyed monarchical power.

[p. 259]

Next in rank to the Master stood the seneschal, who, as his name denotes [**], was the Master's representative and lieutenant. He had a right to be present at all chapters of the order; and to be acquainted with all transactions of consequence. He was allowed the same number of horses as the Master; but, instead of a mule, he was to have a palfrey: he had two esquires, and was assigned a knight as his companion; a deacon acted as his chaplain and Latin secretary; he had also a Saracenic secretary and a Turcopole, with two footmen. Like the Master, he bore the seal of the order.

The marshal, was the general of the order; he had charge of the banner, and led the brethren to battle. All the arms, equipments, and stables of the order were under his superintendence. It was he who nominated the sub-marshal and the standard-bearer. Like all the other great officers, he was appointed by the Master and the chapter. As we have seen, when the Master died in the kingdom of Jerusalem, the marshal occupied his place till a great-prior was chosen. The marshal was allowed four horses, two esquires, a serving-brother, and a Turcopole.

The office of treasurer of the order was always united with the dignity of preceptor of the kingdom of Jerusalem. This officer had the charge of all the receipts and expenditure of the order, of which he was bound to give an account, when required, to the Master and the chapter. The wardrobe of the order was also under him; and the draper was assigned as his companion, without whose knowledge he could not dispose of any of the clothes. As the ships, though few in number, which the Templars possessed, were under him, he may be regarded as,

[p. 260]

also, in some sort, the admiral of the order; and on this account the preceptor of Acre was subordinate to him. The treasurer had the same allowance of horses, &c. as the seneschal.

The draper had charge of the clothing of the order: he was to see that each brother was decently and properly dressed. His allowance was four horses, two esquires, and a pack-servant.

The Turcopilar was the commander of the light horse. All the armed serving-brethren and the Turcopoles were under his command. He was himself subordinate to the marshal. When he was going into action, some of the knights were sent with him. These were under his orders; but if their number amounted to ten, and they had with them a banner and a knight-preceptor, the Turcopilar became subordinate to this officer; which proves that the office of Turcopilar was not one of the higher dignitaries of the order. The Turcopilar was allowed four horses.

Besides these offices of the order in the East, there were the great-priors, great-preceptors, or provincial-masters (for the terms are synonimous) of the three provinces of Jerusalem, Tripolis, and Antioch; and the preceptors, who were subordinate to them.

The great-prior of the kingdom of Jerusalem was also treasurer. His office has been already noticed. The great-priors of Tripolis and Antioch had the superintendence over the brethren and the possessions of the order in these provinces. They had the same allowances of attendants and horses as the seneschal. The prior of Antioch, when on a journey to Armenia, which bordered on his province, and in which the order had possessions, was allowed to take with him a chaplain and a portable chapel, as the Armenians were monophysite heretics, with whom

[p. 261]

the orthodox brethren of the Temple could not join in worship.

The prior of the town of Jerusalem had peculiar duties to perform. It was his office, with ten knights who stood under his command, to escort the pilgrims on their way to and from the Jordan--one of the principal objects of the institution of the order. On this occasion he had with him the banner of the order and a round tent, into which he might take any persons whom he should find sick when he encamped; he was also to take with him provisions, and beasts of burden on which to place such of the pilgrims as might be fatigued on the return.

When the true cross was brought forth on any expedition, it was the duty of the prior of Jerusalem to keep by it, with his ten knights, night and day, and to guard it; he was to encamp close to it; and two brethren were to watch it every night.

All the secular knights who associated themselves to the order in Jerusalem were under his orders, and fought beneath his banner. All the brethren of the order who were in Jerusalem were, in the absence of the marshal, under his command. One half of the booty captured beyond the Jordan fell to him, the other half to the prior of the kingdom.

As we have seen above, the West was, like the East, divided into provinces of the order. Each of these provinces was presided over by a lieutenant of the master, named the provincial-master, great-prior, or great-preceptor, with his chapter and officers corresponding to those of the kingdom of Jerusalem. He was appointed, as it would appear, by the Master and chapter; and when entering on his office, he bound himself by oath to defend the Catholic religion, not only with his lips, but with arms and all his strength; to follow the rules drawn up by St. Bernard; to obey the Master; to come over the sea to his

[p. 262]

aid whenever it was necessary; to defend him against all unbelieving kings and princes; not to fly before these unbelieving foes; not to alienate the goods of the order; to be loyal to the prince of the country; to be chaste; and to aid all spiritual persons, especially the Cistercians, by words and by deeds.

Under the provincial-masters stood the priors, bailiffs, or masters, who governed large districts of the provinces, and had under their inspection several of the houses of the order and their preceptors. They dwelt in large temple-houses, with a good number of knights; they had the power of holding chapters, and of receiving members into the order.

The preceptors were subordinate to the priors; they presided over one or more houses. They were generally knights, but they were sometimes priests. They were of two kinds--house-preceptors and knight-preceptors; the former, as their name denotes, merely presided over the houses, and might be priests or serving-brethren; the latter, who were probably only to be found in the East or in Spain, led each ten knights in the battle.

Another office to be found among the Templars was that of visitors. These were knights, who, as the representatives of the Master, visited the different provinces of the order, especially in the West, to reform abuses, make new regulations, and terminate such disputes and law-suits as were usually reserved for the decision of the Master and the chapter. All the provincial officers, even the great-priors, were subject to the visitors, as the representatives of the Master. The powers of the visitors ceased as soon as the business ended for which they were sent, or when they were recalled.

Besides the foregoing offices, which were almost exclusively confined to the knights, there were some inferior ones appropriated to the serving-brethren.

[p. 263]

 

Click to enlarge
Preceptory, Swingfield, Dover

 

[p. 264]

[paragraph continues] These offices were five in number--namely, those of sub-marshal, standard-bearer, farrier, cook, and preceptor of the coast of Acre. Each of these was allowed two horses.

The sub-marshal had the charge of all the inferior sort of accoutrements (le petit harnois) of the order, in which the horse-furniture seems to have been included. All the handicraftsmen of the order were under him, and were obliged to account to him for their work. He supplied them with the needful tools and materials; could send them where he pleased on the service of the house; and on holidays give them permission to go from one house to another to amuse themselves. The sub-marshal and the standard-bearer were each the representative of the other in his absence.

The standard-bearer had the command over all the esquires of the house; that is, those who were engaged for a limited time in the service of the order, whom he was bound to make acquainted with the rules to which they were subject, and the punishments to which they were liable in case of disobedience; he was also to pay them their wages. Whenever the esquires took the horses out to graze, he was bound to precede them with a standard of the order. He always presided at the table of the serving-brethren and esquires. When the order was marching to battle, it was his task to ride before the standard, which was borne after him by an esquire, or carried on a wain [**]; he was to lead whithersoever the marshal directed him. When the battle commenced, those esquires who led the horses of the knights were to combat behind their masters; the others were to take the mules on which their masters rode, and remain with the standard-bearer, who was to

[p. 265]

have a banner rolled about his lance, which, when he saw the marshal engaged in action, he was to unfurl, and draw up the esquires in as handsome order as possible behind the combatants, in order to support them.

The serving-brethren were eligible to the office of house-preceptor; but there was this distinction made between them and knights who held that office, that, the serving-brethren being allowed but one horse, their esquire was a serving-brother. As Acre was the sea-port at which all the shipments of the order to and from Europe took place, the preceptory there was necessarily an office which entailed a good deal of toil and business on the person who held that situation, and required a knowledge of commerce and of the affairs of the world. It was therefore not considered suitable to a knight, and was always given to a serving-brother. The serving-brethren were also set over the various farms and estates of the order. These were named the brother-stewards,--in Latin, grangiarii and preceptores grangiarum,--and were probably selected from the craftsmen of the order. They were allowed two horses and an esquire.

Footnotes

^253:* Magister, Maistre, is the almost invariable expression in the historians, the statutes of the order, and most documents. Magnus Magister was, however, early employed. Terricus, the Master of the order, thus styles himself when writing to Henry II. of England. The term Grand-Master is apt to convey erroneous ideas of pomp and magnificence to the minds of many readers.

^257:* The Turcopoles were the offspring of a Turkish father, by a Christian mother; or also those who had been reared among the Turks, and had learned their mode of fighting. The Christians employed them as light cavalry; and the Templars had always a number of them in their pay.

^257:+ The Turcomans were, as their name denotes, born Turks. The Christians used them as guides on their expeditions.

^257:++ Le pas de chien. Munter (p. 66) declares his ignorance of where it lay. It was evidently the dangerous pass at the Nahr-el-Kelb, (Dog's River), near the sea, on the way to Antioch.

^259:* Seneschal is one qui alterius vicem gerit. Charpentier Supplem. ad Dufresne Gloss. iii. p. 759.

^264:* The Carroccio of the Italian republics.

     
Secret Societies of the Middle Ages, by Thomas Keightley, [1837], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 266]

  

CHAPTER VIII.

Chapters--Mode of holding them--Templars' Mode of Living--Amusements--Conduct in War.

SUCH as we have described them were the members, the possessions, and the various offices of the powerful society of the Temple. In order to complete our view, it only remains to trace its internal government and most important regulations. We shall therefore commence with an account of the chapters, from which all the acts and rules of the society emanated.

It is frequently declared in the statutes, that the Master was in the place of God; and that all his commands were to be obeyed as those of God. But these expressions, which were borrowed from the rule of the Benedictines, are, as we have already seen, not to be understood too literally; for the constitution of the order of the Templars was aristocratic, and not monarchic; and the Master was anything but absolute. In every matter he was to be guided by the opinion of the majority of the chapter.

The general chapter, or high legislative assembly of the order, consisted of all the great officers, of the great-priors of the provinces, anal the most distinguished of the knights who could attend. Every brother, even the lowest of the serving-brethren, was at liberty to be present as a spectator; but only the proper members of the chapter had the privilege of speaking. The place of holding the chapter Was undetermined, and was left to the choice of the Master. All laws and regulations were made or confirmed in

[p. 267]

the general chapter: there brethren were received--the great officers appointed--visitors chosen to be sent to the different provinces. It is remarkable, that a papal legate never seems to have been present at a chapter of the Templars; though the legates frequently assisted at those of the other orders. This is, most probably, to be ascribed to the secrecy in which the Templars were pleased to envelope their councils and proceedings; and as they rarely held general chapters, a suitable pretext could not well be wanting for freeing themselves from the presence of the legate when they desired it. Those who impute to the Templars the holding of a secret doctrine naturally regard this as the cause of their not admitting to their chapters those who were not initiated in it.

A general chapter was not often assembled--a circumstance easily to be accounted for. Though the order was wealthy, it might not be well able to bear, without inconvenience, the expense of deputies from all the provinces journeying to the kingdom of Jerusalem, where the chapters were in general held; and further, it was obviously the interest of the Master and the great officers to avoid assembling a body which would at once assume the powers which they were in the habit of exercising.

In the intervals between the meetings of general chapters, the powers of the order were exercised by the chapter of the Temple at Jerusalem. This was composed of the Master, the dignitaries of the order, such of the provincial masters as happened to be present, the two assistants of the Master, and such knights as he chose to invite to it. This last provision was the great source of the Master's power; and, when he was a man of talent and address, he could, by managing to get his friends and those whom he could depend on into the different offices,

[p. 268]

and by summoning to the chapter such knights as were attached or looked up to him, contrive to carry any matters that he desired. The laws, however, by way of check upon him, made it imperative that the high officers of the order should have seats in the chapter; and as these were not appointed by the Master, and were independent of him, it was supposed that they would not be his creatures. This chapter could decide on all matters relating to the order, some important affairs, such as war and peace, excepted; make laws and regulations, which were binding on the whole society; and send visitors to the different provinces. All public documents, such as papal bulls, were addressed to it and the Master; all decisions in matters of importance came from it; and all the brethren who were received in the West were sent to it to be distributed where they might be wanting. The declaration made by a French knight on his examination, that the receptions in the chapter of Jerusalem were rare, as the members could be seldom brought to agree respecting a candidate, gives a hint that it was not in general a scene of the greatest harmony and unity. It is, indeed, but natural to suppose, that, as it was the chief seat of the power of the order, it was also the great theatre of intrigue and cabal.

Each province of the order had its general chapter, and also a smaller one, presided over by the great-prior, and composed of the principal officers and such knights of character and estimation as the prior chose to call to it. In like manner every preceptory and every large house of the order had its chapter, at which all the brethren were required to attend. The commander was president, and each question was decided by the majority of voices. The chief transactions in it consisted in the reception of new brethren, and the making up of quarrels and

[p. 269]

disputes, which must have frequently fallen out among men like the Templars, who were almost all soldiers. It was holden early on a Sunday morning; and the strictest secrecy, as to what took place, was enjoined on all present, for secrecy was the soul of the order.

The ordinary chapters were held in the following manner. Each brother, as he entered, made the sign of the cross, and, unless he was bald, took off his cap. The president then rose and said, "Stand up, beloved brethren, and pray to God to send his holy grace among us to-day." Each member repeated a pater noster, and, if there was a chaplain present, he said a prayer. Search was then made to see that there was no one present but those who belonged to the order. The president then delivered a discourse, exhorting the brethren to amendment of life. During this discourse no one was on any account to leave the room. When it was ended, any one who had transgressions to acknowledge went up to the president and made confession. He then retired out of sight and hearing, and the sentiments of the assembly were taken, which were afterwards signified to him. The brethren were also to remind each other of their transgressions, and exhort to confession and penitence. If any one accused a brother falsely, he was severely punished for it: while the inquiry was going on the accused was obliged to retire from the chapter. The discipline was usually administered in presence of the assembled chapter, with a scourge, or with a girdle. Those who were sick were not punished till they were recovered.

When these matters were over, the president explained a portion of the statutes, and exhorted all present to live suitably thereto. He then said, "Beloved brethren, we may now close our chapter, for, praise be to God., all is well; and may God and

[p. 270]

our dear Lady grant that it may so continue, and goodness be every day increased. Beloved brethren, ye mist know how it is with pardon in our chapter, and who has not part therein; know, then, that those have no part either in the pardon of our chapter, or in the other good works of the chapter; who live as they should not; who depart from the righteousness of the order; who do not acknowledge their offences and do penance in the mode prescribed by the order; who treat the alms of the order as their own property, or in any other way contrary to law, and squander them in an unrighteous, scandalous, and foolish manner. But those who honestly acknowledge their faults, and conceal nothing out of shame or fear of the punishment of the order, and are right sorry for their transgressions, have a large share in the forgiveness of our chapter, and in the good works which take place in our order. And to such, in virtue of my authority, I dispense forgiveness in the name of God and of our dear Lady, in the names of the apostles Peter and Paul, of our father the pope, and of you all who have given me authority; and pray to God that, according to his mercy, he will, for the merits of his mother, and of himself, and all the saints, forgive you your sins, as he forgave the famous Mary Magdalene." He then implored the forgiveness of those to whom he might have given any offence or done any injury; and prayed for peace, for the church, for the holy kingdom of .Jerusalem, for the order and all its houses and people, for the brethren and sisters of the order, and for its living and dead benefactors; finally, for all the dead who waited for the mercy of God, especially those who lay buried in the Temple burial-grounds, and for the souls of the fathers and mothers of the Templars. The chaplain, if present, repeated a confession of sin, in which all followed him, and then

[p. 271]

pronounced an absolution. If there was no chaplain present, each brother repeated a pater and an ave, and so the chapter ended.

The statutes of the order are full of the most minute directions respecting the equipment, clothing, and mode of living of the various members of the order. They were obliged to attend divine service punctually each day at all the different hours at which it was celebrated, and regularly to observe all the fasts of the church; they were also to have at their houses both public and private devotions. Their meals were also strictly regulated. They assembled by sound of bell: if there was a priest in the house he said grace for them, if not, each brother repeated a pater before he began to eat. During the meal a clergyman read out something edifying for them, and when it was over no one was to speak till grace was said. There was no difference made in the quality of the food; all, both high and low, fared alike, and they ate two off one plate. They had flesh-meat but three times a week, unless when festival days occurred. On days when they had no flesh-meat they had but two dishes. When the order were in the field a server regulated the supply and distribution of provisions. Before giving out the provisions he was to direct the serving-brethren to notify it to the superiors of the order, that they might come and select the best for themselves; he distributed the remainder without any other distinction than that of giving the best to the sick. The plate given to every two of the brethren was so large that what remained when they were done was sufficient to satisfy two of the poor. Two brethren were allowed as much food as three Turcopoles, and two of these as much as three of the servants. The brethren were not allowed to seek for any food elsewhere than from the server, vegetables, game, and venison excepted. But as by

[p. 272]

the rules of the order the chase was prohibited to them, they could not procure these themselves.

Amusements could not be rigorously prohibited to men who were semi-secular, and had to mingle so much in the world as the Templars. They were therefore allowed to tilt, but only with headless lances; whether only among themselves, or also at public tournaments, is uncertain [**]. They were permitted to run races with their horses, but for no higher wager than a headless cross-bow bolt, or some other trifle. Chess and draughts were prohibited games; nor were they allowed to play at any other game whatever for a stake. Hawking was absolutely forbidden to the Templar, probably on account of the high price of hawks, and of this being the favourite amusement of the secular knights. The reason assigned by the statutes is:--"Because it is not seemly in the members of an order to play sinfully, but willingly to hearken to the commands of God, to pray often, and daily in their prayers before God to bewail their sins with weeping and tears." A Templar might not even accompany one who was going out a-hawking. Moreover, as shouting and bawling were unseemly in a member of an order, he might not go a-hunting in a wood with bow and crossbow, nor accompany any one thus engaged, except to protect him against the heathen. In fine, every species of chase was forbidden to the Templar, except that of the lion 'who goes about seeking whom he may devour, whose hand is against every one, and every one's hand against him' [*+]"

The battle was the Templar's scene of glory, and

[p. 273]

consequently every thing relating to the conduct of the order in war was strictly regulated. On the march the Templars, as the guardians of the holy cross, formed the vanguard of the Christian army; in the array they were in the right wing. The Hospitaliers usually formed the rear-guard, and in the field were posted on the left. The Templars mounted and set forward at the voice of their marshal, the standard-bearer preceding them with the standard of the order. They moved in a walk or a small trot. The march usually took place by night, on account of the heat of eastern climes, and every precaution was adopted to prevent confusion or inconvenience. When the standard halted for , the marshal selected a place for his own tent and the chapel, which was to contain the true cross; the tents of the server, and of the great-prior of the province, had also their places marked out. It was then cried out, "Brethren, pitch your tents in the name of God!" on which each Templar forthwith raised his tent in his rank. All the tents were around the chapel, outside of its cords. The herald pitched by the standard. No brother was allowed, on any account, to go out of hearing of the war-cry, or to visit the quarters of any others than the Hospitaliers, in case these last should be encamped beside them. The place for encamping was selected by the prior of the province in which the war was, who was therefore in some sort quartermaster-general; the marshal assigned the different quarters, and over each he set a knight-preceptor to govern and regulate it.

When the battle commenced, the marshal usually took the standard out of the hands of the sub-marshal and unfurled it in the name of God. He then nominated from five to ten of the brethren to

[p. 274]

surround and guard it; one of these he made a knight-preceptor, who was to keep close by him with a banner furled on a spear, that, in case of that which the marshal carried being torn, or having fallen, or met with any other mishap, he might display it. If the marshal was wounded or surrounded, this knight was to raise the banner in his stead. No one was to lower a banner, or thrust with it, on any account, for fear of causing confusion. The brethren were to fight on all sides, and in every way in which they could annoy the foe, but still to keep near enough to be able to defend the banner of the order, if needful. But if a Templar saw a Christian in imminent danger, he was at liberty to follow the dictates of his conscience, and hasten to his relief. He was to return to his place as speedily as possible; but if the Turks had gotten between him and the banner, he was to join the nearest Christian squadron, giving the preference to the Hospitaliers, if they were at hand. Should the Christians meet with defeat, the Templar, under penalty of expulsion from the order, was not to quit the field so long as the banner of the order flew; and, should there be no red-cross flag to be seen, he was to join that of the Hospitaliers, or any other. Should every Christian banner have disappeared, he was to retreat as well as he could.

Such were the military principles of the order of the Temple--principles which,

                    instead of rage,
 Deliberate valour breathed, firm and unmoved
 With dread of death to flight or foul retreat;

and never, unquestionably, was more unflinching valour displayed than by the Templars. Where all were brave and daring as the fabled heroes of romance, the Templar was still regarded as prominent, and the Cardinal of Vitry could thus speak of them in

[p. 275]

the early part of the thirteenth century, when they may be regarded as somewhat declined from their original elevation:--

"They seek to expel the enemies of the cross of Christ from the lands of the Christians, by fighting manfully, and by moving to battle at the signal and command of him who is at the head of their forces, not impetuously or disorderedly, but prudently and with all caution--the first in advance, the last in retreat; nor is it permitted to them to turn their backs in flight, or to retreat without orders. They are become so formidable to the adversaries of the faith of Christ, that one chases a thousand, and two ten thousand; not asking, when there is a call to arms, how many they are, but where they are: lions in war, gentle lambs at home; rugged warriors on an expedition, like monks and eremites in the church." The language of the worthy cardinal is no doubt declamatory, and rhetorical, and some deduction must consequently be made from it; but still enough will remain to prove that the chivalry of the Temple must still have retained no small portion of the virtues for which they had been originally renowned.

Footnotes

^272:* Sir W. Scott would probably find some difficulty in justifying his making his Templar accept the combat a outrance at the "gentle and free passage of Ashby de la Zouche."

^272:+ It is not clear whether this is to be understood literally or metaphorically.

     
Secret Societies of the Middle Ages, by Thomas Keightley, [1837], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 276]

  

CHAPTER IX.

Molay elected Master--Last attempt of the Christians in Syria--Conduct of the Three Military Orders--Philip the Fair and Pope Boniface VIII.--Seizure of the Pope--Election of Clement V.--The Papal See removed to France--Causes of Philip's enmity to the Templars--Arrival of Molay in France--His interviews with the Pope--Charges made against the Templars--Seizure of the Knights--Proceedings in England--Nature of the Charges against the Order.

WE have, in what precedes, traced the order of the Templars from its institution to the period when the Latin dominion was overthrown for ever on the coast of Syria, and have described, at some length, its internal organisation, and exhibited its power and extent of possessions. It remains for us to tell how this mighty order was suddenly annihilated, to examine the charges made against it [**], and, as we have promised, to establish the falsehood and futility of them--a task far from ungrateful, though not unattended with pain; for it is of advantage to strengthen our love of justice and hatred of tyranny and oppression, by vindicating the memory even of those who perished their victims centuries agone. It is also of use to furnish one instance more to the world of the operation of the principle which will be found so generally

[p. 277]

to prevail, that, let falsehood and sophistry exert their utmost to conceal the truth, means will always remain of refuting them, and of displaying vice, how- ever high seated, in its true colours.

In the year 1297, when the order had established its head-quarters in the isle of Cyprus, James de Molay, a native of Besancon, in the Franche Comte, was elected Master. The character of Molay appears to have been at all times noble and estimable; but if we are to credit the statement of a knight named Hugh de Travaux, he attained his dignity by an artifice not unlike that said to have been employed by Sixtus V. for arriving at the papacy. The chapter, according to De Travaux, could not agree, one part being for Molay, the other, and the stronger, for Hugh de Peyraud. Molay, seeing that he had little chance of success, assured some of the principal knights that he did not covet the office, and would himself vote for his competitor. Believing him, they joyfully made him great-prior. His tone now altered. "The mantle is done, now put the hood on it. You have made me great-prior, and whether you will or not I will be great-master also." The astounded knights instantly chose him.

If this account be true, the mode of election at this time must have differed very considerably from that which we have described above out of the statutes of the order. This election, moreover, took place in France, where, in 1297, Molay, we are told, held the fourth son of the king at the baptismal font.

One feeble attempt, the last military exploit of the Templars, was made by the Christians to acquire once more a footing on the continent of Asia during the mastership of Molay. In 1300, the Mongol chief Gazan came to the aid of the king of Armenia, against the Turks. As it was the policy of the Tartars, who had not as yet embraced Islam, to stir up enemies to the Mohammedans, Gazan, after overrunning

[p. 278]

the country as far as Damascus, sent an embassy to the Pope, Boniface VIII., inviting the Christians, particularly the three military orders, to come and take possession of the Holy Land. The Templars, Hospitaliers, and Henry, king of Cyprus, forthwith manned seven galleys and five smaller vessels. Almeric de Lusignan, Lord of Tyre, and the Masters of the two orders, landed at Tortosa, and endeavoured to maintain that islet against the Egyptian sultan, but were forced to yield to numbers. The Templars fought gallantly to no purpose, and a few of them, who defended a tower into which they had thrown themselves, surrendered, and were carried prisoners to Egypt.

The Hospitallers, in the year 1306, renewed their attacks on the isle of Rhodes, where they finally succeeded in expelling the Turks, and planting the standard of their order. The Teutonic knights transferred the sphere of their warfare to Russia, and the adjacent country, whose inhabitants were still heathens. The Templars meantime remained inactive in Cyprus, and seem even to have been meditating a retreat to Europe.

France was at this time governed by Philip the Fair, son of St. Louis. Philip, who had come to the throne at the early age of seventeen years, had been educated by Giles de Colonna, afterwards archbishop of Bourges, a man distinguished for his learning and for the boldness of his opinions. One of his favourite maxims was, "that Jesus Christ had not given any temporal dominion to his church, and that the king of France has his authority from God alone." Such principles having been early instilled into his mind, the young monarch was not likely to be a very dutiful son of the Church, and the character of Boniface VIII., who, without possessing the talents or the virtues of a Gregory or an Innocent, attempted to stretch the papal pretensions to their greatest extent,

[p. 279]

soon roused him to resistance. In the plenitude of his fancied authority, the pope issued a bull, forbidding the clergy to give any subsidies to lay-powers without permission from Rome. Philip, in return, issued an order prohibiting the exportation of gold, silver, or merchandize from France, thereby cutting off a great source of papal revenue. In the course of the dispute, Boniface maintained that princes were subject to him in temporals also. Philip's reply was,--"Philip, by the grace of God, king of the French, to Boniface, acting as supreme pontiff; little or no health. Let your extreme folly know, that in temporals we are not subject to any one." Shortly afterwards he publicly burned a bull of the pope, and proclaimed the deed by sound of trumpet in Paris. Boniface, raving with indignation, summoned the French clergy to Rome, to deliberate on the means of preserving the liberties of the Church. Philip convoked a national assembly to Paris, in which, for the first time, there appeared deputies of the third estate, who readily expressed their resolution to stand by their monarch in defence of his rights, and the clergy willingly denied the temporal jurisdiction of the pontiff. Several prelates and abbots having obeyed the summons of the pope, the king seized on their temporalities. The pope menaced with deprivation all those who had not attended, and, in his famous bull of Unam sanctam, asserted that every human being was subject to the Roman pontiff. Another bull declared that every person, be his rank what it might, was bound to appear personally when summoned to Rome. Philip forbade the publication of these bulls; and the states general being again convoked appealed to a council against the pope. Commissaries were sent through France to procure the adhesion of the clergy to this act, which was given in some cases voluntarily, in others obtained by means of a little wholesome rigour. The king, his wife, and his son,

[p. 280]

pledged themselves to stand by those who adhered to the resistance made by France to papal usurpation. Boniface next excommunicated the king, who intercepted the bull, and prevented its publication. The pope finally offered the crown of France to the emperor Albert of Austria. Matters were now come to an extremity, and Philip ventured on one of the boldest acts that have ever been attempted in the Christian world.

Philip had afforded an asylum at his court to some members of the Colonna family, the personal enemies of the pope. His chancellor and fast adherent was William de Nogaret, who had been his agent in the affair of appealing to a general council, by presenting to the states general a charge of simony, magic, and the usual real or imaginary crimes of the day against the pontiff. This man, and some of the Italian exiles, attended by a body of 300 horse, set out for Italy, and took up his abode at a castle between Florence and Sienna, under pretext of its being a convenient situation for carrying on negotiations with Rome. The pope was meantime residing at Anagni, his native town. Nogaret having, by a liberal distribution of money, acquired a sufficient number of partisans, appeared before the gate of Anagni early on the morning of the 7th September, 1303. The gate was opened by a traitor, and the French and their partisans ran through the streets, crying Live the king of France, die Boniface. They entered the palace without opposition; the French ran here and there in search of plunder, and Sciarra Colonna and his Italians alone came in presence of the pope. Boniface, who was now eighty-six years of age, was clad in his pontifical vestments, and on his knees before the altar, in expectation of death. At the sight of hint the conspirators, whose intention had been to slay him, stopped short, filled with involuntary awe, and did not dare to lay a hand upon him. During three

[p. 281]

days they kept him a prisoner; on the fourth the people of the town rose and expelled them, and released the pontiff. Boniface returned to Rome; but rage at the humiliation which he had undergone deranged his intellect, and in one of his paroxysms he dashed his head against the wall of his chamber, and died in consequence of the injury which he received [**].

Benedict XI., the successor of Boniface, absolved Philip, and his ministers and subjects, from the sentence of excommunication. As he felt his power, he was proceeding to more vigorous measures to avenge the insulted dignity of the holy see, when he died of poison, administered, as a contemporary historian asserts, by the agents of Philip. During ten months the conclave were unable to agree on his successor among the Italian cardinals. It was then proposed by the partisans of the king of France, that one party in the conclave should name three ultramontane prelates, from among whom the other party should select one. The choice fell on Bertrand de Gotte, archbishop of Bordeaux, who had many serious causes of enmity to Philip and his brother Charles of Valois. Philip's friend, the cardinal of Prato, instantly sent off a courier with the news, advising the king to acquiesce in the election as soon as he had secured him to his interest. Philip set out for Gascony, and had a private interview with the pontiff elect, in an abbey in the midst of a forest near St. Jean d'Angely. Having sworn mutual secresy, the king told the prelate that it was in his power to make him pope on condition of his granting him six favours. He showed him his proofs, and the ambitious Gascon, falling at his feet, promised everything. The six favours demanded by Philip were a perfect reconciliation with the Church; admission to the communion for himself

[p. 282]

and friends; the tithes of the clergy of France for five years, to defray the expenses of his war in Flanders; the persecution and destruction of the memory of Pope Boniface; the conferring the dignity of cardinal on James and Peter Colonna. "The sixth favour," said he, "is great and secret, and I reserve the asking of it for a suitable time and place." The prelate swore on the host, and gave his brother and two of his nephews as hostages. The king then sent orders to the cardinal of Prato, to elect the archbishop of Bordeaux, who took the name of Clement V.

Whet her urged by the vanity of shining in the eyes of his countrymen, or by dread of the tyranny exercised by the cardinals over his predecessors, or, what seems more probable, in compliance with the wishes of Philip, or in consequence of impediments thrown by that monarch in the way of his departure, Clement, to the dismay of all Christendom, instead of repairing to Rome, summoned the cardinals to Lyons for his coronation. They reluctantly obeyed, and he was crowned in that city on the 17th December, 1305, the king, his brother, and his principal nobles, assisting at the ceremony. Clement forthwith created twelve new cardinals, all creatures of Philip, whose most devoted slave the pope showed himself to be on all occasions. His promises to him were most punctually fulfilled, with the exception of that respecting the memory of Boniface, which the cardinal of Prato proved to Philip it would be highly impolitic and dangerous to perform; but Clement cheerfully authorised him to seize, on the festival of St. Madelaine, all the Jews in his kingdom, to banish them, and confiscate their property in the name of religion.

What the sixth and secret grace which Philip required was is unknown. Many conjectures have been made to little purpose. It is not at all improbable that the king had at the time no definite object.

[p. 283]

in view, and that, like the fabled grant of Neptune to Theseus, it was to be claimed whenever an occasion of sufficient importance should present itself.

Such as we have described them were Philip and the sovereign pontiff; the one able, daring, rapacious, ambitious, and unprincipled; the other mean, submissive, and little scrupulous. As it was the object of Philip to depress the papal power, and make it subservient to his ambition, he must naturally have desired to deprive it of support. The Templars, therefore, who had been on all occasions the staunch partizans of the papacy, must on this account alone have been objects of his aversion; they had, moreover, loudly exclaimed against his repeated adulteration of the coin, by which they sustained so much injury; and they were very urgent in their demands for repayment of the money which they had lent him on the occasion of the marriage of his daughter Isabella with the son of the king of England. Their wealth was great; their possessions in France were most extensive; they were connected with the noblest families in the realm; they were consequently, now that they seemed to have given up all idea of making any farther efforts in the East, likely to prove a serious obstacle in the way of the establishment of the absolute power of the crown. They were finally very generally disliked on account of their excessive pride and arrogance, and it was to be expected that in an attack on their power and privileges the popular favour would be with the king. These motives will, we apprehend, sufficiently account for Philip's anxiety to give a check to the order, beyond which, as it would appear, his plans did not at first extend. We cannot venture to say when this project first entered the mind of king Philip; whether he had the Hospitallers also in view, and whether he impelled the pope to invite the Masters of the two orders to France.

[p. 284]

As the rivalry and ill-feeling between the two orders had long been regarded as one of the principal causes of the little success of the Christians in the East, the idea of uniting them had been conceived, and Gregory X. and St. Louis had striven, but in vain, at the council at Lyons, to effect it. Pope Boniface VIII. had also been anxious to bring this project to bear, and Clement now resolved to attempt it. On the 6th June, 1306, only six months after his coronation, he wrote to the Masters of the two orders to the following effect;--The kings of Armenia and Cyprus were calling on him for aid; he therefore wished to confer with them, who knew the country well, and were so much interested in it, as to what were best to be done, and desired that they would come to him as secretly as possible, and with a very small train, as they would find plenty of their knights on this side of the sea; he directed them to provide for the defence of Limisso during their absence.

The Master of the Hospital, William de Villaret, was, when the letter arrived, engaged in the attack on Rhodes, and, therefore, could not obey the summons. But De Molay, the Master of the Temple, having confided Limisso and the direction of the order to the marshal, embarked with sixty of his most distinguished knights, taking with him the treasure of the order, consisting of 150,000 florins of gold, and so much silver, that the whole formed the lading of twelve horses. When they arrived in France, he proceeded to Paris, where the king received him with the greatest marks of favour and distinction, and he deposited the treasure in the Temple of that city. Shortly afterwards he set out for Poitiers, where he had an interview with Clement, who consulted him on the affairs of the East. On the subject of a new crusade, Molay gave it as his opinion that nothing but a simultaneous effort of all the Christian powers

[p. 285]

would be of any avail. He objected to the union of the orders on the following grounds, which were, on the whole, sufficiently frivolous. He said, 1st. That what is new is not always the best; that the orders, as they were, had done good service in Palestine, and, in short, used the good old argument of anti-reformists, It works well. 2dly. That as the orders were spiritual as well as temporal, and many a one had entered them for the weal of his soul, it might not be a matter of indifference to such to leave the one which he had selected and enter another. 3dly. There might be discord, as each order would want its own wealth and influence, and seek to gain the mastery for its own rules and discipline. 4thly. The Templars were generous of their goods, while the Hospitaliers were only anxious to accumulate--a difference which might produce dissension. 5thly. As the Templars received more gifts and support from the laity than the Hospitaliers, they would be the losers, or at least be envied by their associates. 6thly. There would probably be some disputing between the superiors about the appointment to the dignities in the new order. He however candidly acknowledged, that the new order would be stronger than the old one, and so more zealous to combat the infidels, and that many commanderies might be suppressed, and some saving effected thereby. Having thus delivered his sentiments, Molay took leave of the pope, and returned to Paris. Vague rumours of serious charges made, or to be made, against the order now beginning to prevail, Malay, accompanied by Rimbaud de Caron, preceptor of Outre-mer. Jeffrey de Goneville, preceptor of Aquitaine, and Hugh de Perando, preceptor of France, repaired once more to Poitiers, about April, 1307, to justify himself and the order in the eyes of the pope. Clement, we are told, informed them of the serious charges of

[p. 286]

the commission of various crimes which had been made against them; but they gave him such explanations as appeared to content him, and returned to Paris, satisfied that they had removed all doubts from his mind.

The following was the way in which the charges were made against the Templars.

There was lying in prison, at Paris or Toulouse, for some crime, a man named Squin de Flexian, a native of Beziers, who had been formerly a Templar, and prior of , but had been put out of the order for heresy and other offences. His companion in captivity was a Florentine, named Noffo Dei--"a man (says Villani) full of all iniquity." These two began to plan how they might best extricate themselves from their present hopeless state; and, as it would appear, aware of the king's dislike to the Templars, and hating them for having punished him for his crimes, Squin de Flexian resolved to accuse them of the most monstrous offences, and thus obtain his liberation. Accordingly, calling for the governor of the prison, he told him that he had a discovery to make to the king, which would be more for his advantage than the acquisition of a new kingdom, but that he would only reveal it to the king in person. Squin was immediately conveyed to Paris, and brought before the king, to whom he declared the crimes of the order; and some of the Templars were seized and examined by order of Philip.

Another account says that Squin Flexian and Noffo Dei, who were both degraded Templars, had been actively engaged in an insurrection of the people some time before, from which the king was obliged to take shelter in the Temple. They had been taken, and were lying in prison without any hope of their lives, when they hit on the plan of accusing their former associates. They were both set at liberty; but

[p. 287]

[paragraph continues] Squin was afterwards hanged, and Noffo Dei beheaded, as was said with little probability, by the Templars.

It is also said, that, about the same time, Cardinal Cantilupo, the pope's chamberlain, who had been in connexion with the Templars from his eleventh year, made some discoveries respecting it to his master.

The charges made by Squin Flexian against the order were as follows:--

1. Each Templar, on his admission, was sworn never to quit the order; and to further its interests, by right or by wrong.

2. The heads of the order are in secret alliance with the Saracens; and have more Mahommedan infidelity than Christian faith; in proof of which, they make every novice spit and trample on the cross of Christ, and blaspheme his faith in various ways.

3. The heads of the order are heretical, cruel, and sacrilegious men. Whenever any novice, on discovering the iniquity of the order, attempts to quit it, they put him to death, and bury him privately by night. They teach the women who are pregnant by them how to procure abortion, and secretly murder the new-born babes.

4. The Templars are infected with all the errors of the Fraticelli; they despise the pope and the authority of the. Church; they contemn the sacraments, especially those of penance and confession. They feign compliance with the rites of the Church merely to escape detection.

5. The superiors are addicted to the most infamous excesses of debauchery; to which, if any one expresses his repugnance, he is punished by perpetual captivity.

6. The temple-houses are the receptacles of every crime and abomination that can be committed.

7. The order labours to put the Holy Land into the hands of the Saracens; and favours them more than the Christians.

[p. 288]

8. The installation of the Master takes place inn secret, and few of the younger brethren are present at it; whence there is a strong suspicion that he denies the Christian faith or promises, or does something contrary to right.

9. Many statutes of the order are unlawful, profane, and contrary to the Christian religion; the members are, therefore, forbidden, under pain of perpetual confinement, to reveal them to any one.

10. No vice or crime committed for the honour or benefit of the order is held to be a sin.

Such were the charges brought against the order by the degraded prior of Montfaucon--charges in general absurd, or founded on gross exaggeration of some of the rules of the society. Others, still more incredible, were subsequently brought forward in the course of the examinations of witnesses.

Philip and his ministers, having now what they regarded as a plausible case against the Templars, prepared their measures in secret; and on the 12th September, 1307, sealed letters were sent to all the governors and royal officers throughout France, with orders to arm themselves on the 12th of the following month; and in the night to open the letters and act according to the instructions contained therein. The appointed day arrived; and, on the morning of Friday, the 13th October, nearly all the Templars throughout France saw themselves captives in the hands of their enemies. So well had Philip taken his measures, that his meditated victims were without suspicion; and, on the very eve of his arrest, Molay was chosen by the treacherous monarch to Le one of the four pall-bearers at the funeral of the Princess Catherine, wife of the Count of Valois.

The directions sent by the king to his officers had been to seize the persons and the goods of the Templars; to interrogate. torture, and obtain confessions

[p. 289]

from them; to promise pardon to those who confessed; and to menace those who denied.

On the day of the arrest of the Master and his knights, the king took possession of the Temple at Paris; and the Master and the preceptors of Aquitaine, France, and beyond sea, were sent prisoners to Corbeil. The following day the doctors of the University of Paris and several canons assembled with the royal ministers in the church of Notre Dame, and William de Nogaret, the chancellor, stated to them that the knights had been proceeded against on account of their heresies. On the 15th the University met in the Temple; and some of the heads of the order, particularly the Master, were examined, and are said to have made some confessions of the guilt of the order for the last forty years.

The king now published an act of accusation, conceived in no moderate or gentle terms. He calls the accused in it devouring wolves, a perfidious and idolatrous society, whose deeds, whose very words alone, are enough to pollute the earth and infect the air, &c. &c. The inhabitants of Paris were then assembled in the royal gardens; and the king's agents spoke, and some monks preached to them against the accused.

Philip, in his hostility to the order, would be content with nothing short of its utter ruin. Almost immediately after his coup d'etat of the 13th October, he despatched a priest, named Bernard Peletus, to his son-in-law, Edward II., king of England, inviting him to follow his example. Edward wrote, on the 30th of the same month, to say that the charges made against the Templars by Philip and his agent appeared to him, his barons, and his prelates, to be incredible; and that he would, therefore, summon the senechal of Agen, whence this rumour had proceeded, to inform him thereupon, before proceeding any farther.

[p. 290]

Clement had been at first offended at the hasty and arbitrary proceedings of the king of France against the Templars; but Philip easily managed to appease him; and on the 22d November the pope wrote to the king of England, assuring him that the Master of the Temple had spontaneously confessed that the brethren, on their admission, denied Christ; and that several of the brethren in different parts of France had acknowledged the idolatry and other crimes laid to the charge of the order; and that a knight of the highest and most honourable character, whom he had himself examined, had confessed the denial of Jesus Christ to be a part of the ceremony of admission. He therefore calls on the king to arrest all the Templars within his realms, and to place their lands and goods in safe custody, till their guilt or innocence should be ascertained.

Edward, in a letter, dated November 26, inquired particularly of .the senechal of Agen, in Guienne, respecting the charges against the Templars. On the 4th December he wrote to the kings of Portugal, Castile, Aragon, and Sicily, telling them of what he had heard, and adding that he had given no credit to it; and begging of them not to hearken to these rumours. On the 10th, evidently before he had received the bull, he wrote to the pope, stating his disbelief of what he had heard, and praying of his holiness to institute an inquiry. But when the papal bull, so strongly asserting the guilt of the order, arrived, the good-hearted king did not venture to refuse compliance with it; and he issued a writ on the 15th December, appointing the morn of Wednesday after Epiphany, in the following month, for seizing the Templars and their property, but directing them to be treated with all gentleness. Similar orders were forwarded to Scotland, Wales, and Ireland, on the 20th; and on the 26th he wrote to

[p. 291]

assure the pope that his mandates would be speedily obeyed. The arrests took place accordingly; and the Templars and their property were thus seized in the two countries in which they were most powerful [**].

The reluctance of the king of England and his parliament to proceed to any harsh measures against the Templars affords some presumption in their favour, and would incline us to believe that, had Philip been actuated by a similar love of justice, the order would not have been so cruelly treated in France. But Philip had resolved on the destruction of the society, and his privy councillors and favourites were not men who would seek to check him in his career of blood and spoliation. These men were William Imbert, his confessor, a Dominican monk, one of an order inured in Languedoc to blood, and deeply versed in all inquisitorial arts and practices; William Nogaret, his chancellor, the violator of the sanctity of the head of the church; William Plasian, who had shared in that daring deed, and afterwards sworn, in an assembly of the peers and prelates of France, that Boniface was an atheist and a sorcerer, and had a familiar demon. The whole order of the Dominicans also went heart and hand in the pious work of detecting and punishing the heretics. We must constantly bear in mind that the charges made against the Templars, if they may not all be classed under the term heresy, were all such as the Church was in the habit of making against those whom she persecuted as public heretics. And in this, Philip and his advisers acted wisely in their generation; for treason, or any other political charge, would have sounded dull and inefficient in the ears of the people, in comparison with the formidable word heresy.

Footnotes

^276:* The proceedings against the Templars have been published from the original documents by Mowdenhaler, in Germany; but the work has been bought up by the freemasons, who fancy themselves descended from the Templars, so that we have been unable to procure a copy of it. Wilike has, however, extracted largely from it.

^281:* Sismondi Republiques Italiennes, iv. p. 143.

^291:* The arrests were made in England in the same secret and sudden manner as in France. Rymer iii. 34, 43.

     
Secret Societies of the Middle Ages, by Thomas Keightley, [1837], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 292]

 

Click to enlarge
Philip le Bel.

 

[p. 293]

  

CHAPTER X.

Examination of the captive Knights--Different kinds of Torture--Causes of Confession--What Confessions were made--Templars brought before the Pope--Their Declarations--Papal Commission--Molay brought before it--Ponsard de Gisi--Defenders of the Order--Act of Accusation--Heads of Defence--Witnesses against the Order--Fifty-four Templars committed to the flames at Paris--Remarkable words of Aymeric de Villars-le-Duc--Templars burnt in other Places--Further Examinations--The Head worshipped by the Templars--John de Pollincourt--Peter de la Palu.

THE charge of conducting the inquiry against the society was committed by Philip, without asking or waiting for the Pope's approbation, to Imbert, who lost no time in proceeding to action. He wrote to all the inquisitors of his order, directing them to proceed against the Templars, as he had already done himself; and, in case of ascertaining the truth of the charges, to communicate it to the Minorite Friars, or some other order, that the people might take no offence at the procedure; and to send the declarations as soon as possible to the king and himself. They were to use no cruelty towards the prisoners; but, if necessary, they might employ the torture. On the 19th October, six days after their seizure, Imbert commenced his examinations at the Temple of Paris. One hundred and forty prisoners were examined; when, by promises and by the aid of the torture, confessions in abundance were procured. Thirty-six of . he knights expired under the gentle method employed

[p. 294]

to extract the truth from them. The zealous Imbert then proceeded to Bayeux, Metz, Toul, and Verdun; in all which places examinations were held and confessions extorted in the same way. It was, however, carefully stated in each deposition, that the witness had spoken without any constraint.

As our readers fortunately cannot be supposed familiarly acquainted with the mild and gentle modes employed by the brethren of St. Dominic, for eliciting the truth, we will present a slight sketch of some of them, that they may be able to form some idea of the value of rack-extorted testimony.

Sometimes the patient was stripped naked, his hands were tied behind his back, heavy weights were fastened to his feet, and the cord which confined his hands passed over a pulley. At a given signal he was hoisted into the air, where he hung suspended by his arms, which were thus drawn out of their natural position: then suddenly the cord would be let run, but checked before the patient reached the ground, and thus a tremendous shock given to his frame. Another mode of torture was to fasten the feet of the patient on an instrument, which prevented his drawing them back; they were then rubbed with some unctions substance, and set before a flaming fire; a board was occasionally placed between his feet and the fire, and withdrawn again, in order to increase his pain by intervals of cessation. The heel of the patient was at times enclosed in an iron heel, which could be tightened at pleasure, and thus caused excruciating pain. What was regarded as a very gentle mode, and only indulged to those who had not strength to undergo the preceding tortures, was to place round sticks between their fingers, and compress them till the bones of the fingers were cracked. The teeth of the Templars were occasionally drawn, their feet roasted, weights suspended

[p. 295]

from all parts of their bodies; and thus they gave their testimony without constraint!

What is understood as testimony or confession, by inquisitors, is an affirmative answer to such questions as they ask. They usually assume the guilt of the accused; and no witnesses for the defence are heard. It is useless to prove the absurdity and unreasonableness of the charges; for that would be impugning the sense and judgment of those who gave ear to them; and promises are always held out that, if full and free confession is made, the criminal will he gently dealt with. The accused is, moreover, always confined in a solitary cell; he has none to console and cheer him; he feels abandoned by the whole world;. conscious innocence is of no avail; his only hope is in the mercy of his judge. The Templars, we must recollect, were seized towards the commencement of winter; and at that season a dungeon of the middle ages must have been cheerless beyond description. They were barely allowed the necessaries of life; they were stripped of the habit of the order, and denied the consolations of religion, for they were treated as heretics; and they were shown a real or pretended letter of their Master, in which he confessed the crimes of the order, and exhorted them to do the same. Enthusiasts in religion or politics are supported by the consciousness of rectitude, and bear up against privations or torture in firm reliance on the favour of the Divinity, or the praise and esteem of a grateful and admiring posterity. But the great majority of the Templars were far from being such characters; they were illiterate knights, who had long lived in luxury and indulged in arrogance; they knew themselves to be objects of dislike to many, and felt that their power was gone. Need we then be surprised that, beguiled by the hopes held out, numbers of them readily acknowledged all the charges made

[p. 296]

against their order? and must we not so much the more admire the constancy of those who, unseduced by flattering hopes, and undismayed by menaces and torture, yielded up their breath rather than confess a falsehood?

At Paris the knights who confessed acknowledged the denial of Christ (this was the point which the inquisitors were most anxious to establish), but in an uncertain; contradictory manner. as what was said on one examination was retracted on another, or was enlarged or diminished. It was also confessed that an idol was adored in their chapters. At Nimes, in November, 1307, forty-five knights confessed the guilt of the order. They afterwards retracted; but in 1311 the torture made them revert to their original declaration. At Troyes two knights confessed everything that was required of them. At Pont de l'Arche seven confessed. These and six others were again examined at Caen; they terminated their declarations by imploring the mercy of the Church, and entreating with tears to be spared the torture. Those examined at Carcassonne all deposed to the worship of the image; but some of them afterwards retracted that admission, and died maintaining the innocence of the order. Six Templars at Bigorre [**] and seven at Cahors confessed; but several of them afterwards retracted.

Philip and his creatures were at this stage of their career, when the pope began to testify some little dissatisfaction at the irregularity of the proceedings. The king instantly wrote to upbraid him

[p. 297]

with his lukewarmness in the cause of religion. He stated that the bishops, who were his (the king's) helpers in the government of the Church, were the fittest persons to carry on the business, on account of their local knowledge; and added that neither he nor they could comply with the desires of the pope "he acted," he said, "as the servant of God, and must render to God his account." Clement could not venture to impede the pious labours of such a zealous servant of the Lord; he cancelled the bull which he had prepared on the subject, only requiring that each bishop's inquisitors should be confirmed by a provincial council, and that the examination of the heads of the order should be reserved for himself. Philip then condescended to offer to put the captives into the hands of the papal judges, and to devote the goods of the order to the profit of the Holy Land. The clergy declined taking charge of the knights, and the king and pope managed the property of the order in common.

In the beginning of the year 1308, we are told [**], the Master of the Templars, the preceptor of Cyprus, the visiter of France, and the great-priors of Aquitaine and Normandy, were brought before the pope at Chinon, where they voluntarily, and without the application of any torture, confessed the truth of the enormities laid to the charge of the order. They abjured their errors, and the cardinals implored the king in their favour.

M. Raynouard [*+], we know not on what authority, positively denies that the Master and his companions were ever brought before the pope. He says that, in the month of August following, they were on their way to Poitiers, in order to be examined by the pontiff

[p. 298]

in person; but that, under pretext of some)f them being sick, they were detained at Chinon, instead of being brought on to Poitiers, where the pope remained, and were finally conducted back to Paris without having seen him. He does not give the date of this occurrence, but it it would seem to have been in the following autumn.

The proceedings against the Templars were so manifestly contrary to the interest of the pope, that Philip deemed it necessary to keep a strict eye over him. Having, in May, 1308, convoked an assembly of the states at Tom's, and obtained from them a declaration of his right to punish notorious heretics without asking the consent of the pope, and in which he was called upon to act with rigour against the Templars, he proceeded with it himself to Poitiers, and presented it to Clement. During the negotiations which took place at that time, the pope attempted to make his escape to Bordeaux, but his baggage and his treasures were stopped by the king's orders at the gate of the town, and Clement remained in effect a prisoner.

While the supreme pontiff was thus in his power, Philip, who still remained at Poitiers, by way of removing all his scruples, had, on the 29th and 30th June, and 1st July, seventy-two of the Templars, who had confessed, brought before Clement and examined. As was to be expected, the greater part repeated their former declarations of the impiety, idolatry, and licentiousness of the order. From these depositions it appears clearly that the torture had been employed to extract the former confessions.

Pierre de Broel said that he had been stripped and put to the torture, but that he had said neither more nor less on that account. He added that those who tortured him were all drunk.

Guillaume de Haymes had not been tortured, but

[p. 299]

he had been kept a month in solitary confinement on bread and water before he made any confession.

Gerard de St. Martial, who confessed to having denied Christ, and spitten beside the cross, said that he had been cruelly tortured, being at first ashamed to acknowledge these facts, although they were true.

Deodat Jafet had been tortured, but it was the inspiration of God and the blessed Virgin Mary, and not the rack, which had made him confess. He acknowledged every crime imputed to the order. Speaking of the idol, he said, "I was alone in a chamber with the person who received me: he drew out of a box a head, or idol, which appeared to me to have three faces, and said, Thou shouldst adore it as thy Saviour and that of the order of the Temple. We then bent our two knees, and I cried, Blessed be he who will save my soul, and I worshipped it." Yet Jafet afterwards retracted this deposition, and stood forth as one of the defenders of the order.

Iter de Rochefort, though he said he had confessed, had been tortured repeatedly, with a view to extracting more from him. He declared that, having been received in the unlawful way, he had confessed himself to the patriarch of Jerusalem, who had wept bitterly at hearing of such wickedness. As Raynouard very justly observes, the patriarch, who could hardly be a friend to the Templars, was not very likely to content himself with shedding a few useless tears had the knowledge of such a heresy come to his ears.

Pierre de Conders had confessed at the sight of the rack.

Raymond de Stephani had been severely tortured at Carcassonne. Being asked why he did not then tell the truth, he replied, "Because I did not recollect it; but I prayed the senechal to allow me to

[p. 300]

confer with my companions, and when I had deliberated with them I recollected."

Who can give credit to depositions like these, most of which were subsequently revoked? Yet it was by these that the pope declared himself to be perfectly satisfied of the guilt of the order, and justified the rigorous measures which he authorized against it. Philip, we are to observe, was all this time at Poitiers: the prisoners were examined before the cardinals, and only those who had not retracted their former rack-extorted confessions were produced in the large concourse of nobles, clergy, and people assembled on this occasion [**].

Clement and Philip now arranged the convocation of an oecumenic council at Vienne, to pronounce the abolition of the order. The pope also appointed a commission to take at Paris a juridical information against it; and, on the 1st August, he authorised the bishops and his delegates to proceed in their inquiries. On the 12th August, by the bull Faciens misericordiam, after asserting the guilt of the order, he called upon all princes and prelates throughout the Christian world to assist him in making inquiry into this affair.

The commission appointed by the pope was composed of the archbishop of Narbonne, the bishops of Bayeux, Mende, and Limoges; Matthew of Naples, archdeacon of Rouen, notary of the Holy See; John of Mantua, archdeacon of Trent; John of Montlaur, archdeacon of Maguelone; and William Agelin, provost of Aix, which last was prevented by business from giving attendance. They entered on their functions on the 7th August, 1309, and ordered that the brethren of the Temple should be cited before them on the first day of business after the festival of

[p. 301]

[paragraph continues] St. Martin, in November. The citations were to be published in presence of the people and clergy in the cathedrals, churches, and schools, in the principal houses of the order, and in the prisons in which the knights were confined. No one appearing, new citations were issued; and at length the Bishop of Paris was called on by the commission to go himself to the prison where the Master and the heads of the order were confined, and notify it to them. Having done so, he caused the same notification to be made throughout his diocese. The following circumstance, which, occurred at this time, would seem to indicate that impediments were thrown in the way of those who were disposed to defend the order by the royal ministers. The commissioners were informed that the governor of the Chatelet had arrested and imprisoned some persons who were presumed to have come to defend the order. The governor being summoned before them, declared that, by order of the ministers, he had arrested seven persons who were denounced as being Templars in a lay habit, who had come to Paris with money in order to procure advocates and defenders for the accused. He acknowledged that he had put them to the torture, but said that he did not believe them to be Templars.

On Wednesday, Nov. 26, the commission sat, and Molay, the Master of the Temple, was brought before it. He was asked if he would defend the order, or speak for himself. He replied by expressing his surprise that the Church should proceed with such precipitation in this case, when the sentence relative to the Emperor Frederic had been suspended for thirty-two years. Though he had neither knowledge nor talent sufficient to defend the order, he should consider himself vile in his own eyes, and in those of others, if he hesitated to do so; but being the

[p. 302]

prisoner of the king and the pope, and without money, he asked for aid and counsel.

The commissioners desired him to reflect on ms offer, and to consider the confessions respecting himself and the order which he had made. They agreed, however, to give him time; and, that he might not be ignorant of what was alleged against him, had the documents containing their powers read to him in the vulgar language.

During the reading of the letters which recited his confession made to the cardinals at Chinon, he crossed himself repeatedly, and gave other signs of indignation and surprise, and said, that, were it not for the respect due to the envoys of the pope, he should express himself differently. They said they were not come there to receive challenges. He replied that he spoke not of cartels, he only wished they acted in this case as the Saracens and Tartars did, who cut off the head and cut the body in two of those who were found to he guilty.

Two circumstances are worthy of note in this examination; one, that William Plasian was present at it, and, as the commissioners expressly declared, without being invited by them; the other, that the confessions, which were imputed to Molay, and which he evidently intimated to be false, were inserted in the bull Faciens misericordiam, which bears the date of the 12th August, although the festival of the Assumption, that is the 16th of August, is given as the day on which they were made [**]. It was there declared that the heads of the order had confessed and been absolved; yet here we find the

[p. 303]

[paragraph continues] Master treated as a heretic who was still unreconciled.

The following day (Nov. 27), Ponsard de Gisi, prior of Payens, appeared before the commission, On being asked if he would defend the order, he replied, "Yes; the imputations cast on us of denying Christ, of spitting on the cross, of authorising infamous crimes, and all such accusations, are false. If I, myself, or other knights, have made confessions before the bishop of Paris, or elsewhere, we have betrayed the truth--we have yielded to fear, to danger, to violence. We were tortured by Flexien de Beziers, prior of Montfaucon, and the monk William Robert, our enemies. Several of the prisoners had agreed among themselves to make these confessions, in order to escape death, and because thirty-six knights had died at Paris, and a great number in other places, under the torture. As for me, I am ready to defend the order in my own name, and in the names of those who will make common cause with me, if I am assigned out of the goods of the order as much as will defray the needful expense, I require to be granted the counsel of Raynaud of Orleans and of Peter of Bologna, priests of the order." He was asked if he had been tortured. He replied that he had, three months before he made his confession.

Next day the Master was brought up again. He demanded to be brought before the pope, appealed to the valour and charity of the Templars, and their zeal in adorning churches, in proof of their piety, and made an orthodox confession of his own faith. Nogaret, who was present, then observed, that it was related in the chronicles of St. Denis that the Master of the order had done homage to Saladin; and that the sultan had ascribed their ill fortune to their secret vices and impiety. Molay declared that he

[p. 304]

had never heard of such calumnies; and gave an instance of the prudence and good faith of a former Master, when himself and some other young men wanted him to break a truce. Molay concluded by praying the chancellor and the commissioners to procure him the favour of hearing mass, and being attended by his chaplains.

Orders having been given that all the Templars who were desirous to undertake the defence of the order should be conveyed to Paris, they were brought thither strongly guarded. The commission then renewed its sittings. As the prisoners were successively brought before it, they, with few exceptions, declared their readiness to defend their order--till death, cried some; till the end, cried others; because I wish to save my soul, added one. Bertrand de St. Paul declared that he never did, and never would, confess the guilt of the order, because it was not true; and that he believed that God would work a miracle if the body of Christ was administered to those who confessed and those who denied. Seven of those who had been examined before the pope, and had confessed, now declared that they had lied, and revoked what they then said. John de Valgelle maintained that he had made no confession on that occasion. "I was tortured so much, and held so long before a burning fire," said Bernard de Vado, "that the flesh of my heels was burnt, and these two bones (which he showed) came off"

In the course of these examinations, a Templar, named Laurent de Beaune, showed a letter with the seals of Philip de Voet and John Jainville, the persons set by the pope and king over the prisoners, addressed to the Templars confined at Sens, inviting them to confess what was required, and declaring that the pope had given orders that those who did not persevere in their confessions should be committed to

[p. 305]

the flames. Philip de Voet, on being interrogated, said that he did not believe that he had sent that letter; his seal had often lain in the hands of his secretary; he had always advised the prisoners to speak the truth. Jainville was not examined, neither was John Carpini, the bearer of the letter. De Beaune was one of the first afterwards committed to the flames; the supposition is natural, that the letter was a stratagem of the king and his ministers.

The Master having been again brought before the commissioners, and having renewed his demand of being sent to the pope, they promised to write to the pope on the subject, but there is no proof of their having done so.

On the 28th March all the Templars who had expressed their willingness to defend the order were assembled in the garden of the bishop's palace. Their number was 546. The Master was not among them. The articles of accusation were then read over to them in Latin; the commissioners ordered that they should be read again to them in the vulgar tongue, but the knights all cried out that it was enough, they did not desire that such abominations, which were false and not to be named, should be repeated in the vulgar language. Again, they complained of the deprivation of their religious habits and the sacraments of the church, and desired that the Master and the heads of the order should be called thither also. But this reasonable request was not complied with. In vain the Master demanded to be brought before the pope; in vain the knights required to be permitted to enjoy the presence of their chief. Neither the one nor the other suited the interest or the designs of the king.

The number of the Templars in Paris soon amounted to near 900. The commissioners were desirous that

[p. 306]

they should appoint agents to manage their defence; but this they declined to do, some alleging that they could not do so without the consent of their chief, others insisting on defending the order in person. At length, after a great deal of argument and deliberation, seventy-five Templars were chosen to draw up the defence of the order; and the priests of the order, Raynaud de Pruino and Peter of Bologna, and the knights, William de Chambonnet and Bertrand de Sartiges, were appointed to be present at the deposition of the witnesses.

The act of accusation against the Templars, drawn up in the name of the pope, ran thus. At the time of their reception they were made to deny God, Christ, the Virgin, &c.; in particular to declare that Christ was not the true God, but a false prophet, who had been crucified for his own crimes, and not for the redemption of the world. They spat and trampled on the cross, especially on Good Friday. They worshipped a cat which sometimes appeared in their chapters. Their priests, when celebrating mass, did not pronounce the words of consecration. They believed that their Master could absolve them from their sins. They were told at their reception that they might abandon themselves to all kinds of licentiousness. They had idols in all their provinces, some with three faces, some with one. They worshipped these idols in their chapters, believed that they could save them, regarded them as the givers of wealth to the order, and of fertility to the earth; they touched them with cords which they afterwards tied round their own bodies. Those who at the time of their reception would not comply with these practices were put to death or imprisoned. All this, it was stated, took place according to the statutes of the order; it was a general and ancient custom, and

[p. 307]

there was no other mode of reception. The act of accusation stated farther that the Templars stopped at no means of enriching the order [**].

The Templars, in their reply, asserted that all these imputations were false, and that if any of them had confessed them, they had done so under terror and violence, thirty-six having expired by torture at Paris and several others elsewhere. The forms of law had been violated with respect to them; to obtain from them false depositions letters of the king had been shown them declaring that the order had been condemned irrevocably, and offering life, liberty, and pensions, to those who would depose falsely. "All these facts, said they, are so public and so notorious that there are no means or pretexts for disavowing them." The heads of accusation were nothing but falsehoods and absurdities, and the bull contained nothing but horrible, detestable, and iniquitous falsehoods. Their order was pure, and if their statutes were consulted they would be found to be the same for all Templars and for all countries. Their belief was that of the Church; parents brought their children, brothers each other, uncles their nephews, into the order, because it was pure and holy. When in captivity to the infidels, the Templars died sooner than renounce their religion. They declared their readiness to defend their innocence in every way, and against every person except the pope and the king, demanded to be brought personally before the general council, required that those who had quitted the order and deposed against it should be

[p. 308]

kept in close custody till their truth or falsehood should be ascertained, and that no layman should be present to intimidate the accused when under examination. The knight, they maintained, had been struck with such terror, that the false confessions made by some were less matter of surprise than the courage of those who maintained the truth was of admiration. Inquire, said they, of those who were present at the last moments of the knights who died in prison; let their confessions be revealed, and it will be seen if the accusations are true. Is it not strange, asked they in conclusion, that more credit should be given to the lies of those who yielded to tortures or to promises than to the asseverations of those who, in defence of the truth, have died with the palm of martyrdom--of the sound majority of those knights who have suffered and still suffer so much for conscience' sake?

On the 11th April, 1310, the hearing of the witnesses against the order commenced. Only twenty-one were produced, two of whom did not belong to the order, the others being principally those who had persisted in their declarations before the pope. As might be expected, all the crimes laid to the charge of the order in the papal bull were again deposed to by these men; but the commission had only got as far as the examination of the thirteenth witness when the impatience of the king manifested itself in a barbarous and illegal act, which had apparently long been meditated.

The Archbishop of Sens, whose suffragan the Bishop of Paris was, had died about Easter, 1309, and the pope had reserved the nomination to himself. Philip wrote to him requiring of him to nominate Philip de Marigny, Bishop of Cambray, brother to Enquerrand, his prime minister, alleging that his youth was no just impediment, and that his acts

[p. 309]

would prove how much he was beyond his age. The pope, though very reluctant, was obliged to consent, and in April, 1310, Marigny was installed. No time was now lost in proceeding to operation. On Sunday, May 10, the four defenders of the order learned that the provincial council of Sens was convoked at Paris in order to proceed against the knights individually. They took alarm, and applied to the commission, which, though it did not sit on Sundays, assembled, and Peter of Bologna informed them of what he had heard. He begged that they would suffer him to read an appeal which he had drawn up. This they declined doing, but said that, if he had any defence of the order to give in, they would receive it. He forthwith laid down a written paper, stating the danger which the prisoners were in dread of, appealing to the holy see, and entreating the commission to stop the proceedings of the archbishop and his suffragans. The defenders of the order then retired, and the further consideration of the affair was put off till after vespers, when they re-appeared and gave in an address to the Archbishop of Sens, containing an appeal to the pope. The commissioners, however, declined interfering for the present.

It is to be noticed that the defenders of the order prayed on this occasion of the commission to nominate one or more of its notaries to draw up their act of defence, because they could find no notary who would act for them, owing probably to fear of the royal displeasure, or to the want of funds by the accused.

On Monday and Tuesday two more of the witnesses were heard. One of them named Humbert de Puy declared that, having refused to acknowledge the crimes laid to the charge of the order, he had been tortured three times and kept for thirty-six weeks on bread and water in the bottom of an inected tower, by order of John de Jainville.

[p. 310]

While thus engaged, the commissioners learned to their dismay that the council was about to commit to the flames fifty-four of the knights who had stepped forth as the defenders of the order. They instantly sent one of their notaries and one of the keepers of the prison of the Templars to entreat the archbishop to act with caution, as there were strong reasons for doubting the truth of the charges; and representing that the witnesses were so terrified at what they had heard of the intentions of the council, that they were incapable of giving their evidence; that moreover the Templars had delivered in an appeal to the pope.

The archbishop, who was paying the price of his elevation to a hard creditor, was not to be stopped by these considerations. He was making short work of the business. On the Monday he had a number of those who had undertaken the defence of the order brought before the council, and he interrogated them once more himself. Those of them who, having confessed, had afterwards retracted, and now persisted in their retractation, were declared to be relapsed heretics, and were delivered over to the secular arm and condemned to the flames; those who, had not confessed, and would not, were sentenced to imprisonment as unreconciled Templars; those who persisted in their confession of the enormities laid to the charge of the order were set at liberty, and called reconciled Templars.

The next morning the fifty-four Templars who had been declared relapsed were taken from their prison, placed in carts, and conducted to the place of execution, where they beheld the piles prepared, and the executioners standing with flaming torches in their hands. An envoy from the court was present, who proclaimed liberty and the royal favour for those who would even then retract their declarations

[p. 311]

and confess the guilt of the order. The friends and relatives of the unhappy victims crowded round them, with tears and prayers, imploring of them to make the required acknowledgment and save their lives. In vain. These gallant knights, who, yielding to the anguish of torture, and worn down by solitude and privations, had confessed to the truth of the most absurd charges, now that they beheld the certain limit of their sufferings, disdained to purchase by falsehood a prolongation of life to be spent in infamy and contempt. With one voice they re-asserted their own innocence and that of their order. They called on God, the Virgin, and all the saints to aid and support them, raised the hymn of death, and expired amidst the tears and commiseration of the by-standers.

Felons convicted on the clearest evidence will, as is well known, die asserting their innocence; but this is when they have no hope of escape remaining. Here life and liberty were offered, and the victims were implored by those whom they most loved to accept of them. May we not then assert that the men who resisted all solicitations were sincere and spoke the truth, and were supported by their confidence of being received as martyrs by that God whom they devoutly adored according to the doctrines of their church?

On Wednesday, Aymeric de Villars-le-Duc, aged about fifty years, was brought before the commissioners. He was quite pallid, and seemed terrified beyond measure. On the articles to which he was to depose being explained to him, he asseverated in the strongest manner his resolution to speak the truth; then striking his breast with his clenched hands, he bent his knees, and stretching his hands towards the altar, spake these memorable words:--

"I persist in maintaining that the errors imputed to the Templars are absolutely false, though I have

[p. 312]

confessed some of them myself, overcome by the tortures which G. de Marcillac and Hugh de Celle, the king's knights, ordered to be inflicted on me. I have seen the fifty-four knights led in carts to be committed to the flames because they would not make the confessions which were required of them. I have heard that they were burnt; and I doubt if I could, like them, have had the noble constancy to brave the terrors of the pile. I believe that, if I were threatened with it, I should depose on oath before the commission, and before any other persons who should interrogate me, that these same errors imputed to the order are true. I would kill God himself if it was required of me."

He then earnestly implored the commissioners and the notaries who were present not to reveal to the king's officers, and to the keepers of the Templars, the words which had escaped him, lest they should deliver him also to the flames.

Ought not these simple honest words, the very accents of truth, to prevail with us against all the confessions procured by torture, or by promises or threats, and satisfy us as to their value?

The commissioners, whose conduct throughout the whole affair was regulated by humanity and justice, declared that the evening before one of the witnesses had come to them and implored of them to keep his deposition secret, on account of the danger which he ran if it should be known; and, judging that in their present state of terror it would not be just to hear the witnesses, they deliberated on proroguing their session to a future period.

We thus see that even the papal commission could not protect against the king such of the witnesses as were honest and bold enough to maintain the innocence of the order. Strict justice was therefore out of the question, Philip would have the order guilty

[p. 313]

of the most incredible crimes, and death awaited the witness who did not depose as he wished. Meantime his agents were busily engaged in tampering with the prisoners; and by threats and promises they prevailed on forty-four of them to give up their design of defending the order.

On the 21st May the commissioners met, in the absence of the Archbishop of Narbonne and the Archdeacon of Trent, and, declaring their labours suspended for the present, adjourned to the 3d November.

In the interval the conduct of the council of Sens had been imitated in other provinces. The Archbishop of Rheims held a council at Senlis, by whose sentence nine Templars were committed to the flames. Another council was held at Pont-de-l'Arche by the Archbishop of Rouen, and several knights were burnt. The Bishop of Carcassonne presided at a council which delivered many victims to the secular arm. On the 18th August the Archbishop of Sens held a second council, and burned four knights. Thibault, Duke of Lorraine, the close friend of King Philip, put many Templars to death, and seized the property of the order.

On the 3d November three of the papal commissioners met at Paris: they asked if any one wished to defend the order of the Templars. No one appearing they adjourned to the 27th December. On resuming their sittings they called on William de Chambonnet and Bertrand de Sartiges to give their presence at the hearing of the witnesses. These knights required the presence of Raynaud de Pruino and Peter of Bologna, but were informed that these priests had solemnly and voluntarily renounced the defence of the order, and revoked their retractations; that the latter had escaped from his prison and fled, and that the former could not be admitted to defend the order

[p. 314]

as he had been degraded at the council of Sens The knights reiterated their refusal and retired. The commissioners then proceeded in their labours without them, and continued the examination of witnesses till the 26th May, 1311.

The whole number of persons examined before the  amounted to 231, for the far greater part serving-brethren. Of these about two-thirds acknowledged the truth of the principal charges against the order. The denial of Christ and spitting on the cross were very generally confessed, but many said they had spitten beside it, not on it, and also that they had denied God with their lips, not with their hearts.

With respect to the head which the Templars were said to worship, as it was of some importance to prove this offence, in order to make out the charge of heresy, it was testified to by a few. Some said it was like that of a man with a long white beard, others that it was like that of a woman, and that it was said to be the head of one of the 11,000 virgins. One witness gave the following account of it, which he said he had had from a secular knight at Limisso, in Cyprus.

A certain nobleman was passionately in love with a maiden. Being unable, however, to overcome her repugnance to him, he took her body, when she was dead, out of her grave, and cut off her head, and while thus engaged he heard a voice crying--Keep it safe, whatever looks on it will be destroyed. He did as desired, and made the first trial of it on the Grissons, an Arab tribe, which dwelt in Cyprus and the neighbouring country, and whenever he uncovered the head and turned it towards any of their towns, its walls instantly fell down. He next embarked with the head for Constantinople, being resolved to destroy that city also. On the way his nurse, out of curiosity, opened the box which contained

[p. 315]

the head. Instantly there came on a terrific storm, the ship went to pieces, and nearly all who were on board perished. The very fish vanished from that part of the sea.

Another of the witnesses had heard the same story. The common tradition of the East, he said, was, that in old times, before the two spiritual orders of knighthood were founded, a head used to rise in a certain whirlpool named Setalia, the appearance of which was very dangerous for the ships which happened to be near it. We are to suppose, though it does not appear that the witnesses said so, that the Templars had contrived to get possession of this formidable head.

We are to observe that the witnesses who thus deposed had been picked and culled in all parts of France, by the king's officers, out of those who had confessed before the different prelates and provincial councils, and who were, by threats and promises, engaged to persist in what they had said. The terror they were under was visible in their countenances, their words, and their actions. Many of them began by saying that they would not vary from what they had deposed before such a bishop or such a council; yet even among these some were bold enough to revoke their confessions, declaring that they had been drawn from them by torture, and asserted the innocence of the order. Others retracted their confessions when brought before the commissioners, but shortly afterwards, having probably in the interval been well menaced or tortured by the king's officers, returned and retracted their retractation.

The case of John de Pollencourt, the thirty-seventh witness, is a remarkable instance. He began in the usual way, by declaring that he would persist in his confession made before the Bishop of Amiens, touching the denial of Christ, &c. The commissioners, observing his paleness and agitation, told him to tell

[p. 316]

the truth and save his soul, and not to persist in his confession if it had not been sincere, assuring him that neither they nor their notaries would reveal any thing that he said. After a pause he replied:--

"I declare then, on peril of my soul, and on the oath which I have taken, that, at the time of my reception, I neither denied God nor spat upon the cross, nor committed any of the indecencies of which we are accused, and was not required so to do. It is true that I have made confusions before the inquisitors; but it was through the fear of death, and because Giles de Rotangi had, with tears, said to me, and many others who were with me in prison at Montreuil, that we should pay for it with our lives, if we did not assist by our confessions to destroy the order. I yielded, and afterwards I wished to confess myself to the Bishop of Amiens; he referred me to a Minorite friar; I accused myself of this falsehood, and obtained absolution, on condition that I would make no more false depositions in this affair. I tell you the truth; I persist in attesting it before you; come what may of it, I prefer my soul to my body."

Nothing can bear more plainly the character of truth than this declaration; yet three days afterwards the witness came back, revoked it all, spoke of the cat which used to appear in the chapters, and said that, if the order had not been abolished, he would have quitted it. Had he not been well menaced and tortured in the interim?

The examination of Peter de la Palu, a bachelor in theology of the order of the preachers, the 201st witness, brought from him these remarkable words: "I have been present at the examination of several Templars, some of whom confessed many of the things contained in the said articles, and some others totally denied them; and for many reasons it appeared to me that greater credit was to be given to those who denied than to those who confessed."

Footnotes

^296:* In the church of the romantic hamlet of Gavarnie, a few leagues from Bareges, on the road to Spain, in the heart of the Hautes Pyrenees, are shown twelve skulls, which are said to have been those of Templars who were beheaded in that place. The tradition is, .in all probability, incorrect; but the Templars had possessions in Bigorre.

^297:* This is mentioned in a private letter from Clement to Philip, of the 30th December, 1308.

^297:+ Monumens Historiques, &c. p. 46.

^300:* Raynouard, p. 253.

^302:* Raynouard, 61. This circumstance was first remarked by Fleury, Hist. Eccles., lib. xci. Yet it seems hardly credible  the pope and his secretaries could have made so gross a mistake.

^307:* All these crimes had been acknowledged by various members of the order. Yet what can be more improbable than the worship of the cat for instance? This charge, by the way, had already been made against the sect of the Cathari, who were said to have derived their name a catta:--rather their name gave origin to the invention.

     
Secret Societies of the Middle Ages, by Thomas Keightley, [1837], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 317]

  

CHAPTER XI.

Examinations in England--Germany--Spain--Italy--Naples and Provence--Sicily--Cyprus--Meeting of the Council of Vienne--Suppression of the order--Fate of its Members--Death of Molay.

THE time fixed for the meeting of the council at Vienne was now at hand, in which the fate of the order was to be decided. Before we proceed to narrate its acts we will briefly state the result of the examinations of the Templars in other countries.

The pope sent, as his judges, to England, Dieudonne, abbot of Lagny, and Sicard de Vaux, canon of Narbonne; and the examinations commenced at York, London, Lincoln, and other places, on the 25th November, 1309. The inquiry continued till the council held in London in 1311; the number of Templars examined was two hundred and twenty-eight; that of the witnesses against the order was seventy-two, almost all Carmelites, Minorites, Dominicans, and Augustinians, the natural foes of the order. The Templars were treated with great mildness; and in England, Ireland, and Scotland, they were unanimous and constant in their assertion of the innocence of the order. The evidence against the order was almost all hearsay: its nature will be shown by the following specimens.

John de Goderai, a Minorite, had heard that Robert de Raxat, a Templar, had once gone about a meadow crying "Wo, wo is me! that ever I was born. I have been forced to deny God, and give myself up to the devil."

[p. 318]

A Templar had said to William de Berney, in the presence of several respectable people, at the funeral of the parish-priest of Duxworth, near Cambridge, that a man has no more a soul, after death, than a dog.

John De Eure, a secular knight, said that he once invited the prior William de Fenne to dine with him. After dinner the prior took from his bosom a book, and gave it to the knight's lady to read. She found on a paper which was fastened into the book the following words, "Christ was not the Son of God, nor born of a virgin, but conceived by Mary, the wife of Joseph, in the same way as all other men. Christ was not a true but a false prophet, and was crucified for his own crimes and not for the redemption of mankind, &c." The lady showed this paper to her husband, who spoke to the prior, who only laughed at it; but, being brought before a court of justice, he confessed the truth, excusing himself on the grounds of his being illiterate and ignorant of what the book contained.

Robert of Oteringham, a Minorite, said, "One evening my prior did not appear at table, as relics were come from Palestine which he wished to show the brethren. About midnight I heard a confused noise in the chapel; I got up, and, looking through the keyhole, saw that it was lighted. In the morning I asked a brother who was the saint in whose honour they had celebrated the festival during the night? He turned pale with terror, thinking I had seen something, and said "Ask me not; and if you value your life say nothing of it before the superiors."

Another witness said that the son of a Templar had peeped through the slits of the door into the chapter-room, and seen a new member put to death for hesitating to deny Christ. Long afterwards,

[p. 319]

being asked by his father to become a Templar, he refused, telling what he had seen: his father instantly slew him.

John of Gertia, a Minorite, was told by a woman named Agnes Lovecote, who said she had it from Exvalethus, prior in London, that when in one of the chapters a brother had refused to spit on the cross, they suspended him in a well and covered it up. This witness also deposed to some other enormities which he said he had heard of from the same woman, herself speaking from hearsay.

In June, 1310, the pope wrote to King Edward, blaming his lenity and calling on him to employ the torture in order to elicit the truth. The council of London, after a long discussion, ordered it to be employed, but so as not to mutilate the limbs or cause an incurable wound or violent effusion of blood. The knights persisted in asserting their innocence.

In Germany the different prelates examined the Templars in their respective dioceses. Nothing was elicited. At Mentz the order was pronounced innocent. The Wildgraf Frederic, preceptor on the Rhine, offered to undergo the ordeal of glowing iron. He had known the Master intimately in the East, and believed him to be as good a Christian as any man.

The Templars in the Spanish peninsula were examined, and witnesses heard for and against them in Castile, Leon, Aragon, and Portugal, and nothing was proved against them. The council of Tarragona in Aragon, after applying the torture, pronounced the order free from the stain of heresy. At the council of Medina del Campo in Leon, one witness said that he had heard that, when some Minorites visited the preceptor at Villalpando, they found him reading a little book, which he instantly locked up in three boxes, saying, "This book might fall

[p. 320]

into hands where it may be very dangerous to the order."

The influence of the pope may be supposed to have been stronger in Italy than in the countries above mentioned, and accordingly we find that declarations similar to those made in France were given there. Yet it was at Florence that the adoration of the idols, the cat, &c., was most fully acknowledged. In the patrimony of St. Peter some confessions to the same effect were made; but at Bologna, Cesena, and Ancona, nothing transpired. Nine Templars maintained the innocence of the order before the council of Ravenna. It was debated whether the torture should be employed. Two Dominican inquisitors were for it, the remainder of the council declared against it. It was decreed that the innocent should be absolved, the guilty punished according to law. Those who had revoked the confessions made under torture, or through fear of it, were to be regarded as innocent--a very different rule from that acted on by King Philip.

Charles II. of Anjou, the relation of King Philip, and the enemy of the Templars, who were on the side of Frederick, king of Sicily, had the Templars seized and examined in Provence and Naples. Those examined in Provence were all serving-brethren, and some of them testified to the impiety and idolatry of the order. Two Templars were examined at Brindisi, in the kingdom of Naples, in June, 1310; one had denied the cross in Cyprus, he said, six years after he had entered the order; the other had trampled on the cross at the time of his reception. He, as well as others, had bowed down and worshipped a grey cat in the chapters.

In Sicily six Templars, the only ones who were arrested, deposed against the order. One of them said he had been received in the unlawful way in

[p. 321]

[paragraph continues] Catalonia, where, as we have just seen, the innocence of the order was fully recognized. His evidence was full of absurdity. He said the cat had not appeared for a long time in the chapters but that the ancient statutes of Damietta said that it used to appear and be worshipped.

In Cyprus 110 witnesses were examined; 75 belonged to the order and maintained its innocence; the testimony of the remainder was also in favour of it.

We thus find that, in every place beyond the sphere of the influence of the king of France and his creature the pope, the innocence of the order was maintained and acknowledged.; and undoubtedly the same would have been the case in France if the proceedings against it had been regulated by justice and the love of truth.

The time appointed for the meeting of the general council was now arrived. On the 1st October, 1311, the pope came to Vienne, which is a short distance from the city of Lyons, and found there 114 bishops, besides several other prelates, already assembled. On the 13th, the anniversary of the arrest of the Templars four years before, the council commenced its sittings in the cathedral. The pope, in his opening speech, stated the grounds of its having been convoked, namely, the process against the Templars, the support of the Holy Land, the reformation of the Church. The bishops of Soissons, Mende, Leon, and Aquila, who had been appointed to draw up a report of the result of the different examinations respecting the order, read it before the assembled fathers, who then once more invited any Templars who wished to defend the order to appear.

Though the order was now broken up and persecuted, and numbers of its ablest members deal or languishing in dungeons with their superiors, yet

[p. 322]

nine knights had the courage to come forward in defence of their order, and present themselves before the council as the representatives of from 1500 to 2000 Templars, who were still dwelling or rather lurking in Lyons and its vicinity. The pope was not present when they appeared, but his letter of the 11th November shows how he acted when he heard that defenders of the order had presented themselves. Clement had these brave knights arrested and thrown into prison, and, in real or affected terror at the number of Templars at large, he took additional precautions for the security of his person, and counselled the king to do the same.

To the honour of the assembled fathers, they refused to sanction this flagrant act of injustice. The prelates of Spain, Germany, Denmark, England, Ireland, and Scotland, without exception; the Italians, all but one; the French, with the exception of the archbishops of Rheims, Sens, and Rouen, declared, but in vain, for admitting the Templars and hearing their defence. Instead of complying with this demand of justice and humanity, Clement suddenly put an end to the session. The winter passed away in arguments and negociations.

Philip, whose practice it was always to look after his affairs himself, deeming his presence necessary at Vienne, set out for that place, where he arrived early in February, accompanied by his three sons, his brother, and several nobles and men-at-arms. The effect of his presence was soon perceptible; the pope assembled the cardinals and several other prelates in a secret consistory, and abolished the order, by his sole authority, on the 22nd March, 1313.

The second session of the council was opened on the 3rd April, with great solemnity; the king of France, his sons, and his brother, gave their presence at it, and the royal guards appeared for honour,

[p. 323]

for protection, or for intimidation. The pope read his bull of abolition. All present listened in silence. No one ventured to raise his voice in the cause of justice. The wealthy and powerful order of the knights of the Temple was suppressed. On the 2d May the bull was published, and the order as such ceased to exist.

The order being suppressed, persecution became needless, and it consequently ceased in a great measure. The king and the pope converted to their own use the moveable property of the order in France. Its other possessions were, sorely against the will of the king, assigned to the order of the Hospitaliers, who were, however, obliged to pay such large fines to the king and pope as completely impoverished them. This extended to all countries, except the Spanish peninsula and Majorca. The property of the Templars in Aragon was given to the order of Our Lady of Montesa, which was founded in 1317. Its destination was to combat the Moors; its habit was similar to that of the Templars; and it might, therefore, be almost called the same order. Diniz, the able and enlightened king of Portugal, did not suppress the order, whose innocence his prelates had recognised. To yield a show of obedience to the papal will, he made it change its name, and the great-prior of the Templars in Portugal became the master of the Order of Christ, which has continued to the present times.

With respect to the remaining Templars, who were in prison, it was ordered in council that those who should be found guiltless should be set at liberty, and maintained out of the property of the order; that the guilty, if they confessed and lamented their offences, should be treated with mildness; if they did not, dealt with according to the ecclesiastical law, and kept in custody in the former temple-houses

[p. 324]

and in the convents. Those who had escaped were, if they did not appear within a year before the council or their diocesan, to be excommunicated.

Most of the knights were immediately set at liberty; but the property of the order was all gone, and no means of support remained for them: they were, therefore, reduced to the greatest distress, and many of them obliged to submit to the most menial employment in order to gain a livelihood. A great number were received into the order of St. John, on the same footing as they had stood on in their own order--a strong proof that the guilt of the order of the Templars was not, by any means, regarded as proved. Gradually, as the members died off, or merged into other orders, the name of the Templars fell into oblivion, or was only recollected with pity for their unmerited fate.

While the noble order over which he had presided was thus suppressed, its members scattered, its property bestowed on others, the Master, James de Molay, with his three companions, the great-prior of Normandy, Hugh de Peyraud, visiter of France, and Guy, brother to the Dauphin of Auvergne, still languished in prison. Molay had there but one attendant, his cook; the allowance made to him was barely sufficient to procure him common necessaries, and life had now lost all its value in his eyes. The pope at length determined to inform the captives of the fate destined for them.

A papal commission, composed of the bishop of Alba and two other cardinals, proceeded to Paris, not to hear the prisoners, but, taking their guilt for proved, to pronounce their sentence. To give all publicity to this act, probably in accordance with the desire of the king, a stage was erected in front of the church of Notre Dame, on which the three commissioners, with the archbishop of Sens and several other prelates,

[p. 325]

took their places, on the 18th March, 1314. An immense concourse of people stood around. The four noble prisoners were conducted from their dungeons, and led up on the stage. The cardinal of Alba read out their former confessions, and pronounced the sentence of perpetual imprisonment. He was then proceeding to expose the guilt of the order, when the Master interrupted him, and thus spoke, taking all the spectators to witness:--

"It is just that, in so terrible a day, and in the last moments of my life, I should discover all the iniquity of falsehood, and make the truth to triumph. I declare, then, in the face of heaven and earth, and acknowledge, though to my eternal shame, that I have committed the greatest of crimes; but it has been the acknowledging of those which have been so foully charged on the order. I attest, and truth obliges me to attest, that it is innocent. I made the contrary declaration only to suspend the excessive pains of torture, and to mollify those who made me endure them. I know the punishments which have been inflicted on all the knights who had the courage to revoke a similar confession; but the dreadful spectacle which is presented to me is not able to make me confirm one lie by another. The life offered me on such infamous terms. I abandon without regret."

Molay was followed by Guy in his assertion of the innocence of the order; the other two remained silent. The commissioners were confounded, and stopped. The intelligence was conveyed to the king, who, instantly calling his council together, without any spiritual person being present, condemned the two knights to the flames.

A pile was erected on that point of the islet in the Seine where afterwards was erected the statue of Henry IV., and the following day Molay and his

[p. 326]

companion were brought forth and placed upon it. They still persisted in their assertion of the innocence of the order. The flames were first applied to their feet, then to their more vital parts. The fetid smell of their burning flesh infected the surrounding air, and added to their torments; yet still they persevered in their declarations. At length death terminated their misery. The spectators shed tears at the view of their constancy, and during the night their ashes were gathered up to be preserved as relics.

Click to enlarge
Portrait of last Grand Master.

It is mentioned as a tradition, by some historians, that Molay, ere he expired, summoned Clement to appear within forty days before the Supreme Judge,

[p. 327]

and Philip to the same tribunal within the space of a year. The pontiff actually did die of a cholic on the night of the 19th of the following month, and, the church in which his body was laid taking fire, the corpse was half consumed. The king, before the year had elapsed, died of a fall from his horse. Most probably it was these events which gave rise to the tradition, which testifies the general belief of the innocence of the Templars. It was also remarked that all the active persecutors of the order perished by premature or violent deaths.

It remains to discuss the two following points:--Did the religio-military order of the Knights Templars hold a secret doctrine subversive of religion and morality? Has the order been continued down to our own days?

We have seen what the evidence against the Templars was, and it is very plain that such evidence would not be admitted in any modern court of justice. It was either hearsay, or given by persons utterly unworthy of credit, or wrung from the accused by agony and torture. The articles themselves are absurd and contradictory. Are we to believe that the same men had adopted the pure deism of the Mahommedans, and were guilty of a species of idolatry [**] almost too gross for the lowest superstition? But when did this corruption commence among the Templars? Were those whom St. Bernard praised as models of Christian zeal and piety, and whom the whole Christian world admired and revered, engaged in a secret conspiracy against religion and government? Yes, boldly replies Hammer, the two humble and pious knights who founded the order were the pupils and secret allies of

[p. 328]

the Mahommedan Ismaelites. This was going too far for Wilike, and he thinks that the guilt of introducing the secret doctrine lies on the chaplains; for he could discern that the doctrines of gnosticism, which the Templars are supposed to have held, were beyond the comprehension of illiterate knights, who, though they could fight and pray, were but ill qualified to enter into the mazes of mystic metaphysics. According, therefore, to one party, the whole order was corrupt from top to bottom; according to another, the secrets were confined to a few, and, contrary to all analogy, the heads of the order were frequently in ignorance of them. Neither offer any thing like evidence in support of their assumption.

The real guilt of the Templars was their wealth and their pride [**]: the last alienated the people from them, the former excited the cupidity of the king of France. Far be it from us to maintain that the morals of the Templars were purer than those of the other religious orders. With such ample means as they possessed of indulging all their appetites and passions, it would be contrary to all experience to suppose that they always restrained them, and we will even concede that some of their members were obnoxious to charges of deism, impiety, breaches of their religious vows, and gross licentiousness. We only deny that such were the rules of the order. Had they not been so devoted as they were to the Holy See they would perhaps have come down to us

[p. 329]

as unsullied as the knights of St. John [**]; but they sided with Pope Boniface against Philip the Fair, and a subservient pontiff sacrificed to his own avarice and personal ambition the most devoted adherents of the court of Rome [*+].

We make little doubt that any one who coolly and candidly considers the preceding account of the manner in which the order was suppressed will readily concede that the guilt of its members was anything but proved. It behoves their modern impugners to furnish some stronger proofs than any they have as yet brought forward. The chief adversary of the Templars at the present day is a writer whose veracity and love of justice are beyond suspicion, and who has earned for himself enduring fame by his labours in the field of oriental literature, but in whose mind, as his most partial friends must allow, learning and imagination are apt to overbalance judgment and philosophy [*++]. He has been replied to by Raynouard, Munter, and other able advocates of the knights.

We now come to the question of the continuance of the order to the present day. That it has in some sort been transmitted to our times is a matter of no

[p. 330]

doubt; for, as we have just seen, the king of Portugal formed the Order of Christ out of the Templars in his dominions. But our readers are no doubt aware that the freemasons assert a connexion with the Templars, and that there is a society calling themselves Templars, whose chief seat is at Paris, and whose branches extend into England and other countries. The account which they give of themselves is as follows:--

James de Molay, in the year 1314, in anticipation of his speedy martyrdom,, appointed Johannes Marcus Lormenius to be his successor in his dignity. This appointment was made by a regular well-authenticated charter, bearing the signatures of the various chiefs of the order, and it is still preserved at Paris, together with the statutes, archives, banners, &c., of the soldiery of the Temple. There has been an unbroken succession of grand-masters down to the present times, among whom are to be found some of the most illustrious names in France. Bertrand du Guesclin was grand-master for a number of years; the dignity was sustained by several of the Montmorencies; and during the last century the heads of the society were princes of the different branches of the house of Bourbon. Bernard Raymond Fabre Palaprat is its head at present, at least was so a few years ago [**].

This is no doubt a very plausible circumstantial account; but, on applying the Ithuriel spear of criticism to it, various ugly shapes resembling falsehood start up. Thus Molay, we are told, appointed his successor in 1314. He was put to death on the

[p. 331]

[paragraph continues] 18th March of that year, and the order had been abolished nearly a year before. Why then did he delay so long, and why was he become so apprehensive of martyrdom at that time, especially when, as is well known, there was then no intention of putting him to death? Again, where were the chiefs of the society at that time? How many of them were living? and how could they manage to assemble in the dungeon of Molay and execute a formal instrument! Moreover, was it not repugnant to the rules and customs of the Templars for a Master to appoint his successor? These are a few of the objections which we think may be justly made; and, on the whole, we feel strongly disposed to reject the whole story.

As to the freemasons, we incline to think that it was the accidental circumstance of the name of the Templars which has led them to claim a descent from that order; and it is possible that, if the same fate had fallen on the knights of St. John, the claim had never been set up. We are very far from denying that at the time of the suppression of the order of the Temple there was a secret doctrine in existence, and that the overthrow of the papal power, with its idolatry, superstition, and impiety, was the object aimed at by those who held it, and that freemasonry may possibly be that doctrine under another name [**]. But we are perfectly convinced that no proof of any weight has been given of the Templars' participation in that doctrine, and that all probability is on the other side. We regard them, in fine, whatever their sins may have been, as martyrs--martyrs to the cupidity, blood-thirstiness, and ambition of the king of France.

Footnotes

^327:* Almost every charge brought against the Templars had been previously made against the Albigenses, with how much truth every one is aware.

^328:* Our readers will call to mind the well-known anecdote of King Richard I. When admonished by the zealous Fulk, of Neuilly, to get rid of his three favourite daughters, pride, avarice, and voluptuousness,--"You counsel well," said the king, "and I hereby dispose of the first to the Templars, of the second to the Benedictines, and of the third to my prelates.'

^329:* Similar charges are said to have been brought against the Hospitallers in the year 1238, but without effect. There was no Philip the Fair at that time in France.

^329:+ Clement, in a bull dated but four days after that of the suppression, acknowledged that the whole of the evidence against the order amounted only to suspicion!

^329:++ We mean the illustrious Jos. von Hammer, whose essay on the subject is to be found in the sixth volume of the Mines de l'Orient, where it will be seen that he regards Sir W. Scott, in his Ivanhoe, as a competent witness against the Templars, on account of his correct and faithful pictures of the manners and opinions of the middle ages. We apprehend that people are beginning now to entertain somewhat different ideas on the subject of our great romancer's fidelity, of which the present pages present some instances.

^330:* See Manuel des Templiers. As this book is only sold to members of the society, we have been unable to obtain a copy of it. Our account has been derived from Mills's History of Chivalry. That this writer should have believed it implicitly is, we apprehend, no proof of its truth.

^331:* This has, we think, been fully prayed by Sr. Rossetti. It must not be concealed that this writer strongly asserts that the Templars were a branch of this society.

     
Secret Societies of the Middle Ages, by Thomas Keightley, [1837], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 332]

  

THE

  

SECRET TRIBUNALS OF WESTPHALIA [**],

  

CHAPTER I.

Introduction--The Original Westphalia--Conquest of the Saxons by Charlemagne--His Regulations--Dukes of Saxony--State of Germany--Henry the Lion--His Outlawry--Consequences of it--Origin of German Towns--Origin of the Fehm-gerichte, or Secret Tribunals--Theories of their Origin--Origin of their Name--Synonymous Terms.

WE are now arrived at an association remarkable in itself, but which has been, by the magic arts of romancers, especially of the great archimage of the north, enveloped in darkness, mystery, and awe, far beyond the degree in which such a poetical investiture can be bestowed upon it by the calm inquirer after truth. The gloom of midnight will rise to the mind of many a reader at the name of the Secret

[p. 333]

[paragraph continues] Tribunals of Westphalia: a dimly lighted cavern beneath the walls of some castle, or peradventure Swiss hostelrie, wherein sit black-robed judges in solemn silence, will be present to his imagination, and he is prepared with breathless anxiety to peruse the details of deeds without a name [**].

We fear that we cannot promise the full gratification of these high-wrought expectations. Extraordinary as the Secret Tribunals really were, we can only view them as an instance of that compensating principle which may be discerned in the moral as well as in the natural empire of the Deity; for, during the most turbulent and lawless period of the history of Germany, almost the sole check on crime, in a large portion of that country, was the salutary terror of these Fehm-Gerichte, or Secret Tribunals. And those readers who have taken their notions of them only from works of fiction will learn with surprise that no courts of justice at the time exceeded, or perhaps we might say equalled, them in the equity of their proceedings.

Unfortunately their history is involved in much obscurity, and we cannot, as in the case of the two preceding societies, clearly trace this association from its first formation to the time when it became evanescent and faded from the view. While it flourished, the dread and the fear of it weighed too heavily on the minds of men to allow them to venture to pry into its mysteries. Certain and instantaneous death was the portion of the stranger who was seen at any place where a tribunal was sitting, or who dared so

[p. 334]

much as to look into the books which contained the laws and ordinances of the society. Death was also the portion of any member of the society who revealed its secrets; and so strongly did this terror, or a principle of honour, operate, that, as Aeneas Sylvius (afterwards Pope Pius II.), the secretary of the Emperor Frederick III., assures us, though the number of the members usually exceeded 100,000, no motive had ever induced a single one to be faithless to his trust. Still, however, sufficient materials are to be found for satisfying all reasonable curiosity on the subject.

To ascertain the exact and legal sphere of the operation of this formidable jurisdiction, and to point out its most probable origin, are necessary preliminaries to an account of its constitution and its proceedings. We shall therefore commence with the consideration of these points.

Westphalia, then, was the birth-place of this institution, and over Westphalia alone did it exercise authority. But the Westphalia of the middle ages did not exactly correspond with that of the later times. In a general sense it comprehended the country between the Rhine and the Weser; its southern boundary was the mountains of Hesse; its northern, the district of Friesland, which at that time extended from Holland to Sleswig. In the records and law-books of the middle ages, this land bears the mystic appellation of the red earth, a name derived, as one writer thinks, from the gules, or red, which was the colour of the field in the ducal shield of Saxony; another regards it as synonymous with the bloody earth; and a third hints that it may owe its origin to the red colour of the soil in some districts of Westphalia.

This land formed a large portion of the country of the Saxons, who, after a gallant resistance of thirty

[p. 335]

years, were forced to submit to the sway of Charlemagne, and to embrace the religion of their conqueror. The Saxons had hitherto lived in a state of rude independence, and their dukes and princes possessed little or no civil power, being merely the presidents in their assemblies and their leaders in war. Charlemagne thought it advisable to abolish this dignity altogether, and he extended to the country of the Saxons the French system of counts and counties. Each count was merely a royal officer who exercised in the district over which he was placed the civil and military authority. The missi dominici or regii were despatched from the court to hold their visitations in Saxony, as well as in the other dominions of Charles, and at these persons of all classes might appear and prefer their complaints to the representative of the king, if they thought themselves aggrieved by the count or any of the inferior officers.

In the reign of Louis the German, the excellent institutions of Charlemagne had begun to fall into desuetude; anarchy and violence had greatly increased. The incursions of the Northmen had become most, formidable, and the Vends [**] also gave great disturbance to Germany. The Saxon land being the part most immediately exposed to invasion, the emperor resolved to revive the ancient dignity of dukes, and to place the district under one head, who might direct the energies of the whole people against the invaders. The duke was a royal lieutenant, like the counts, only differing from them in the extent of the district over which he exercised authority. The first duke of Saxony was Count Ludolf, the founder of Gandersheim; on his death the dignity was conferred on his son Bruno, who, being

[p. 336]

slain in the bloody battle of Ebsdorf fought against the Northmen, was succeeded by his younger brother Otto, the father of Henry the Fowler.

On the failure of the German branch of the Carlovingians, the different nations which composed the Germanic body appointed Conrad the Franconian to be their supreme head; for a new enemy, the Magyars, or Hungarians, now harassed the empire, and energy was demanded from its chief. Of this Conrad himself was so convinced, that, when dying, after a short reign, he recommended to the choice of the electors, not his own brother, but Henry the Fowler, Duke of Saxony, who had, in his conflicts with the Vends and the Northmen, given the strongest proofs of his talents and valour. Henry was chosen, and the measures adopted by him during his reign, and the defeat of the Hungarians, justified the act of his elevation.

On the death of Henry, his son Otto, afterwards justly styled the Great, was unanimously chosen to succeed him in the imperial dignity. Otto conferred the Duchy of Saxony on Herman Billung. From their constant warfare with the Vends and the Northmen, the Saxons were now esteemed the most valiant nation in Germany, and they were naturally the most favoured by the emperors of the house of Saxony. This line ending with Henry II. in 1024, the sceptre passed to that of Franconia, under which and the succeeding line of Suabia, owing to the contests with the popes about investitures and to various other causes, the imperial power greatly declined in Germany; anarchy and feuds prevailed to an alarming extent; the castles of the nobles became dens of robbers; and law and justice were nowhere to be found.

The most remarkable event of this disastrous period, and one closely connected with our subject,

[p. 337]

is the outlawry of Henry the Lion, Duke of Saxony and Bavaria. Magnus, the last of the Billungs of Saxony, died, leaving only two daughters, of whom the eldest was married to Henry the Black, Duke of Bavaria, who consequently had, according to the maxims of that age, a right to the Duchy of Saxony; but the Emperor Henry V. refused to admit his claim, and conferred it on Lothaire of Supplinburg. As, however, Henry the Black's son, Henry the Proud, was married to the only daughter of Lothaire, and this prince succeeded Henry V. in the empire, Henry found no difficulty in obtaining the Duchy of Saxony from his father-in-law, who also endeavoured to have him chosen his successor in the imperial dignity. But the other princes were jealous of him, and on the death of Lothaire they hastily elected Conrad of Suabia, who, under the pretext that no duke should possess two duchies, called on Henry to resign either Saxony or Bavaria. On his refusal, Conrad, in conjunction with the princes of the empire, pronounced them both forfeited, and conferred Bavaria on the Margraf of Austria, and Saxony on Albert the Bear, the son of the second daughter of Duke Magnus of Saxony.

Saxony was, however, afterwards restored by Conrad to Henry the Lion, son of Henry the Proud, and Conrad's successor, Frederick Barbarossa, gave him again Bavaria. Henry had himself carried his arms from the Elbe to the Baltic, and conquered a considerable territory from the Vends, which he regarded as his own peculiar principality. He was now master of the greater part of Germany, and it was quite evident that he must either obtain the imperial dignity or fall. His pride and his severity made him many enemies; but as he had no child but a daughter, who was married to a cousin of the emperor, his power was regarded without much

[p. 338]

apprehension. It was, however, the ambition of Henry to be the father of a race of heroes, and, after the fashion of those times, he divorced his wife and espoused Matilda, daughter of Henry II. of England, by whom he had four sons. Owing to this and other circumstances all friendly feeling ceased between Henry and the emperor, whom, however, he accompanied on the expedition to Italy, which terminated in the battle of Legnano. But he suddenly drew off his forces and quitted the imperial army on the way, and Frederick, imputing the ill success which he met with in a great measure to the conduct of the Duke of Saxony, was, on his return to Germany, in a mood to lend a ready ear to any charges against him. These did not fail soon to pour in: the Saxon clergy, over whom he had arrogated a right of investiture, appeared as his principal accusers. Their charges, which were partly true, partly false, were listened to by Frederick and the princes of the empire, and the downfall of Henry was resolved upon. He was thrice summoned, but in vain, to appear and answer the charges made against him. He was summoned a fourth time, but to as little purpose; the sentence of outlawry was then formally pronounced at Wurtzburg. He denied the legality of the sentence, and attempted to oppose its execution; several counts stood by him in his resistance; but he was forced to submit and sue for grace at Erfurt. The emperor pardoned him and permitted him to retain his allodial property on condition of his leaving Germany for three years. He was deprived of all his imperial fiefs, which were immediately bestowed upon others.

In the division of the spoil of Henry the Lion Saxony was cut up into pieces; a large portion of it went to the Archbishop of Cologne; and Bernhard of Anhalt, son of Albert the Bear, obtained a considerable

[p. 339]

part of the remainder; the supremacy over Holstein, Mecklenburg, and Pomerania, ceased; and Lubeck became a free imperial city. All the archbishops, bishops, counts, and barons, seized as much as they could, and became immediate vassals of the empire. Neither Bernhard nor the Archbishop of Cologne was able completely to establish his power over the portion assigned him, and lawless violence everywhere prevailed. "There was no king in Israel, and every one did that which was right in his own eyes," is the language of the Chronicler [**].

We here again meet an instance of the compensatory principle which prevails in the arrangements of Providence. It was the period of turbulence and anarchy succeeding the outlawry of Henry the Lion which gave an impulse to the building or enlarging of towns in the north of Germany. The free Germans, as described by Tacitus, scorned to be pent up within walls and ditches; and their descendants in Saxony would seem to have inherited their sentiments, for there were no towns in that country till the time of Henry the Fowler. As a security against the Northmen, the Slaves, and the Magyars, this monarch caused pieces of land to be enclosed by earthen walls and ditches, within which was collected a third part of the produce of the surrounding country, and in which he made every ninth man of the population fix his residence. The courts of justice were held in these places to give them consequence; and, their strength augmenting with their population, they became towns capable of resisting the attacks of the enemy, and of giving shelter and defence to the people of the open country. Other towns, such as Munster, Osnabruck (Osnaburgh), Paderborn, and Minden, grew up gradually, from the desire of the

[p. 340]

people to dwell close to abbeys, churches, and episcopal residences, whence they might obtain succour in time of temporal or spiritual need, and derive protection from the reverence shown to the church. A third class of towns owed their origin to the stormy period of which we now write; for the people of the open country, the victims of oppression and tyranny, fled to where they might, in return for their obedience, meet with some degree of protection, and erected their houses at the foot of the castle of some powerful nobleman. These towns gradually increased in power, with the favour of the emperors, who, like other monarchs, viewing in them allies against the excessive power of the church and the nobility, gladly bestowed on them extensive privileges; and from these originated the celebrated Hanseatic League, to which almost every town of any importance in Westphalia belonged, either mediately or immediately.

But the growth of cities, and the prosperity and the better system of social regulation which they presented, were not the only beneficial effects which resulted from the overthrow of the power of Henry the Lion. There is every reason to conclude that it was at this period that the Fehm-gerichte, or Secret Tribunals, were instituted in Westphalia; at least, the earliest document in which there is any clear and express mention of them is dated in the year 1267. This is an instrument by which Engelbert, Count of the Mark, frees one Gervin of Kinkenrode from the feudal obligations for his inheritance of Broke, which was in the county of Mark; and it is declared to have been executed at a place named Berle, the court being presided over by Bernhard of Henedorp, and the Fehmenotes being present. By the Fehmenotes were at all times understood the initiated in the secrets of the Westphalian tribunals; so that we have here a clear and decisive proof of the existence of these

[p. 341]

tribunals at that time. In another document, dated 1280, the Fehmenotes again appear as witnesses, and after this time the mention of them becomes frequent.

We thus find that, in little more than half a century after the outlawry of Henry the Lion, the Fehm-gerichte were in operation in Westphalia; and there is not the slightest allusion to them before that date, or any proof, at all convincing, to be produced in favour of their having been an earlier institution. Are we not, therefore, justified in adopting tie opinion of those who place their origin in the first half of the thirteenth century, and ascribe it to the anarchy and confusion consequent on the removal of the power which had hitherto kept within bounds the excesses of the nobles and the people? And is it a conjecture altogether devoid of probability that some courageous and upright men may have formed a secret determination to apply a violent remedy to the intolerable evils which afflicted the country, and to have adopted those expedients for preserving the public peace, out of which gradually grew the Secret Tribunals? or that some powerful prince of the country, acting from purely selfish motives, devised the plan of the society, and appointed his judges to make the first essay of it [**]?

Still it must be confessed that the origin of the Fehm-gerichte is involved in the same degree of obscurity which hangs over that of the Hanseatic league and so many other institutions of the middle ages; and little hopes can be entertained of this obscurity ever being totally dispelled. Conjecture will, therefore, ever have free scope of the subject; and the opinion which we have just expressed ourselves as inclined to adopt is only one of nine which have been already advanced on it. Four of these carry

[p. 342]

back the origin of the Fehm-gerichte to the time of Charlemagne, making them to have been either directly instituted by that great prince, or to have gradually grown out of some of his other institutions for the better governing of his states. A fifth places their origin in the latter half of the eleventh century, and regards them as an invention of the Westphalian clergy for forwarding the views of the popes in their attempt to arrive at dominion over all temporal. princes. A sixth ascribes the institution to St. Engelbert, Archbishop of Cologne, to whom the Emperor Frederic II. committed the administration of affairs in Germany during his own absence in Sicily, and who was distinguished for his zeal in the persecution of heretics. He modelled it, the advocates of this opinion say, on that of the Inquisition, which had lately been established. The seventh and eighth theories are undeserving of notice. On the others we shall make a few remarks.

The first writers who mention the Fehm-gerichte are Henry of Hervorden, a Dominican, who wrote against them in the reign of the Emperor Charles IV., about the middle of the fourteenth century; and Aeneas Sylvius, the secretary of Frederic III., a century later. These writers are among those who refer the origin of the Fehm-gerichte to Charlemagne, and such was evidently the current opinion of the time--an opinion studiously disseminated by the members of the society, who sought to give it consequence in the eyes of the emperor and people, by associating it with the memory of the illustrious monarch of the West. There is, however, neither external testimony nor internal probability to support that opinion. Eginhart, the secretary and biographer of Charlemagne, and all the other contemporary writers, are silent on the subject; the valuable fragments of the ancient Saxon laws collected in the twelfth century

[p. 343]

make not the slightest allusion to these courts; and, in fine, their spirit and mode of procedure are utterly at variance with the Carlovingian institutions. As to the hypothesis which makes Archbishop Engelbert the author of the Fehm-gerichte, it is entirely unsupported by external evidence, and has nothing in its favour but the coincidence, in point of time, of Engelbert's administration with the first account which we have of this jurisdiction, and the similarity which it bore in the secrecy of its proceedings to that of the Holy Inquisition--a resemblance easy to be accounted for, without any necessity for having recourse to the supposition of the one being borrowed from the other. We can therefore only say with certainty that, in the middle of the thirteenth century, the Fehm-gerichte were existing and in operation in the country which we have described as the Westphalia of the middle ages. To this we may add that this jurisdiction extended over the whole of that country, and was originally confined to it, all the courts in other parts of Germany, which bore a resemblance to the Westphalian Fehm-gerichte, being of a different character and nature [**].

It remains, before proceeding to a description et these tribunals, to give some account of the origin of their name. And here again we find ourselves involved in as much difficulty and uncertainty as when inquiring into the origin of the society itself.

Almost every word in the German and cognate languages, which bears the slightest resemblance to the word Fehm [*+], has been given by some writer or other as

[p. 344]

its true etymon. It is unnecessary, in the present sketch of the history of the Fehm-gerichte, to discuss the merits of each of the claimants: we shall content ourselves with remarking that, among those which appear to have most probability in their favour, is the Latin Fama, which was first proposed by Leibnitz. At the time when we have most reason for supposing these tribunals to have been instituted the Germans were familiar with the language of the civil and canonical laws; the Fehm-gerichte departed from the original maxim of German law, which was--no accuser, no judge, and, in imitation of those foreign laws [**], proceeded on common fame, and without any formal accusation against persons suspected of crime or of evil courses. Moreover, various tribunals, not in Westphalia, which proceeded in the same manner, on common report, were also called Fehm-gerichte, which may therefore be interpreted Fame-tribunals, or such as did not, according to the old German rule, require a formal accusation, but proceeded to the investigation of the truth of any charge which common fame of general report made against any person--a dangerous mode of proceeding, no doubt, and one liable to the greatest abuse, but which the lawless state of Germany at that period, and the consequent impunity which great criminals would else have enjoyed, from the fear of them, which would have kept back accusers and witnesses, perhaps abundantly justified. It is proper to observe, however, that fem appears to be an old German word, signifying

[p. 345]

condemnation; and it is far from being unlikely, after all, that the Fehm-gerichte may mean merely the tribunals of condemnation--in other words, courts for the punishment of crime, or what we should call criminal courts.

The Fehm-gerichte was not the only name which these tribunals bore; they were also called Fehm-ding, the word ding [**] being, in the middle ages, equivalent to gericht, or tribunal. They were also called the Westphalian tribunals, as they could only be holden in the Red Land, or Westphalia, and only Westphalians were amenable to their jurisdiction. They were further styled free-seats (Frei-stuhle, stuhl also being the same as gericht), free-tribunals, &c., as only freemen were subject to them. A Frei-gericht, however, was not a convertible term with a Westphalian Fehm-gericht; the former was the genus, the latter the species. They are in the records also named Secret Tribunals, (Heimliche Gerichte), and Silent Tribunals (Stillgerichte), from the secrecy of their proceedings; Forbidden Tribunals (Verbotene Gerichte), the reason of which name is not very clear; Carolinian Tribunals, as having been, as was believed, instituted by Charles the Great; also the Free Bann, which last word was equivalent to jurisdiction. A Fehm-gericht was also termed a Heimliche Acht, and a Heimliche beschlossene Acht (secret and secret-closed tribunal); acht also being the same as gericht, or tribunal.

Footnotes

^332:* Dr. Berck has, in his elaborate work on this subject (Geschichte der Westphalischen Femgerichte, Bremen, 1815), collected, we believe, nearly all the information that is now attainable. This work has been our principal guide; for, though we have read some others, we cannot say that we have derived any important information from them. As the subject is in its historical form entirely new in English literature, we have, at the hazard of appearing occasionally dry, traced with some minuteness the construction and mode of procedure of these celebrated courts.

^333:* The romantic accounts of the Secret Tribunals will be found in Sir W. Scott's translation of Goethe's Gotz von Berlichingen, and in his House of Aspen and Anne of Geierstein. From various passages in Sir W. Scott's biographical and other essays, it is plain that he believed such to be the true character of the Secret Tribunals.

^335:* The Vends (Wenden) were a portion of the Slavonian race who dwelt along the south coast of the Baltic.

^339:* Arnold of Lubeck, Chronica Slavorum, l. iii. c. l., apud Leibnitz Scriptores Rerum Brunsvicarum, t. ii. p. 653.

^341:* Berck, pp. 259, 260.

^343:* See Berck, l. i. c. 5, 6, 7.

^343:+ Spelt also Fem, Fam, Vem, Vehm. In German f and v are pronounced alike, as also are a and e. The words from which Fahm has been derived are Fahne, a standard; Femen, to skin; Fehde, feud; Vemi (i.e. vae mihi), wo is me; Ve or Vaem, which Dreyer says signifies, in the northern languages, [p. 344] holy; Vitte (old German), prudence; Vette, punishment; the Fimmiha of the Salic law; Swedish Fem, Islandic Fimm, five, such being erroneously supposed to be the number of judges in a Fehm, or court. Finally, Mozer deduces it from Fahm, which he says is employed in Austria and some other countries for Rahm, cream.

^344:* Common fame was a sufficient ground of arraignment in England, also, in the Anglo-Saxon period.

^345:* In the northern languages, Ting; hence the Storc Ting (in our journals usually written Storthing), i.e. Great Ting, or Parliament of Norway.

     
Secret Societies of the Middle Ages, by Thomas Keightley, [1837], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 346]

  

CHAPTER II.

The Tribunal-Lord--The Count--The Schoppen--The Messengers--The Public Court--The Secret Tribunal--Extent of its Jurisdiction--Places of holding the Courts--Time of holding them--Proceedings in them--Process where the criminal was caught in the fact--Inquisitorial Process.

HAVING traced the origin of the Fehm-gerichte and their various appellations, as far as the existing documents and other evidences admit, we are now to describe the constitution and procedure of these celebrated tribunals, and to ascertain who were the persons that composed them; whence their authority was derived; and over what classes of persons their jurisdiction extended.

Even in the periods of greatest anarchy in Germany, the emperor was regarded as the fountain of all judicial power and authority, more particularly where it extended to the right of inflicting capital punishment. The Fehm-gerichte, therefore, regarded the emperor as their head, from whom they derived all the power which they possessed, and acknowledged his right to control and modify their constitution and decisions. These rights of the emperors we shall, in the sequel, describe at length.

Between the emperor and the Westphalian tribunal-lords (Stuhlherren), as they were styled, that is, lay and ecclesiastical territorial lords, there was no intermediate authority until the fourteenth century, when the Archbishop of Cologne was made the imperial

[p. 347]

lieutenant in Westphalia. Each tribunal-lord had his peculiar district, within which he had the power of erecting tribunals, and beyond which his authority did not extend. He either presided in person in his court, or he appointed a count (Freigraf) to supply his place. The rights of a stuhlherr [**] had some resemblance to those of the owner of an advowson in this country. He had merely the power of nominating either himself or another person as count; the right to inflict capital punishment was to be conferred by the emperor or his deputy. To this end, when a tribunal-lord presented a count for investiture, he was obliged to certify on oath that the person so presented was truly and honestly, both by father and mother, born on Westphalian soil; that he stood in no ill repute; that he knew of no open crime he had committed; and that he believed him to be perfectly well qualified to preside over the county.

The count, on being appointed, was to swear that he would judge truly and justly, according to the law and the regulations of the emperor Charles and the closed tribunal; that he would be obedient to the emperor or king, and his lieutenant; and that he would repair, at least once in each year, to the general chapter which was to be held on the Westphalian land, and give an account of his conduct, &c.

The income of the free-count arose from fees and a share in fines; he had also a fixed allowance in money or in kind from the stuhlherr. Each free-schoppe who was admitted made him a present, to repair, as the laws express it, his country hat. If the person admitted was a knight, this fee was a mark of gold; if not, a mark of silver. Every one of the initiated who cleared himself by oath from

[p. 348]

any charge paid the count a cross-penny. He had a share of all the fines imposed in his court, and a fee on citations, &c.

There was in general but one count to each tribunal; but instances occur of there being as many as seven or eight. The count presided in the court, and the citations of the accused proceeded from him.

Next to the count were the assessors or (Schoppen) [**]. These formed the main body and strength of the society. They were nominated by the count with the approbation of the tribunal-lord. Two persons, who were already in the society, were obliged to vouch on oath for the fitness of the candidate to be admitted. It was necessary that he should be a German by birth; horn in wedlock of free parents; of the Christian religion; neither excommunicate nor outlawed; not involved in any Fehm-gericht process; a member of no spiritual order, &c.

These schoppen were divided into two classes, the knightly, and the simple, respectable assessors; for, as the maxim that every man should be judged by his peers prevailed universally during the middle ages, it was necessary to conform to it also in the Fehm-tribunals.

Previous to their admission to a knowledge of the secrets of the society, the schoppen were named Ignorant; when they had been initiated they were called Knowing (Wissende) or Fehmenotes. It was only these last who were admitted to the secret-tribunal.

[p. 349]

[paragraph continues] The initiation of a schoppe was attended with a good deal of ceremony. He appeared bareheaded before the assembled tribunal, and was there questioned respecting his qualifications. Then, kneeling down, with the thumb and forefinger of his right hand on a naked sword and a halter, he pronounced the following oath after the count:--

"I promise, on the holy marriage, that I will, from henceforth, aid, keep, and conceal the holy Fehms, from wife and child, from father and mother, from sister and brother, from fire and wind, from all that the sun shines on and the rain covers, from all that is between sky and ground, especially from the man who knows the law, and will bring before this free tribunal, under which I sit, all that belongs to the secret jurisdiction of the emperor, whether I know it to be true myself, or have heard it from trustworthy people, whatever requires correction or punishment, whatever is Fehm-free (i.e. a crime committed in the county), that it may be judged, or, with the consent of the accuser, be put off in grace; and will not cease so to do, for love or for fear, for gold or for silver, or for precious stones; and will strengthen this tribunal and jurisdiction with all my five senses and power; and that I do not take on me this office- for any other cause than for the sake of right and justice; moreover, that I will ever further and honour this free tribunal more than any other free tribunals; and what I thus promise will I stedfastly and firmly keep, so help me God and his Holy Gospel."

He was further obliged to swear that he would ever, to the best of his ability, enlarge the holy empire; and that he would undertake nothing with unrighteous hand against the land and people of the stuhlherr.

The count then inquired of the officers of the

[p. 350]

court (the Frohnboten) if the candidate had gone through all the formalities requisite to reception, and when that officer had answered in the affirmative, the count revealed to the aspirant the secrets of the tribunal, and communicated to him the secret sign by which the initiated knew one another. What this sign was is utterly unknown: some say that when they met at table they used to turn the point of their knife to themselves, and the haft away from them. Others take the letters S S G G, which were found in an old MS. at Herford, to have been the sign, and interpret them Stock Stein, Gras Grein. These are, however, the most arbitrary conjectures, without a shadow of proof. The count then was bound to enter the name of the new member in his register, and henceforth he was one of the powerful body of the initiated.

Princes and nobles were anxious to have their chancellors and ministers, corporate towns to have their magistrates, among the initiated. Many princes sought to be themselves members of this formidable association, and we are assured that in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries (which are the only ones of which we have any particular accounts) the number of the initiated exceeded 100,000.

The duty of the initiated was to go through the country to serve citations and to trace out and denounce evil-doers; or, if they caught them in the fact, to execute instant justice upon them. They were also the count's assessors when the tribunal sat. For that purpose seven at least were required to be present, all belonging to the county in which the court was held; those belonging to other counties might attend, but they could not act as assessors; they only formed a part of the bystanders of the court. Of these there were frequently some hundreds present.

[p. 351]

All the initiated of every degree might go on foot and on horseback through the country, for daring was the man who would presume to injure them, as certain death was his inevitable lot. A dreadful punishment also awaited any one of them who should forget his vow and reveal the secrets of the society; he was to be seized, a cloth bound over his eyes, his hands tied behind his back, a halter put about his neck; he was to be thrown upon his belly, his tongue pulled out behind by the nape of his neck, and he was then to be hung seven feet higher than any other felon. It is doubtful, however, if there ever was a necessity for inflicting this punishment, for Aeneas Sylvius, who wrote at the time when the society had degenerated, assures us that no member had ever been induced, by any motives whatever, to betray its secrets; and he describes the initiated as grave men and lovers of right and justice. Similar language is employed concerning them by other writers of the time.

Besides the count and the assessors, there were required, for the due holding a Fehm-court, the officers named Frohnboten [**], or serjeants, or messengers, and a clerk to enter the decisions in what was called the blood-book (Liber sanguinis). These were, of course, initiated, or they could not be present. It was required that the messengers should be freemen belonging to the county, and have all the qualifications of the simple schoppen. Their duty was to attend on the court when sitting, and to take care that the ignorant, against whom there was any charge, were duly cited [*+].

[p. 352]

The count was to hold two kinds of courts, the one public, named the Open or Public Court (Offenbare Ding), to which every freeman had access; the other private, called the Secret Tribunal (Heimliche Acht), at which no one who was not initiated could venture to appear.

The former court was held at stated periods, and at least three times in each year. It was announced fourteen days previously by the messengers (Frohnboten), and every householder in the county, whether initiated or not, free or servile, was bound under a penalty of four heavy shillings, to appear at it and declare on oath what crimes he knew to have been committed in the county.

When the count held the Secret Court, the clergy, who had received the tonsure and ordination, women and children, Jews and Heathens [**], and, as it would appear, the higher nobility, were exempted from its jurisdiction. The clergy were exempted, probably, from prudential motives, as it was not deemed safe to irritate the members of so powerful a body, by encroaching on their privileges; they might, however, voluntarily subject themselves to the Fehm-gerichte if they were desirous of partaking of the advantages of initiation. Women and children were exempt on account of their sex and age, and the period of infancy was extended, in the citations, to fourteen, eighteen, and sometimes twenty years of age. Jews, Heathens, and such like, were exempted on account of their unworthiness. The higher nobility were exempted (if such was really the case) in compliance with the maxim of German law that

[p. 353]

each person should be judged by his peers, as it was scarcely possible that in any county there could be found a count and seven assessors of equal rank with accused persons of that class.

In their original constitution the Fehm-gerichte, agreeably to the derivation of the name from Fem, condemnation, were purely criminal courts, and had no jurisdiction in civil matters. They took cognizance of all offences against the Christian faith, the holy gospel, the holy ten commandments, the public peace, and private honour--a category, however, which might easily be made to include almost every transgression and crime that could be committed. We accordingly find in the laws of the Fehm-gerichte, sacrilege, robbery, rape, murder, apostacy, treason, perjury, coining, &c., &c., enumerated; and the courts, by an astute interpretation of the law, eventually managed to make matters which. had not even the most remote appearance of criminality Fehmbar, or within their jurisdiction.

But all exceptions were disregarded in cases of contumacy, or of a person being taken in the actual commission of an offence. When a person, after being duly cited, even in a civil case, did not appear to answer the charge against him, he was outlawed, and his offence became fehmbar; every judge was then authorized to seize the accused, whether he belonged to his county or not; the whole force of the initiated was now directed against him, and escape was hardly possible. Here it was that the superior power of the Fehm-gerichte exhibited itself. Other courts could outlaw as well as they, but no other had the same means of putting its sentences into execution. The only remedy which remained for the accused was to offer to appear and defend his cause, or to sue to the emperor for protection. In cases where a person was caught flagranti delicto, the Westphalian

[p. 354]

tribunals were competent to proceed to instant punishment.

Those who derive their knowledge of the Fehm-gerichte from plays and romances are apt to imagine that they were always held in subterranean chambers, or in the deepest recesses of impenetrable forests, while night., by pouring her deepest gloom over them, added to their awfulness and solemnity. Here, as elsewhere, we must, however reluctantly, lend our aid to dispel the illusions of fiction. They were not held either in woods or in vaults, and rarely even under a roof. There is only one recorded instance of a Fehm-gericht being held under ground, viz., at Heinberg, under the house of John Menkin. At Paderborn indeed it was held in the town-house; there was also one held in the castle of Wulften. But the situation most frequently selected for holding a court was some place under the blue canopy of heaven, for the free German still retained the predilection of his ancestors for open space and expansion. Thus at Nordkirchen and Sudkirchen (north and south church) the court was held in the churchyard; at Dortmund, in the market-place close by the town-house. But the favourite place for holding these courts was the neighbourhood of trees, as in the olden time: and we read of the tribunal at Arensberg in the orchard; of another under the hawthorn; of a third under the pear-tree; of a fourth under the linden, and so on. We also find the courts denominated simply from the trees by which they were held, such as the tribunal at the elder, that at the broad oak, &c.

The idea of their being held at night is also utterly devoid of proof, no mention of any such practice being found in any of the remaining documents. It is much more analogous to Germanic usage to infer that, as the Public Court, and the German courts in general,

[p. 355]

were held in the morning, soon after the break of day, such was also the rule with the Secret Court.

When an affair was brought before a Fehm-court, the first point to be determined was whether it was a matter of Fehm-jurisdiction. Should such prove to be the case, the accused was summoned to appear and answer the charge before the Public Court. All sorts of persons, Jews and Heathens included, might be summoned before this court, at which the uninitiated schoppen also gave attendance, and which was as public as any court in Germany. If the accused did not appear, or appeared and could not clear himself, the affair was transferred to the Secret Court. Civil matters also, which on account of a denial of satisfaction were brought before the Fehm-court, were, in like manner, in cases of extreme contumacy, transferred thither.

The Fehm-tribunals had three different modes of procedure, namely, that in case of the criminal being taken in the fact, the inquisitorial, and the purely accusatorial.

Two things were requisite in the first case; the criminal must be taken in the fact, and there must be three schoppen, at least, present to punish him. With respect to the first particular, the legal language of Saxony gave great extent to the term taken in the fact. It applied not merely to him who was seized in the instant of his committing the crime, but to him who was caught as he was running away. In cases of murder, those who were found with weapons in their hands were considered as taken in the fact; as also, in case of theft, was a person who had the key of any place in which stolen articles were found, unless he could prove that they came there without his consent or knowledge. The Fehm-law enumerated three tokens or proofs of guilt in these cases; the Habende Hand (Having Hand), or having the proof

[p. 356]

in his hand; the Blickende Schein (looking appearance), such as the wound in the body of one who was slain; and the Gichtige Mund (faltering mouth), or confession of the criminal. Still, under all these circumstances, it was necessary that he should be taken immediately; for if he succeeded in making his escape, and was caught again, as he was not this time taken in the fact, he must be proceeded against before the tribunal with all the requisite formalities.

The second condition was, that there should be at least three initiated persons together, to entitle them to seize, try, and execute a person taken in the fact. These then were at the same time judges, accusers, witnesses, and executioners. We shall in the sequel describe their mode of procedure. It is a matter of uncertainty whether the rule of trial by peers was observed on these occasions: what is called the Arensberg Reformation of the Fehm-law positively asserts, that, in case of a person being taken flagranti delicto, birth formed no exemption, and the noble was to be tried like the commoner. The cases, however, in which three of the initiated happened to come on a criminal in the commission of the fact must have been of extremely rare occurrence.

When a crime had been committed, and the criminal had not been taken in the fact, there remained two ways of proceeding against him, namely, the inquisitorial and the accusatorial processes. It depended on circumstances which of these should be adopted. In the case, however, of his being initiated, it was imperative that he should be proceeded against accusatorially.

Supposing the former course to have been chosen,--which was usually done when the criminal had been taken in the fact, but had contrived to escape, or when he was a man whom common fame charged openly and distinctly with a crime,--he was not cited

[p. 357]

to appear before the court or vouchsafed a hearing. He was usually denounced by one of the initiated; the court then examined into the evidence of his guilt, and if it was found sufficient he was outlawed, or, as it was called, forfehmed [**], and his name was inscribed in the blood-book. A sentence was immediately drawn out, in which all princes, lords, nobles, towns, every person, in short, especially the initiated, were called upon to lend their aid to justice. This sentence, of course, could originally have extended only to Westphalia; but the Fehm-courts gradually enlarged their claims; their pretensions were favoured by the emperors, who regarded them as a support to their authority; and it was soon required that their sentence should be obeyed all over the empire, as emanating from the imperial power.

Unhappy now was he who was forfehmed; the whole body of the initiated, that is 100,000 persons, were in pursuit of him. If those who met him were sufficient in number, they seized him at once; if they felt themselves too weak, they called on their brethren to aid, and every one of the society was bound, when thus called on by three or four of the initiated, who averred to him on oath that the man was forfehmed, to help to take him. As soon as they had seized the criminal they proceeded without a moment's delay to execution; they hung him on a tree by the road-side and not on a gallows, intimating thereby that they were entitled to exercise their office in the king's name anywhere they pleased, and without any regard to territorial jurisdiction. The halter which they employed was, agreeably to the usage of the middle ages, a withy; and they are said to have had so much practice, and to have arrived at such expertness

[p. 358]

in this business, that the word Fehmen at last began to signify simply to hang, as execution has come to do in English. It is more probable, however, that this, or something very near it, was the original signification of the word from which the tribunals took their name. Should the malefactor resist, his captors were authorised to knock him down and kill him. In this case they bound the dead body to a tree, and stuck their knives beside it, to intimate that he had not been slain by robbers, but had been executed in the name of the emperor.

Were the person who was forfehmed uninitiated, he had no means whatever of knowing his danger till the halter was actually about his neck; for the severe penalty which awaited any one who divulged the secrets of the Fehm-courts was such as utterly to preclude the chance of a friendly hint or warning to be on his guard. Should he, however, by any casualty, such, for instance, as making his escape from those who attempted to seize him, become aware of how he stood, he might, if he thought he could clear himself, seek the protection and aid of the Stuhlherr, or of the emperor.

If any one knowingly associated with or entertained a person who was forfehmed, he became involved in his danger. It was necessary, however, to prove that he had done so knowingly--a point which was to be determined by the emperor, or by the judge of the district in which the accused resided. This rule originally had extended only to Westphalia, but the Fehm-judges afterwards assumed a right of punishing in any part of the empire the person who entertained one who was forfehmed.

Nothing can appear more harsh and unjust than this mode of procedure to those who would apply the ideas and maxims of the present to former times. But violent evils require violent remedies; and the disorganized state of Europe in general, and of Germany

[p. 359]

in particular, during the middle ages, was such as almost to exceed our conception. Might it not then be argued that we ought to regard as a benefit, rather than as an evil, any institution which set some bounds to injustice and violence, by infusing into the bosom of the evil-doer a salutary fear of the consequences? When a man committed a crime he knew that there was a tribunal to judge it from which his power, however great it might be, would not avail to protect him; he knew not who were the initiated, or at what moment he might fall into their hands; his very brother might be the person who had denounced him; his intimate associates might be those who would seize and execute him. So strongly was the necessity of such a power felt in general, that several cities, such as Nuremberg, Cologne, Strasburg, and others, applied for and obtained permission from the emperors, to proceed to pass sentence of death on evil-doers even unheard, when the evidence of common fame against them was satisfactory to the majority of the town -council. Several counts also obtained similar privileges, so that there were, as we may see, Fehm courts in other places besides Westphalia, but they were far inferior to those in power, not having a numerous body of schoppen at their devotion.

It is finally to be observed that it was only when the crimes were of great magnitude, and the voice of fame loud and constant, that the inquisitorial process could be properly adopted. In cases of a minor nature the accused had a right to be heard in his own behalf. Here then the inquisitorial process had its limit: if report was not sufficiently strong and overpowering, and the matter was still dubious, the offender was to be proceeded against accusatorially. If he was one of the initiated, such was his undoubted right and privilege in all cases.

Footnotes

^347:* Stuhlherr is tribunal-lord, or, literally, lord of the seat (of judgment); stuhl (Anglice, stool) being a seat, or chair.

^348:* This word, which cannot be adequately translated, is the low-Latin Scabini, the French Echevins. We shall take the liberty of using it throughout. The schoppen were called frei-(free) schoppen, as the count was called frei-graf, the court frei-stuhl, on account of the jurisdiction of the tribunals being confined to freemen.

^351:* Frohnbote is interpreted a Holy Messenger, or a Servant of God.

^351:+ When a person was admitted into the society he paid, besides the fee to the count already mentioned, to each schoppe [p. 352] who was assisting there, and to each frohnbote, four livres Tournois.

^352:* The natives of Prussia were still heathens at that time.

^357:* In German Verfehmt. We have ventured to coin the word in the text. The English for answers to the German ver; vergessen is forget; verforen is forlorn.

     
Secret Societies of the Middle Ages, by Thomas Keightley, [1837], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 360]

  

CHAPTER III.

Accusatorial process--Persons liable to it--Mode of citation--Mode of procedure--Right of appeal.

As we have stated above, the first inquiry when a matter was brought before a Fehm-court was, did it come within its jurisdiction, and, on its being found to do so, the accused was summoned before the Public Court, and when he did not appear, or could not clear himself, the cause was transferred to the Secret Court. We shall now consider the whole procedure specially.

The summons was at the expense of the accuser; it was to be written on good new parchment, without any erasures, and sealed with at least seven seals, to wit, those of the count and of six assessors. The seals of the different courts were different. The summonses varied according to whether the accused was a free-count, a free-schoppe, or one of the ignorant and uninitiated, a community, a noth-schoppe, or a mere vagabond. In all cases they were to be served by schoppen. They were to have on them the name of the count, of the accuser, and of the accused, the charge, and the place where the court was to be holden. The stuhlherr was also to be previously informed of it.

For a good and legal service it was requisite that. two schoppen should either serve the accused personally or leave the summons openly or clandestinely at his residence, or at the place where he had taker refuge. If he did not appear to answer the charm

[p. 361]

within six weeks and three days, he was again summoned by four persons. Six weeks was the least  set for appearing to this summons, and it was requisite that a piece of imperial coin should be given with it. Should he still neglect appearing, he was summoned for the third and last time by six schoppen and a count, and the term set was six weeks and three days as before.

If the accused was not merely initiated but also a count, he was treated with corresponding respect. The first summons was served by seven schoppen, the second by fourteen and four counts, and the third by twenty-one and six counts.

The uninitiated, whether bond or free, did not share in the preceding advantages. The summons was served on themselves, or at their residence, by a messenger, and only once. There is some doubt as to the period set for their appearance, but it seems to have been in general the ordinary one of six weeks and three days.

The summons of a town or community was usually addressed to all the male inhabitants. In general some of them were specially named in it; the Arensberg Reformation directed that the names of at least thirty persons should be inserted. The term was six weeks and three days, and those who served the summons were required to be true and upright schoppen.

The noth-schoppe, that is, the person who had surreptitiously become possessed of the secrets of the society, was summoned but once. The usual time was allowed him for appearing to the charge.

Should the accused be a mere vagabond, one who had no fixed residence, the course adopted was to send, six weeks and three days before the day the court was to sit, and post up four summonses at a cross-road which faced the four cardinal points, placing

[p. 362]

a piece of imperial money with each. This was esteemed good and valid service, and if the accused did not appear the court proceeded to act upon it.

Notwithstanding the privileges which the members of the society enjoyed, and the precautions which were employed to ensure their safety, and moreover the deadly vengeance likely to be taken on any one who should aggrieve them, we are not to suppose the service of a summons to appear before a Fehm-court to have been absolutely free from danger. The tyrannic and self-willed noble, when in his own strong castle, and surrounded by his dependents, might not scruple to inflict summary chastisement on the audacious men who presumed to summon him to answer for his crimes before a tribunal; the magistrates of a town also might indignantly spurn at the citation to appear before a Fehm-court, and treat its messengers as offenders. To provide against these cases it was determined that it should be considered good service when the summons was affixed by night to the gate of a town or castle, to the door of the house of the accused, or to the nearest alms-house. The schoppen employed were then to desire the watchman, or some person who was going by, to inform the accused of the summons being there, and they were to take away with them a chip cut from the gate or door, as a proof of the service for the court.

If the accused was resolved to obey the summons, he had only to repair on the appointed day to the place where the court was to be held, the summons being his protection. Those who would persuade us that the Fehm-courts were held by night in secret places say that the mode appointed for the accused to meet the court was for him to repair three-quarters of an hour before midnight to the next cross-roads, where a schoppe was always waiting for him, who bound his eyes and led him to where the court was

[p. 363]

sitting. This, however, is all mere fiction; for the place where the court was to be held was expressly mentioned in every summons.

The Fehm-courts (like the German courts in general) were holden on a Tuesday [**]. If on this day the accused, or his attorney, appeared at the appointed place, and no court was holden, the summons abated or lost its force; the same was the case when admission was refused to him and his suite, a circumstance which sometimes occurred. But should he not appear to the first summons, he was fined the first time thirty shillings, the second time sixty, the third time he was forfehmed. The court had however the power of granting a further respite of six weeks and three days previous to passing this last severe sentence. This term of grace was called the King's Dag, or the Emperor Charles's Day of Grace.

The plea of necessary and unavoidable absence was, however, admitted in all cases, and the Fehm-law distinctly recognised four legal impediments to appearance, namely, imprisonment, sickness, the service of God (that is, pilgrimage), and the public service. The law also justly added the following cases:--inability to cross a river for want of a bridge or a boat, or on account of a storm; the loss of his horse when the accused was riding to the court, so that he could not arrive in time; absence from the country on knightly, mercantile, or other honest occasions; and lastly, the service of his lord or master. In short, any just excuse was admitted. As long as the impediment continued in operation all proceedings against the accused were void. If the impediment arose from his being in prison, or in the public service, or that of his master, he was to notify the same., by letter sealed with his seal, or else by his own oath

[p. 364]

and those of two or three other persons. The other impediments above enumerated were to be sworn to by himself alone.

If the accused neglected answering the two first summonses, but appeared to the third, he was required to pay the two fines for non-appearance; but if he declared himself too poor to pay them, he was obliged to place his two fore-fingers on the naked sword which lay before the court, and swear, by the death which God endured on the cross, that such was the case. It was then remitted to him, and the court proceeded to his trial.

When a Fehm-court sat the count presided; before him lay on the table a naked sword and a withy-halter; the former, says the law, signifying the cross on which Christ suffered and the rigour of the court, the latter denoting the punishment of evil-doers, whereby the wrath of God is appeased. On his right and left stood the clerks of the court, the assessors, and the audience. All were bare-headed, to signify, says the law, that they would proceed openly and fairly, punish men only for the crimes which they had committed, and cover no right with unright. They were also to have their hands uncovered to signify that they would do nothing covertly and underhand. They were to have short cloaks on their shoulders, significatory of the warm love which they should have for justice; for as the cloak covers all the other clothes and the body, so should their love cover justice. They were to wear neither weapons nor harness, that no one might feel any fear of them, and to indicate that they were under the peace of the emperor, king, or empire. Finally, they were to be free from wrath and sober, that drunkenness might not lead them to pass unrighteous judgment, for drunkenness causes much wickedness.

If one who was not initiated was detected in the

[p. 365]

assembly, his process was a brief one. He was seized without any ceremony, his hands and feet were tied together, and he was hung on the next tree. Should a noth-schoppe be caught in the assembly, a halter o f oaken twigs was put about his neck, and he was thrown for nine days into a dark dungeon, at the end of which time he was brought to trial, and, if he failed in clearing himself, he was proceeded with according to law, that is, was hanged.

The business of the day commenced, as in German courts in general, by the count asking of the messengers if it was the day and time for holding a court under the royal authority. An affirmative answer being given, the count then asked how many assessors should there be on the tribunal, and how the seat should be filled. When these questions were answered, he proclaimed the holding of the court.

Each party was permitted to bring with him as many as thirty friends to act as witnesses and compurgators. Lest, however, they might attempt to impede the course of justice, they were required to appear unarmed. Each party had, moreover, the right of being represented by his attorney. The person so employed must be initiated; he must also be the peer of the party, and if he had been engaged on either side he could not, during any stage of the action, be employed on the other, even with the permission of the party which had just engaged him. When he presented himself before the court, his credentials were carefully examined, and if found strictly conformable to what the law had enjoined, they were declared valid. It was necessary that they should have been written on good, new, and sound parchment, without blot or erasure, and be sealed by the seals of at least two frei-schoppen.

The attorney of a prince of the empire appeared

[p. 366]

with a green cross in his right hand, and a golden penny of the empire in his left. He was also to have a glove on his right hand. If there were two attorneys, they were both to bear crosses and pence. The attorney of a simple prince bore a silver penny. The old law, which loves to give a reason for every thing, says, "By the cross they intimate that the prince whom they represent will, in case he should be found guilty, amend his conduct according to the direction of the faith which Jesus Christ preached, and be constant and true to the holy Christian faith, and obedient to the holy empire and justice."

All the preliminaries being arranged, the trial commenced by the charge against him being made known to the accused, who was called upon for his defence. If he did not wish to defend himself in person, he was permitted to employ an advocate whom he might have brought with him. If it was a civil suit, he might, however, stay the proceedings at once by giving good security for his satisfying the claims of the plaintiff, in which case he was allowed the usual grace of six weeks and three days. He might also except to the competence of the court, or to the legality of the summons, or to anything else which would, if defective, annul the proceedings.

If the accused did not appear, the regular course was for the prosecutor to overswear him; that is, himself to swear by the saints to the truth of what he had stated, and six true and genuine frei-schoppen to swear that they believed him to have spoken the truth.

The older Fehm-law made a great distinction between the initiated and the ignorant, and one very much to the advantage of the former. The accused, if initiated, was allowed to clear himself from the charge by laying his two fore-fingers on the naked sword, and swearing by the saints "that he was

[p. 367]

innocent of the things and the deed which the court had mentioned to him, and which the accuser charged him with, so help him God and all the saints." He then threw a cross-penny (Kreutzer?) to the court and went his way, no one being permitted to let or hinder him. But if he was one of the uninitiated, he was not permitted to clear himself in this manner, and the truth of the fact was determined by the evidence given.

It is plain, however, that such a regulation as this could properly only belong to the time when none but persons of irreproachable character were initiated. As the institution degenerated, this distinction was gradually lost sight of, and facts were determined by evidence without any regard to the rank of the accused.

The accuser could prevent the accused from clearing himself thus easily, by offering himself and six compurgators to swear to the truth of his charge. If the accused wanted to outweigh this evidence, he was obliged to come forward with thirteen or twenty compurgators and swear to his innocence. If he could bring the last number he was acquitted, for the law did not allow it to be exceeded; but if he had but thirteen, the accuser might then overpower him by bringing forward twenty to vouch for his veracity.

If the accuser had convicted the accused, he forthwith prayed the count to grant him a just sentence. The count never took on himself the office of finding the verdict; he always directed one of the assessors to perform it. If the assessor thought the matter too difficult for his judgment, he averred on oath that such was the case, and the court then gave the duty to another, who might free himself from the responsibility in the same manner. Should none of the

[p. 368]

assessors be able to come to a decision, the matter was put off till the next court-day.

But if the assessor undertook the finding of the verdict, it lay with himself whether he should do so alone, or retire to take the opinion of the other assessors and the by-standers. To give the verdict due force it must be found sitting, otherwise it might be objected to. Whether or not the assessor was bound to decide according to the majority of voices is uncertain. When the verdict had been found the assessor appeared with his colleagues before the tribunal, and delivered it to the count, who then passed sentence. What the penalties were for different offences was a secret known only to the initiated; but, if they were of a capital nature, the halter, as was intimated by the one which lay before the count, was the instrument of punishment.

Should the accused not have appeared, and been in consequence outlawed, he was forfehmed by the following awful curse: it was declared that "he should be excluded from the public peace, from all liberties and rights, and the highest un-peace, un-grace, and halter be appointed for him; that he should be cut off from all communication with any Christian people, and be cursed so that he might wither in his body, and neither become any more verdant, nor increase in any manner; that his wife should be held to be a widow, and his children orphans; that he should be without honour and without right, and given up to any one; that his neck should be left to the ravens, his body to all beasts, to the birds of the air and the fishes in the water; but his soul should be commended to God," &c. &c.

If he continued a year and a day under the sentence of outlawry, all his goods then fell to the

[p. 369]

emperor or king. A prince, town, or community, that incurred the sentence of outlawry, lost thereby at once all liberties, privileges, and graces.

Should the sentence passed be a capital one, the count flung the halter over his head out of the in-closure of the tribunal, the schoppen spat on it, and the name of the condemned was entered in the blood-book. If the criminal was present he was instantly seized, and, according to the custom of the middle ages, when, as in the East, no disgrace was attached to the office of executioner, the task of executing him was committed to the youngest schoppe present, who forthwith hung him from the nearest tree. The quality of the criminal was duly attended to; for if he was initiated he was hung seven feet higher than any other, as being esteemed a greater criminal. If the accused was not present, all the schoppen were, as we have already described, set in pursuit of him, and wherever they caught him they hanged him without any further ceremony.

The sentence was kept a profound secret from the uninitiated. A copy of it, drawn up in the usual form, and sealed with seven seals, was given to the accuser.

We thus see that the proceedings in the Fehm-courts were strictly consonant to justice, and even leaned to the side of mercy. But this was not all: the right of appeal was also secured to the accused in case the schoppen who consulted about the verdict did not agree, or that the witnesses did not correspond in their evidence; or, finally, if the verdict found was considered unjust or unsuitable; which last case afforded a most ample field of appeal, for it must have been very rarely that a sentence did not appear unjust or over-severe to the party who was condemned. It was, however, necessary that the appeal should be made on publication of the sentence,

[p. 370]

or at least before the court broke up. The parties were allowed to retire for a few minutes, to consult with their friends who had accompanied them. If they did not then say that they would appeal, the sentence was declared absolute, and they were forbidden, under heavy penalties, to oppose it in any other court. If they did resolve to appeal, both parties were obliged to give security de lite prosequenda. Should either party, being poor or a stranger, be unable to give security, his oath was held to be sufficient, that, as the law humanely and justly expresses it, "the stranger or the poor man may be able to seek his right in the Holy Roman Empire as well as the native or the rich man."

The appeal lay to the general chapter of the Secret closed Tribunal of the Imperial Chamber, which usually, if not constantly, sat at Dortmund; or it lay to the emperor, or king, as the supreme head of these tribunals. In case of the monarch being initiated, he could examine into the cause himself; otherwise he was obliged to commit the inquiry to such of his councillors as were initiated, or to initiated commissioners, and that only on Westphalian soil. Of this species of appeal there are numerous instances. Finally, the appeal might be made to the imperial lieutenant, who then inquired into the matter himself, with the aid of some initiated schoppen, or brought it before the general chapter of which he was president. There was no appeal to the emperor from his sentence, or from that of the chapter.

There were, besides the right of appeal, other means of averting the execution of the sentence of a Fehm-court. Such was what was called replacing in the former state, of which, however, it was only the initiated who could avail himself.  having been passed on a person who had not appeared, he might voluntarily and personally repair to

[p. 371]

where the secret tribunal was sitting, and sue for this favour. He was to appear before the court which had passed the sentence, accompanied by two frei-schoppen, with a halter about his neck, with white gloves on him, and his hands folded, with an imperial coin and a green cross in them. He and his companions were then to fall down on their knees, and pray for him to be placed in the condition which he was in before the proceedings commenced against him. There was also what was called the complaint of nullity, in case the prescribed form of the proceedings had been violated. Some other means shall presently be noticed.

Footnotes

^363:* In German, Dienstag, probably Dinstag, i.e. Court-day.

     
Secret Societies of the Middle Ages, by Thomas Keightley, [1837], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 372]

  

CHAPTER IV.

The General Chapter--Rights of the Emperor--Of his Lieutenant--Of the Stuhlherrn, or Tribunal-Lords.

To complete the sketch of the Fehm-tribunals and their proceedings, we must state the rights and powers of the general chapter and of the emperor, his lieutenant, and the tribunal-lords.

The general chapter was a general assembly of the Westphalian tribunal-lords, counts, and schoppen, summoned once a-year by the emperor or his lieutenant. Every count was bound by oath to appear at it. It could only be holden in Westphalia, and almost exclusively at Dortmund or Arensberg. No one could appear at it who was not initiated, not even the emperor himself. The president was the emperor, if present and initiated, otherwise the lieutenant or his substitute.

The business of the general chapter was to inquire into the. conduct and proceedings of the different Fehm-courts. The counts were therefore to give an account of all their proceedings during the past year; to furnish a list of the names of the schoppen who had been admitted, as well as of the suits which had been commenced, with the names of the accusers, the accused, the forfehmed, &c. Such counts as had neglected their duty were deposed by the general chapter.

The general chapter was, as we have above observed, a court of appeal from all the Fehm-tribunals. In matters of great importance the decrees of the

[p. 373]

lower courts were, to give them greater weight, confirmed by the general chapter. It was finally at the general chapter that all regulations, laws, and reformations, concerning the Fehm-law and courts, were made.

The emperor, even when the imperial authority was at the lowest, was regarded in Germany as the fountain of judicial authority. The right of passing capital sentence in particular was considered to emanate either mediately or immediately from him. The Fehm-courts were conspicuous for their readiness to acknowledge him as the source of their authority, and all their decrees were pronounced in his name.

As superior lord and judge of all the counts and tribunals, the emperor had a right of inspection and reformation over them. He could summon and preside in a general chapter.; he might enter any court; and the presiding count was obliged to give way and allow him to preside in his stead. He had the power to make new schoppen, provided he did so on Westphalian soil. Every schoppe was moreover bound to give a true answer to the emperor when he asked whether such a one was forfehmed or not, and in what court. He could also depose disobedient counts, but only in Westphalia.

The emperor could even withdraw a cause out of the hands of the tribunals. The right of appeal to him has been already noticed; but, besides this, he had a power of forbidding the count to proceed in the cause when the accused offered himself to him for honour and right; and it was at his own risk then that the count proceeded any further in the business. The emperor could also grant a safe-conduct to any person who might apply for it under apprehension of having been forfehmed, which safe-conduct the schoppen dared not violate. Even when

[p. 374]

a person had been forfehmed, the emperor could save him by issuing his command to stay execution of the sentence for a hundred years, six weeks, and a day.

It is plain, that, to be able to exercise these rights, the emperor must be himself initiated, for otherwise he could not, for instance, appear where a court was sitting, make alterations in laws with which, if ignorant, he must necessarily be unacquainted, or extend mercy when he could not know who was forfehmed or not. In the laws establishing the rights of the emperor it was therefore always inserted, provided he be initiated, and the acts of uninitiated emperors were by the Fehm-courts frequently declared invalid. The emperor had, therefore, his choice of setting a substitute over the Fehm-courts, or of being himself initiated. The latter course was naturally preferred, and each emperor, at his coronation at Aix-la-Chapelle, was initiated by the hereditary Count of Dortmund. Though Aix-la-Chapelle was not in Westphalia, the law sanctioned this departure from the general rule that frei-schoppen should only be made in that country.

The emperor's lieutenant, who was almost always the Archbishop of Cologne, had the right of confirming such counts as were presented to him by the Tribunal-lords, and of investing them with the powers of life and death. He could also summon general chapters, and preside and exercise the other imperial rights in them. He might decide, with the aid of some schoppen, in cases of appeal to him, without bringing the affair before the general chapter; and he had the power of making schoppen at any tribunal in Westphalia, which proves that, like the emperor, he had free access to them all. Hence it is clear that he also must have been initiated.

The dignity and pre-eminence of the 

[p. 375]

of Cologne, when this office had been conferred on him, caused a good deal of envy and jealousy among the lords of Westphalia, who had been hitherto his equals, and who considered themselves equally entitled to it with him. They never let slip an occasion of showing their feelings, and they always had their counts invested by the emperor, and not by the archbishop; nay, there are not wanting instances of their having such counts as he had invested confirmed and re-invested by the emperor.

There now remain only the Tribunal-Lords (Stuhlherrn) to be considered.

The Tribunal-lord was the lord of the district in which there was a Fehm-tribunal. He might himself, if initiated, become the count of it, having previously obtained the power of life and death from the emperor, or his lieutenant; or, if he did not choose to do so, he might, as we have already seen, present a count to be invested, for whose conduct he was held responsible; and, if the count appointed by him misconducted himself, the Stuhl-herr was liable to a forfeiture of his rights. He was, in consequence, permitted to exercise a right of inspection over the Fehm-courts in his territory; no schoppe could be made, no cause brought into the court, not even a summons issued, without his approbation. There even lay a kind of appeal to him from the sentence of the count; and he could also, like the emperor, withdraw certain persons and causes from his jurisdiction. But as his power did not extend beyond his own , the count might refer those causes in which he wished, but was prohibited, to proceed, to the courts in other territories; he might also, if he apprehended opposition from the Tribunal-lord, require him (if initiated) to be present at the proceedings.

The Tribunal-lord, if uninitiated, could, like the

[p. 376]

emperor in the same case, exercise these powers only by initiated deputies.

The great advantage which resulted from the right of having Fehm-tribunals induced the high lords, both spiritual and temporal, to be very anxious to become possessed of this species of territorial property, and in consequence nearly all the lords in Westphalia had Fehm-tribunals. Even towns, such as Dortmund, Soest, Munster, and Osnabruck, had these tribunals, either within their walls, or in their districts, or their neighbourhood, for it would not have been good policy in them to suffer this sort of Status in Statu, to be independent of their authority.

     
Secret Societies of the Middle Ages, by Thomas Keightley, [1837], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 377]

  

CHAPTER V.

Fehm-courts at Celle--At Brunswick--Tribunal of the Knowing in the Tyrol--The Castle of Baden--African Purrahs.

WE have now gone through the constitution and modes of procedure of the Fehm-tribunals of Westphalia, as far as the imperfect notices of them which have reached the present age permit. It remains to trace their history down to the last vestiges of them which appear. A matter of some curiosity should, however, be previously touched on, namely, how far they were peculiar to Westphalia, and what institutions resembling them may be elsewhere found.

Fehm-tribunals were, in fact, as we have already observed, not peculiar to Westphalia. In a MS. life of Duke Julius of Celle, by Francis Algermann [**], of the year 1608, we read the following description of a Fehm- court, which the author remembered to have seen holden at Celle in his youth:--

"When the Fehm-law [*+] was to be put in operation, all the inhabitants of the district who were above twelve years of age were obliged to appear, without fail, on a heath or some large open place, and sit down on the ground. Some tables were then set in the middle of the assembly, at which the prince, his councillors, and bailiffs, took their seats. The Secret Judges then reported the delinquents and the offences; and they went round with a white wand

[p. 378]

and smote the offenders on the legs. Whoever then had a bad conscience, and knew himself to be guilty of a capital offence, was permitted to stand up and to quit the country within a day and a night. He might even wait till he got the second blow. But if he was struck the third time, the executioner was at hand, a pastor gave him the sacrament, and away with him to the nearest tree.

"But if a person was struck but once or twice, that was a paternal warning to him to amend his life thenceforward. Hence it was called Jus Veniae, because there was grace in it, which has been corrupted and made Vim-richt."

There were similar courts, we are told, at places named Wolpe and Rotenwald. Here the custom was for the Secret Judges, when they knew of any one having committed an offence which fell within the Fehm-jurisdiction, to give him a private friendly warning. To this end they set, during the night, a mark on his door, and at drinking-parties they managed to have the can sent past him. If these warnings took no effect the court was held.

According to an ancient law-book, the Fehm-court at Brunswick was thus regulated and holden. Certain of the most prudent and respectable citizens, named Fehmenotes, had the secret duty of watching the conduct of their fellow-citizens and giving information of it to the council. Had so many offences been committed that it seemed time to hold a Fehm-court, a day was appointed for that purpose. Some members of the council from the different districts of the town met at midnight in St. Martin's churchyard, and then called all the council together. All the gates and entrances of the town were closed; ail corners and bridges, and the boats both above and below the town, were guarded. The Fehm-clerk was then directed to begin his office, and the Fehmenotes

[p. 379]

were desired to give their informations to him to be put into legal form if the time should prove sufficient.

At daybreak it was notified to the citizens that the council had resolved that the Fehm-court should be holden on this day, and they were directed to repair to the market-place as soon as the tocsin sounded.

When the bell had tolled three times all who had assembled accompanied the council, through the gate of St. Peter, out of the town to what was called the Fehm-ditch. Here they separated; the council took their station on the space between the ditch and the town-gate, the citizens stood at the other side of the ditch. The Fehmenotes now mingled themselves among the townsmen, inquired after such offences as were not yet come to their knowledge, and communicated whatever information they obtained, and also their former discoveries (if they had not had time to do so in the night) to the clerk, to be put by him into proper form and laid before the council.

The clerk having delivered his protocol to the council, they examined it and ascertained which of the offences contained in it were to be brought before a Fehm-court, and which not; for matters under the value of four shillings did not belong to it. The council then handed the protocol back to the clerk, who went with it to the Fehm-court, which now took its seat in presence of a deputation of the council.

Those on whom theft had been committed were first brought forward and asked if they knew the thief. If they replied in the negative, they were obliged to swear by the saints to the truth of their answer; if they named an individual, and that it was the first charge against him, he was permitted to clear himself by oath; but if there was a second charge against him, his own oath was not sufficient,

[p. 380]

and he was obliged to bring six compurgators to swear along with him. Should there be a third charge, his only course was to clear himself by the ordeal. He was forthwith to wash his hand in water, and to take in it a piece of glowing-hot iron, which the beadles and executioners had always in readiness on the left of the tribunal, and to carry it a distance of nine feet. The Fehm-count, according to ancient custom, chose whom he would to find the verdict. The council could dissolve the court whenever they pleased. Such causes as had not come on, or were put off on account of sickness, or any other just impediment, were, on such occasions, noted and reserved for another session.

It is evident, however, that this municipal court, of which the chief object was the punishment of theft, the grand offence of the middle ages, though called a Fehm-court, was widely different from those of the same name in Westphalia.

The Tribunal of the Knowing (Gericht der Wissenden), in Tyrol, has also been erroneously supposed to be the same with the Westphalian courts. The mode of procedure in this was for the accuser to lay his finger on the head of the accused, and swear that he knew him to be an infamous person, while six reputable people, laying their fingers on the arm of the accuser, swore that they knew him to have sworn truly and honestly. This was considered sufficient evidence against any person, and the court proceeded to judgment on it.

The ideal Fehm-court beneath the castle of Baden must not be passed over without notice, as it seems to be the model after which our popular novelist described his Fehm-tribunal in Switzerland! A female writer in Germany [**] informs us that beneath the

[p. 381]

castle of Baden the vaults extend to a considerable distance in labyrinthine windings, and were in former times appropriated to the secret mysteries of a Fehm-tribunal. Those who were brought before this awful tribunal were not conducted into the castle-vaults in the usual way; they were lowered into the gloomy abyss by a cord in a basket, and restored to the light, if so fortunate as to be acquitted, in the same manner; so that they never could, however inclined, discover where they had been. The ordinary entrance led through a long dark passage, which was closed by a door of a single stone as large as a tombstone.. This door revolved on invisible hinges, and fitted so exactly, that when it was shut the person who was inside could not distinguish it from the adjoining stones, or tell where it was that he had entered. It could only be opened on the outside by a secret spring. Proceeding along this passage you reached the torture-room, where you saw hooks in the wall, thumb-screws, and every species of instruments of torture. A door on the left opened into a recess, the place of the Maiden's Kiss. When any person who had been condemned was led hither, a stone gave way under his feet, and he fell into the arms of the Maiden, who, like the wife of Nabis, crushed him to death in her arms, which were thick set with spikes. Proceeding on farther, after passing through several doors, you came to the vault of the Tribunal. This was a long spacious quadrangle hung round with black. At the upper end was a niche in which were an altar and crucifix. In this place the chief judge sat; his assessors had their seats on wooden benches along the walls.

We need not to observe how totally different from the proceedings of a genuine Fehm-tribunal is all this. That there are vaults under the castle of Baden is certain, and the description above given is possibly

[p. 382]

correct. But the Fehm-court which was held in them is the mere coinage of the lady's brain, and utterly unlike any thing real, unless it be the Holy Office, whose secret proceedings never could vie in justice or humanity with those of the Westphalian Fehm-courts. It is, moreover, not confirmed by any document, or even by the tradition of the place, and would be undeserving of notice were it not for the reason assigned above.

The similarity between the Fehm-courts and the Inquisition has been often observed. In the secrecy of their proceedings, and the great number of agents which they had at their devotion, they resemble each other; but the Holy Office had nothing to correspond to the public and repeated citations of the Fehm-courts, the fair trial given to the accused, the leaning towards mercy of the judges, and the right of appeal which was secured.

The most remarkable resemblance to the Fehm-tribunals is (or was) to be found among the negroes on the west coast of Africa, as they are described by a French traveller [**]. These are the Purrahs of the Foollahs, who dwell between Sierra Leone river and Cape Monte.

There are five tribes of this people, who form a confederation, at the head of which is a union of warriors, which is called a Purrah. Each tribe has its own separate Purrah, and each Purrah has its chiefs and its tribunal, which is, in a more restricted sense, also called a Purrah. The general Purrah of the confederation is formed from the Purrahs of the five tribes.

To be a member of the inferior Purrahs, a man must be thirty years of age; no one under fifty can have a seat in the general Purrah. The candidate

[p. 383]

for admission into an inferior Purrah has to undergo a most severe course of probation, in which all the elements are employed to try him. Before he is permitted to enter on this course, such of his relatives as are already members are obliged to pledge themselves for his fitness, and to swear to take his life if ever he should betray the secrets of the society. Having passed through the ordeal, he is admitted into the society and sworn to secrecy and obedience. If he is unmindful of his oath, he becomes the child of death. When he least expects it a warrior in disguise makes his appearance and says, "The great Purrah sends thee death." Every one present departs; no one ventures to make any opposition, and the victim falls.

The subordinate Purrahs punish all crimes committed within their district, and take care that their sentences are duly executed. They also settle disputes and quarrels between the leading families.

It is only on extraordinary occasions that the great Purrah meets. It then decides on the punishment of traitors and those who had resisted its decrees. Frequently too it has to interfere to put an end to wars between the tribes. When it has met on this account it gives information to the belligerents, directing them to abstain from hostilities, and menacing death if a drop more of blood should be spilt. It then inquires into the causes of the war, and condemns the tribe which is found to have been the aggressor to a four days' plundering. The warriors to whom the execution of this sentence is committed must, however, be selected from a neutral district. They arm and disguise themselves, put horrible-looking vizards on their faces, and with pitch-torches in their hands set out by night from the place of assembly. Making no delay, they reach the devoted district before the break of day, and in parties of

[p. 384]

from forty to sixty men, they fall unexpectedly on the devoted tribe, and, with fearful cries, making known the sentence of the great Purrah, proceed to put it into execution. The booty is then divided one half is given to the injured tribe, the other falls to the great Purrah, who bestow one half of their share on the warriors who executed their sentence.

Even a single family, if its power should appear to be increasing so fast as to put the society in fear for its independence, is condemned to a plundering by the Purrah. It was thus, though under more specious pretexts, that the Athenian democracy sought to reduce the power of their great citizens by condemning. them to build ships, give theatrical exhibitions, and otherwise spend their fortunes.

Nothing can exceed the dread which the  inspires. The people speak of it with terror and awe, and look upon the members of it as enchanters who are in compact with the devil. The Purrah itself is solicitous to diffuse this notion as much as possible, esteeming it a good mean for increasing its power and influence. The number of its members is estimated at upwards of 6000, who recognise each other by certain words and signs. Its laws and secrets are, notwithstanding the great number of the members, most religiously concealed from the knowledge of the uninitiated.

Footnotes

^377:* Berck, p. 231, from Spittler's History of Hanover.

^377:+ Vimricht, i.e. Fehm-law, the German word, of which the author presently gives a childish etymology.

^380:* Friederika Brun. Episoden aus Reisen durch das Sudliche Deutschland, &c,

^382:* Golberry, Voyage en Afrique, t. i. p,114, and seq.

     
Secret Societies of the Middle Ages, by Thomas Keightley, [1837], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 385]

  

CHAPTER VI.

The Emperor Lewis the Bavarian--Charles IV.--Wenceslaus--Rupertian Reformation--Encroachments of the Fehm-courts--Case of Nickel Weller and the town of Gorlitz--Of the City of Dantzig--Of Hans David and the Teutonic Knights--Other instances of the presumption of the Free-counts--Citation of the Emperor Frederic III.--Case of the Count of Teckenburg.

THE history of the Fehm-gerichte, previous to the fifteenth century, offers but few events to detain at-attention. The Emperor Lewis the Bavarian appears to have exerted his authority on several occasions in granting privileges in Westphalia according, as it is expressly stated, to the Fehm-law. His successor, the luxurious Charles IV., acted with the same caprice respecting the Fehm-tribunals as he did in every thing else, granting privileges and revoking them just as it seemed to accord with his interest at the moment. This monarch attempted also to extend the Fehm-system beyond Westphalia, deeming it perhaps a good mean for bringing all Germany under the authority of his patrimonial kingdom of Bohemia. He therefore gave permission to the Bishop of Hildesheim to erect two Free-tribunals out of Westphalia. On the representations of the Archbishop of Cologne and the lords of Westphalia, however, he afterwards abolished them.

Wenceslaus, the son of Charles, acted with his usual folly in the case of the Fehm-tribunals; he is said, as he could keep nothing secret, to have blabbed their

[p. 386]

private sign, and he took on him to make frei-schoppen, contrary to the law, out of Westphalia. These schoppen of the emperor's making did not, however, meet with much respect from the genuine ones, as the answer given to the Emperor Rupert by the Westphalian tribunals evinces. On his asking how they acted with regard to such schoppen, their reply was, "We ask them at what court they were made schoppen. Should it appear that they were made schoppen at courts which had no right so to do, we hang them, in case of their being met in Westphalia, on the instant, without any mercy." Wenceslaus, little as he cared about Germany in general, occasionally employed the Fehm-courts for the furtherance of his plans, and, in the year 1389, he had Count Henry of Wernengerode tried and hanged for treason by Westphalian schoppen. The reign of Wenceslaus is particularly distinguished by its being the period in which the Archbishop of Cologne arrived at the important office of lieutenant of the emperor over all the Westphalian tribunals.

The reign of Rupert was, with respect to the Westphalian Fehm-courts, chiefly remarkable by the reformation of them named front him. This reformation, which is the earliest publicly-accredited source from which a knowledge of the Fehm-law can be derived, was made in the year 1404. It is a collection of decisions by which the rights and privileges of a king of the Romans are ascertained with respect to these tribunals.

The Rupertian reformation, and the establishment of the office of lieutenant in the person of the Archbishop of Cologne, which was completed by either Rupert or his successor Sigismund, form together an epoch in the history of the Fehm-gerichte. Hitherto Westphalia alone was the scene of their operations, and their authority was of evident advantage to the

[p. 387]

empire. Their power had now attained its zenith; confidence in their strength led them to abuse it; and, during the century which elapsed between the Rupertian reformation and the establishment of the Perpetual Public Peace and the Imperial Chamber by the Emperor Maximilian, we shall have to contemplate chiefly their abuses and assumptions.

The right of citation was what was chiefly abused by the Free-courts. Now that they were so formally acknowledged to act under the imperial authority, they began to regard Westphalia as too narrow a theatre for the display of their activity and their power. As imperial commissioners, they maintained that their jurisdiction extended to every place which acknowledged that of the emperor's, and there was hardly a corner of Germany free from the visits of their messengers; nay, even beyond the limits of the empire men trembled at their citations.

It was chiefly the towns which were harassed by these citations, which were frequently issued at the instance of persons whom they had punished or expelled for their misdeeds. Their power and consequence did not protect even the greatest: we find, during the fifteenth century, some of the principal cities of the empire summoned before the tribunals of Westphalian counts. Thus in the records of those times we read of citations served on Bremen, Lubeck, Augsburg, Nuremberg, Erfurt, Gorlitz, and Dantzig. Even Prussia and Livonia, then belonging to the order of the Teutonic knights, were annoyed by their interference.

One of the most remarkable cases which this period presents is that of the uneasiness, caused to the town of Gorlitz by means of one of its inhabitants named Nickel Weller. This man, who was a Westphalian schoppe, was accused of having disinterred an unchristened child, and of having made

[p. 388]

a candle of the bone of its arm, which he had filled with the wax of an Easter-taper and with incense, and of having employed it in a barn in presence of his mother, his wife, and an old peasant, for magical purposes. As he could not deny the fact, he was, according to the law of those times, liable to be hanged; but the high-bailiff of Stein, and some other persons of consequence, interfering in his favour, the magistrates contented themselves with expelling him the town and confiscating his goods. As it afterwards proved, they would have acted more wisely had they condemned him to perpetual imprisonment.

Weller immediately repaired to Bresslau, and besought the council, the Bishop of Waradein, and the imperial chancellor, to advocate his cause. They acceded to his desire; but the magistrates of Gorlitz perfectly justified their conduct. Weller, still indisposed to rest, applied to the pope, Innocent VIII., asserting that he could not to any purpose bring an accusation against the council of Gorlitz within the town of the diocese of Meissen, and that he had no chance of justice there. The pope forthwith named John de' Medici and Dr. Nicholas Tauchen of Bresslau spiritual commissioners in this affair, and these desired the high-bailiff of Stein to do his best that Weller should recover his rights within the space of a month, on his taking his oath to the truth of his statements, otherwise they should be obliged themselves to take measures for that purpose.

From some unassigned cause, however, nothing came of this, and Weller once more addressed himself to the pope, with whom the Bishop of Ostia became his advocate, He was re-admitted into the bosom of the Church; but the decree of the magistracy of Gorlitz still remained in force, and the new commissioners appointed by the pope even confirmed it.

Finding that he had nothing to expect from papal

[p. 389]

interference, Weller had at last recourse to the Fehm-tribunals, and on the 3d May, 1490, John of Hulschede, count of the tribunal at Brackel, cited the burgomasters, council, and all the lay inhabitants of Gorlitz above the age of eighteen years, before his tribunal. This summons was served in rather a remarkable manner, for it was found fastened to a twig on a hedge, on a farm belonging to a man named Wenzel Emmerich, a little distance from the town.

As by the Golden Bull of the Emperor Charles IV., and moreover by a special privilege granted by Sigismund, Gorlitz was exempted from all foreign jurisdiction, the magistracy informed Vladislaus, King of Bohemia, of this citation, and implored his mediation. The Bohemian monarch accordingly addressed himself to the tribunal at Brackel, but George Hackenberg, who was at that time the free-count of that court, Hulschede being dead, did not even deign to give him an answer.

Meanwhile the appointed period had elapsed without the people of Gorlitz having appeared to the summons, and Weller, charging them with disobedience and contempt of court, prayed that they might be condemned in all the costs and penalties thereby incurred, and that he might be himself permitted to proceed with his complaint. To this end he estimated the losses and injuries which he had sustained at 500 Rhenish florins, and made a declaration to that effect on oath, with two joint-swearers. He was accordingly authorised by the court to indemnify himself in any manner he could at the expense of the people of Gorlitz. It was farther added that, if any one should impede Weller in the prosecution of his rights, that person should ipso facto fall under the heavy displeasure of the empire and the pains and penalties of the tribunal at Brackel, and be moreover obliged to pay all the costs of the accuser.

[p. 390]

On the 16th August of the same year, the count set a new peremptory term for the people of Gorlitz, assuring them that, in case of disobedience, "he should he obliged, though greatly against his inclination, to pass the heaviest and most rigorous sentence on their persons, their lives, and their honour." The citation was this time found on the floor of the convent church. The council in consternation applied to the Archbishop of Cologne and to the free-count himself, to be relieved from this condition, but in vain; the count did not condescend to take any notice of their application, and when they did not appear at the set time, declared the town of Gorlitz outlawed for contumacy.

It appears that Weller had, for some cause or other, brought an accusation against the city of Bresslau also; for in the published decree of outlawry against Gorlitz it was included. By this act it was prohibited to every person, under penalty of similar outlawry, to harbour any inhabitant of either of these towns; to eat or drink, or hold any intercourse with them, till they had reconciled themselves to the Fehm-tribunals, and given satisfaction to the complainant. Weller himself stuck up a copy of this decree on a market-day at Leipzig; but it was instantly torn down by some of the people of Gorlitz who happened to be there.

The two towns of Gorlitz and Bresslau held a consultation at Liegnitz, to devise what measures it were best to adopt in order to relieve themselves from this system of persecution. They resolved that they would jointly and separately defend themselves and their proceedings by a public declaration, which should be posted up in Gorlitz, Bresslau, Leipzig, and other places. They also resolved to lay their griefs before the Diet at Prague, and pray for its intercession with the Archbishop of Cologne and the Landgraf

[p. 391]

of Hessen. They accordingly did so, and the Diet assented to their desire; but their good offices were of no avail, and the answer of the landgraf clearly showed, either that he had no authority over his count, or that he was secretly pleased with what he had done.

The indefatigable Weller now endeavoured to seize some of the people of Bresslau and Gorlitz, in Hein and other places in Meissen. But they frustrated his plans by obtaining a promise of protection and safe-conduct from the Duke George. Weller, however, did not desist, and when Duke Albert came from the Netherlands to Meissen, he sought and obtained his protection. But here again he was foiled; for, when the high-bailiff and council of Gorlitz had informed that prince of the real state of the case, he withdrew his countenance from him. Wearied out by this ceaseless teasing, the towns applied, through the king of Bohemia, to the Emperor Frederic III. for a mandate to all the subjects of the empire, and an inhibition to the tribunal at Brackel and all the free-counts and schoppen. These, when obtained, they took care to have secretly served on the council of Dortmund and the free-count of Brackel. By these means they appear to have put an end to their annoyances for the remainder of Weller's life. But, in the year 1502, his son and his son-in-law revived his claims on Gorlitz. Count Ernest of Hohenstein interceded for them; but the council adhered firmly to their previous resolution, and declared that it was only to their own or to higher tribunals that they must look for relief. The matter then lay over for ten years, when it was again stirred by one Guy of Taubenheim, and was eventually settled by an amicable arrangement.

As we have said, the Fehm-tribunals extended their claims of jurisdiction even to the Baltic. We

[p. 392]

find that a citizen of the town of Dantzig, named Hans Holloger, who was a free schoppe, was cited to appear before the tribunal of Elleringhausen, under the hawthorn, "because he had spoken what he ought not to have spoken about the Secret Tribunal." This might seem just enough, as he belonged to the society; but the town-council were commanded, under a penalty of fifty pounds of fine gold, to cast the accused into prison till he had given security for standing his trial.

Even the powerful order of the Teutonic Knights, who were the masters of Prussia and Livonia, did not escape being annoyed by the Fehm-tribunals. How little their power availed against that formidable jurisdiction is evinced by the answer made by the Grand Master to the towns which sued to him for protection. "Beloved liegemen! you have besought us to protect you therefrom; we would cheerfully do it knew we but ways and means thereto." And when he wrote to Mangolt, the count of the tribunal at Freyenhagen, warning him against summoning before him the subjects of the order, the latter haughtily replied, You have your rights from the empire, and I have power to judge over all who hold of the empire."

The following very curious case occurred in the first half of the fifteenth century:--

A shopkeeper at Liebstadt died very much indebted to the two officers of the Teutonic order, whose business it was to keep the small towns in Prussia supplied with mercantile goods, and they accordingly seized on the effects which he had left behind him. These, however, were not sufficient to satisfy even the demands of one of them, much less of both, and they had made up their minds to rest content with the loss, when, to their surprise, Hans David, the son of the deceased, came forward with

[p. 393]

an account against the order of such amount, that, as it was observed, if all the houses in the town were sold, and all the townsmen taxed to the utmost, the produce would not discharge the one-half of it. He however produced a document purporting to be a bond of the order. This instrument bore all the marks of falsification; it was full of erasures and insertions; among the witnesses to it, some were set down as priors who were only simple brethren of the order; there were the names of others who had never seen it; it was asserted to have been attested and verified by the tribunal at Passnar, but in the records of that court there were not the slightest traces of it; the seal of the Grand Master, which was appended to every document of any importance, was wanting Of course payment was resisted, but Hans David was told to pursue his claim, if he pleased, before the emperor and the pope, whom the order recognised as their superiors.

As Hans David was under the protection of the king of Poland, he had recourse to that prince; but he declined interfering any farther than to apply for a safe-conduct for him that he might apply for a new inquiry. The Grand Master, on application being made to him, swore on his honour that he owed to the complainant nothing, and that the bond was a forgery; he moreover promised to answer the charge in any fit place that the complainant might select; nay, even in Prussia, and he granted him a safe-conduct as before.

It is not known what course Hans David now adopted; but nine years afterwards (1441) we find him addressing himself to the Free-tribunal at Freyenhagen, whose count, the notorious Mangolt, forthwith issued his citations, "because, as he expressed himself, the order judges with the sword and gentle murder and burning." The Grand Master,

[p. 394]

indignant at this piece of arrogance, immediately brought the matter before the assembly of the free-counts at Coblentz, who declared the proceedings null, and Mangolt liable to punishment, as the knights were spiritual persons. He moreover applied to the emperor, who, to gratify him, issued a mandate, addressed to all princes of the empire, declaring the act of Mangolt to be a piece of iniquity, and null and void.

Hans David was now cast into prison at Cologne, and, notwithstanding a prohibition of the Free-tribunal, was detained there for two years. Existing documents attest (though the fact is inexplicable) that the emperor directed the Archbishop of Cologne and the Margraf of Baden to examine anew into the affair, and to send the acts into the imperial chancery, and, finally, to set the complainant free on his oath, or on his giving bail to appear at Nuremberg. As this proceeding can only be ascribed to the influence of the Secret Tribunals, bent on annoying the order, it serves to show what their power and consequence must have been at that time.

Two years afterwards it was clearly proved at Vienna that the bond had beer}, forged, at the desire of Hans David, by a scholar of Elbingen, named Rothofe. As the case against the former was now so plain, it might be supposed that he would be punished at once. Instead of that, the emperor referred the parties to the pope, as Hans David had struck a prior of the order, and this last was not content with the satisfaction accorded by the emperor.

The cause of the-'order was triumphant in Rome also, yet still Hans David found means to keep off the execution of the sentence already passed on him at Vienna. It was -not till after the death of the then Grand Master that final judgment was formally delivered by Cardinal Jossi, and Hans David, his comrade

[p. 395]

[paragraph continues] Paul Frankleuen, and the Count Mangolt, were condemned to perpetual silence, and to payment of the sum of 6,000 Rhenish florins to the order, and, in case of disobedience, they were declared to be outlawed. All this, however, did not yet avail, and two years afterwards Jossi was obliged to apply to the emperor for the aid of the temporal arm for the execution of the sentence. The chaplain of the order at Vienna also found that Hans David had still the art to deceive many and gain them over to his cause, and he accordingly took care to have the whole account of his conduct posted up on the church-doors.

Still the unwearied Hans David did not rest. He now went to the Free-tribunal at Waldeck, and had the art to deceive the count by his false representations. He assured him that the order had offered him no less than 15,000 florins and an annuity, if he would let his action drop; that they would have been extremely well content if he had escaped out of prison at Cologne, but that he preferred justice and truth to liberty. The order however succeeded here again in detecting and exposing his arts, and the count honestly confessed that he had been deceived by him. He cast him off forthwith, and Hans David, ceasing to annoy the order, devoted himself to astrology and conjuring for the rest of his days [**].

He had, however, caused  abundance of

[p. 396]

uneasiness and expense. Existing documents prove that this affair cost them no less than upwards of 1580 ducats, and 7000 florins, which must be in a great measure ascribed to the secret machinations of the Free-tribunals, anxious to depress the Teutonic Knights, who stood in their way.

In 1410 the Wild and Rhein Graf was summoned before the tribunal at Nordernau, and, in 1454, the Duke of Saxony before that at Limburg. The Elector-Palatine found it difficult, in 1448, to defend himself against a sentence passed on him by one of the Fehm-courts. Duke Henry of Bavaria found it necessary on the following occasion, actually to become a  in order to save himself. One Gaspar, of Torringen, had accused him before the tribunal of Waldeck of "having taken from him his hereditary office of Chief Huntsman; of having seized and beaten his huntsmen and servants, taken his hounds, battered down his castle of Torringen, and taken from his wife her property and jewels, in despite of God, honour, and ancient right." The free-count forthwith cited the duke, who applied to the emperor Sigismund, and procured an inhibition to the count. The duke found it necessary, notwithstanding, to appear before the court; but he adopted the expedient of getting himself made a frei-schoppe, and then, probably in consequence of his rank and influence, procured a sentence to be passed in accordance with his wishes. Gaspar, who was probably an injured man, appealed to the emperor, who referred the matter to the Archbishop of Cologne, and. we are not informed how it ended.

But the audacity of the free-counts went so far as even to cite the head of the empire himself before their tribunals. The imperial chancery having, for just and good cause, declared several free-counts and their Tribunal-lord, Walrabe of Waldeck, to be outlawed,

[p. 397]

three free-counts had the hardihood, in 1470, to cite the emperor Frederic III., with his chancellor, the Bishop of Passau, and the assessors of the chancery-court, to appear before the free-tribunal between the gates of Wunnenberg in the diocese of Paderborn, "there to defend his person and highest honour under penalty of being held to be a disobedient emperor;" and on his not appearing, they had the impudence to cite him again, declaring that, if he did not appear, justice should take its course. Feeble, however, as was the character of the emperor, he did not give way to such assumptions.

Even robbery and spoliation could find a defence with the Fehm-courts. Towards the end of the thirteenth century a count of Teckenburg plundered and ravaged the diocese of Munster. The bishop assembled his own people and called on his allies to aid him, and they took two castles belonging to the count and pushed him to extremity. To extricate himself he accused the bishop, and all those who were with him, before his Fehm-court, and though there were among them the Bishop of Paderborn, three counts, and several knights, the free-count had the boldness to cite them all to appear and defend their 'honour. The affair was eventually amicably arranged and the citation recalled.

These instances may suffice to show how far the Fehm-tribunals had departed from the original object of their institution, and how corrupt and iniquitous they were become.

Footnotes

^395:* The following is one of his predictions, delivered by him, under the name of Master Von Dolete, in the year 1457: "In the ensuing month, September, the sun will appear like a black dragon; cruel winds will blow, the sea will roar, and men will be knocked to pieces by the wind. The sun will then be turned to blood; that betokeneth war in the East and West. A mighty emperor will die; the earth will quake, and few men will remain alive. Wherefore secure your houses and chambers; lay up provisions for thirty days in caverns," &e., &c. The arts of knaves and the language of impostors are the same in all ages and countries.

    
Secret Societies of the Middle Ages, by Thomas Keightley, [1837], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 398]

  

CHAPTER VII.

Cause of the degeneracy of the Fehm-courts--Attempts at reformation--Causes of their high reputation--Case of the Duke of Wurtemberg--Of Kerstian Kerkerink--Causes of the decline of the Fehm-jurisdiction.

THE chief cause of the degeneracy of the Fehm-courts was the admission of improper persons into the society. Originally, as we have seen, no man was admitted to become a schoppe without producing satisfactory evidence as to the correctness of his character; but now, in the case of either count or schoppe, a sufficient sum of money availed to supersede inquiry, and the consequence was that men of the most disgraceful characters frequently presided at the tribunals and wielded the formidable powers of the society. A writer in the reign of Sigismund says, "that those who had gotten authority to hang men were hardly deserving enough to keep pigs; that they were themselves well worthy of the gallows if one cast a glance over their course of life; that they left not unobserved the mote in their brother's eye, but overlooked the beam in their own, &c." And it required no small courage in the writer thus to express himself; for, according to his own testimony, people then hardly ventured even to speak of the Secret Tribunals, so great was the awe in which they were held.

The consequence was that justice was not to be had at any tribunal which was presided over by corrupt judges, as they selected assessors, and even bystanders,

[p. 399]

of the same character with themselves, and whatever verdict they pleased was found. The tribunal-lord generally winked at their proceedings, while the right of appeal to the emperor was treated with little respect; for these monarchs had generally affairs of more immediate importance to themselves to occupy their attention. The right of exemption was also trampled on; sovereign princes were, as we have seen, cited before the tribunals; so also were the Jews. Purely civil matters were now maintained to belong to the Fehm-jurisdiction, and parties in such cases were cited before the tribunals, and forfehmed in case of disobedience. In short, the Fehm-jurisdiction was now become a positive evil instead of being, as heretofore, a benefit to the country.

Various attempts were doubtless made to reform the Fehm-law and tribunals, such as the Arensberg reformation, the Osnaburgh regulation, and others, but to little purpose. The system, in fact, was at variance with the spirit which was now beginning to prevail, and could not be brought to accord with it.

Before we proceed to the decline of the society, we will pause a moment to consider the causes of the great reputation and influence which it obtained and exercised during the period in which it flourished.

The first and chief cause was the advantage which it was found to be of for the maintenance of social order and tranquillity. In the very worst and most turbulent times a portion of mankind will always be found desirous of peace and justice, even independently of any private interest; another portion, feeling themselves the victims of oppression, will gladly catch at any hope of protection; even the mighty and the oppressive themselves will at times view with satisfaction any institution which may avail to shield them against power superior to their own, or which they conceive may be made the instrument of extending

[p. 400]

and strengthening their consequence. The Fehm-jurisdiction was calculated to suit all these orders of persons. The fourteenth and fifteenth centuries were the most anarchic periods of Germany; the imperial power was feeble to control; and the characters of most of the emperors were such as to render still more unavailing the little  which, as heads of the empire, they possessed. Sensible of their weakness, these monarchs generally favoured the Fehm-tribunals, which so freely, and even ostentatiously, recognised the imperial superiority, as long as it did not seek to control them or impede them in their proceedings. The knowledge which, if initiated, they could derive of the crimes and misdemeanors committed in the empire, and the power of directing the arms of the society against evil-doers, were also of no small importance, and they gradually became of opinion that their own existence was involved in that of the Fehm-courts. The nobles of Westphalia, in like manner, found their advantage in belonging to the society, and the office of tribunal-lord was, as we have seen, one of influence and emolument.

But it was the more helpless and oppressed classes of society, more especially the unhappy serfs, that most rejoiced in the existence of the Fehm-tribunals; for there only could they hope to meet with sure redress when aggrieved, and frequently was a cause, when other courts had been appealed to in vain, brought before the Secret Tribunal, which judged without respect of persons. The accuser had farther not to fear the vengeance of the evil-doer, or his friends and dependents; for his name was kept a profound secret if the proofs which he could furnish were sufficient to justify the inquisitorial process already described, and thus the robber-noble, or the feudal tyrant, often met his merited punishment at

[p. 401]

a time when he perhaps least dreaded it, and when he held his victim, whose cries to justice had brought it on him, in the greatest contempt; for, like the Nemesis, or the "gloom-roaming" Erinnys of antiquity, the retributive justice of the Fehm-tribunals moved to vengeance with stealthy pace, and caught its victim in the midst of his security.

A second cause was the opinion of these courts having been instituted by Charles the Great, a monarch whose memory was held in such high estimation and such just veneration during the middle ages. Emperors thought themselves bound to treat with respect the institution of him from whom they derived their authority; and the clergy themselves, exempt from its jurisdiction, were disposed to view with favour an institution established by the monarch to whom the Church was so deeply indebted, and of whose objects the punishment of heretics was one of the most prominent.

A third, and not the least important cause, was the excellent organization of the society, which enabled it to give such effect to its decrees, and to which nothing in those times presented any parallel. The veil of secrecy which enveloped all its proceedings, and the number of agents ready to execute its mandates, inspired awe; the strict inquiry which was known to be made into the character of a man before he was admitted into it gained it respect. Its sentences were, though the proofs were unknown, believed to have emanated from justice; and bad men trembled, and good men rejoiced, as they beheld the body of a criminal suspended from a tree, and the schoppe's knife stuck beside it to intimate by whom he had been judged and condemned.

The reign of the Emperor Maximilian was a period of great reform in Germany, and his establishment of the Perpetual Public Peace, and of

[p. 402]

the Imperial Chamber, joined with other measures, tended considerably to alter and improve the condition of the empire. The Fehm-tribunals should, as a matter of prudence, have endeavoured to accommodate themselves to the new order of things; but this is a part of wisdom of which societies and corporate bodies are rarely found capable; and, instead of relaxing in their pretensions, they even sought to extend them farther than before. Under their usual pretext--the denial of justice--they extended their citations to persons and places over which they had no jurisdiction, and thereby provoked the enmity and excited the active hostility of cities and powerful  lords.

The most remarkable cases which this period presents of the perversion of the rights and powers of the Fehm-tribunals are the two following:--

Duke Ulrich of Wurtemberg lived unhappily with his duchess Sabina. There was at his court a young nobleman named Hans Hutten, a member of an honourable and powerful family, to whose wife the duke was more particular in his attentions than could be agreeable to a husband. The duchess, on her side, testified a particular esteem for Hans Hutten, and the intimacy between them was such as the duke could not forgive. Hutten was either so vain or so inconsiderate as to wear publicly on his finger a valuable ring which had been given to him by the duchess. This filled up the measure of the jealousy and rage of the duke, and one day, at a hunting-party in the wood of Bebling, he contrived to draw Hutten away from the rest of the train, and, taking him at unawares, ran him through with his sword; he then took off his girdle, and with it suspended him from one of the oak-trees in the wood. When the murder was discovered he did not deny it, but asserted that he was a free schoppe, and had performed the deed

[p. 403]

in obedience to a mandate of the Secret Tribunal, to which he was bound to yield obedience. This tale, however, did not satisfy the family of Hutten, and they were as little content with the proposal made by the murderer of giving them satisfaction before a Westphalian tribunal. They loudly appealed to the emperor for justice, and the masculine eloquence of Ulrich von Hutten interested the public so strongly in their favour, that the emperor found himself obliged to issue a sentence of outlawry against the Duke of Wurtemberg. At length, through the mediation of Cardinal Lang, an accommodation both with the Hutten family and the duchess was effected; but the enmity of the former was not appeased, and they some time afterwards lent their aid to effect the deposition of the duke and the confiscation of his property.

It would seem that the Fehm-tribunals would have justified the assassination committed by the duke, at least that all confidence in their justice was now gone; and, at this period, even those writers who are most lavish in their praises of the schoppen of the olden time can find no language sufficiently strong to describe the iniquity of those of their own days. It was now become a common saying that the course of a Fehm-court was first to hang the accused and then to examine into the charges against him. By a solemn recess of the Diet at Triers, in 1512, it was declared "that by the Westphalian tribunals many an honest man had lost his honour, body, life, and property;'' and the Archbishop of Cologne, who must have known them well, shortly afterwards asserted, among other charges, in a capitulation which he issued, that "by very many they were shunned and regarded as seminaries of villains."

The second ease to which we alluded affords a still stronger proof of their degeneracy.

[p. 404]

A man named Kerstian Kerkerink, who lived near the town of Munster, was accused, and probably with truth, of having committed repeated acts of adultery. The Free-tribunal of Munster determined to take cognizance of the affair, and they sent and had him taken out of his bed in the dead of the night. In order to prevent his making any noise and resistance, the persons who were employed assured him that he was to be brought before the tribunal of a respectable councillor of the city of Munster, and prevailed on him to put on his best clothes. They took him to a place named Beckman's-bush, where they kept him concealed while one of them conveyed intelligence of their success to the town-council.

At break of day the tribunal-lords, free-count, and schoppen, taking with them a monk and a common hangman, proceeded to Beckman's-bush, and had the prisoner summoned before them. When he appeared he prayed to be allowed to have an advocate; but this request was refused, and the court proceeded forthwith to pass sentence of death. The unfortunate man now implored for the delay of but one single day to settle his affairs and make his peace with God; but this request also was strongly refused, and it was signified to him that he must die forthwith, and that if he wished he might make his confession, to which end a confessor had been brought to the place. When the unhappy wretch sued once more for favour, it was replied to him that he should find favour and be beheaded, not hung. The monk was then called forward, to hear his confession; when that was over the executioner (who had previously been sworn never to reveal what he saw) advanced and struck off the head of the delinquent.

Meantime, information of what was going on had reached the town, and old and young came forth to witness the last act of the tragedy, or perhaps to

[p. 405]

interfere in favour of Kerkerink. But this had been foreseen and provided against; officers were set to watch all the approaches from the town till all was over, and when the people arrived they found nothing but the lifeless body of Kerkerink, which was placed in a coffin and buried in a neighbouring churchyard.

The bishop and chapter of Munster expressed great indignation at this irregular proceeding and encroachment on their rights, and it served to augment the general aversion to the Fehm-courts.

Our readers will at once perceive how much the proceedings in this case, which occurred in the year 1580, differed from those of former times. Then the accused was formally summoned, and he was allowed to have an advocate; here he was seized without knowing for what, and was hardly granted even the formality of a trial. Then the people who came, even accidentally, into the vicinity of a Fehm-court, would cross themselves and hasten away from the place, happy to escape with their lives: now they rush without apprehension to the spot where it was sitting, and the members of it fly at their approach. Finally, in severity as well as justice, the advantage was on the side of the old courts. The criminal suffered by the halter; we hear of no father confessor being present to console his last moments, and his body, instead of being deposited in consecrated earth, was left to be torn by the wild beasts and ravenous birds. The times were evidently altered!

The Fehm-tribunals were never formally abolished; but the excellent civil institutions of the Emperors Maximilian and Charles V., the consequent decrease of the turbulent and anarchic spirit, the introduction of the Roman law, the spread of the Protestant religion, and many other events of those times, conspired to give men an aversion for what now appeared to be a barbarous jurisdiction and only suited

[p. 406]

to such times as it was hoped and believed never could return. Some of the courts were abolished; exemptions and privileges against them were multiplied; they were prohibited all summary proceedings; their power gradually sank into insignificance; and, though up to the present century a shadow of them remained in some parts of Westphalia, they have long been only a subject of antiquarian curiosity as one of the most striking phenomena of the middle ages. They were only suited to a particular state of society: while that existed they were a benefit to the world; when it was gone they remained at variance with the state which succeeded, became pernicious, were hated and despised, lost all their

 

Click to enlarge
Seal of the Secret Tribunals

 

[p. 407]

influence and reputation, shared the fate of every thing human, whose character is instability and decay, and have left only their memorial behind them.

_________________________________

It is an important advance in civilization, and a great social gain, to have got rid, for all public purposes, of Secret Societies--both of their existence and of their use; for, that, like most of the other obsolete forms into which the arrangements of society have at one time or other resolved themselves, some of these mysterious and exclusive institutions, whether for preserving knowledge or dispensing justice, served, each in its day, purposes of the highest utility, which apparently could not have been accomplished by any other existing or available contrivance, has been sufficiently shown by the expositions that have been given, in the preceding pages, of the mechanism and working of certain of the most remarkable of their number. But it has been made at least equally evident that the evils attendant upon their operation, and inherent in their nature, were also very great, and that, considered even as the suitable remedies for a most disordered condition of human affairs, they were at best only not quite so bad as the disease. They were institutions for preserving knowledge, not by promoting, but by preventing that diffusion of it which, after all, both gives to it its chief value, and, in a natural state of things, most effectually ensures its purification, as well as its increase; and for executing justice, by trampling under foot the rights alike of the wrong-doer and of his victim. Mankind may be said to have stepped out of night into day, in having thrown off the burden and bondage of this form of the social system, and having attained to the power of pursuing knowledge in the spirit of knowledge, and justice in the spirit of justice. We have now escaped from that state of confusion

[p. 408]

and conflict in which one man's gain was necessarily another man's loss, and are fairly on our way towards that opposite state in which, in everything, as far as the constitution of this world will permit, the gain of one shall be the gain of all, This latter, to whatever degree it may be actually attainable, is the proper hope and goal of all human civilization.

 

 

 

 

THE END.

 

 

__________________________
 London: Printed by W. CLOWES, and SONS, Stamford Street.

 

    


===== BOOK: smoa.txt =====


    
Selestor's Men of Atlantis, by Clara Iza von Ravn, [1937], at sacred-texts.com

  

SELESTOR'S MEN OF ATLANTIS

  

By

  

CLARA IZA VON RAVN

  

The Christopher Publishing House

  

Boston, U. S. A.

  

[1937]

Scanned, proofed and formatted by John Bruno Hare at sacred-texts.com, Dec. 2008. This text is in the public domain in the US because its copyright was not renewed in a timely fashion at the US copyright office as required by law at the time.

Click to enlarge
Dust Jacket

Click to enlarge
Front Cover

Click to enlarge
Title Page

Click to enlarge
Verso

  

DEDICATION

To the memory of my dear brothers--

Edgar Alfred Tibbets, whose great learning and patience in instructing me has been my incentive to accomplish, and Frank William Tibbets, who with tender, and never failing sympathy endeavored to smooth for me life's rugged path.

Text on back of dust jacket.

Pictured in Majestic and Poetical Language

The author, in private life the Baroness von Ravn, has written poetry and plays from girlhood; but her most serious work preceding this appeared a number of years ago, and was entitled "The Scribe of a Soul," for which Professor van der Naillen, noted scientist, and associate of , after reading her manuscript, wrote the introduction. This will give an idea of the scientific value of the present volume, although not of its thrilling interest, which can only be found in reading its amazing pages.

"Selestor's Men of Atlantis," as the title indicates, is about Atlantis, that great and ancient continent said to have been in the Atlantic, the physical existence of which, beneath the sea, has been, we believe, quite completely established by scientists. Many books have been written about this land of semi-myth, but none from the standpoint of this writer. In her foreword the author says:

"The wonderful amount of material, especially fossils of different kinds, relating to the island of Atlantis, that were gathered by the Schliemanns, father and son, noted archeologists who devoted their lives to proving that such an island really did exist, to which other scientists working independently or cooperating with the Schliemanns, have added their achievements to the proof.

"In his majestic and poetical language Selestor, to whom we are indebted for the contents of this book, has pictured the highly civilized state of Atlantis' inhabitants, that in several sciences were farther advanced than our nation is today."

Selestor's description of the destruction of Atlantis, of the activities of the people on the morning of the day it sank into the deep, is the story of a tragedy beyond telling. After a weird description of the fright of men and women who knew the doom that was coming, the chapter closes with these words of Selestor's:

"The quivering mountain sank--an inch--the measure of a man's broad palm--a fathom! Then a quiver and a roar marked moment when the land that mocked the sun went down! Atlantis, thou hast sunk, but shall arise, a slimy thing of ocean, still to bear much beauty, offering riches to the world which hath not known thy fate."

This is a book that will be of equal interest to the scientist, the historian, the student in all fields, and the reader for unusual entertainment.

Cloth, Price $2.00

THE CHRISTOPHER PUBLISHING HOUSE, Boston

     
Selestor's Men of Atlantis, by Clara Iza von Ravn, [1937], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 7]

  

FOREWORD

Atlantis, "the submerged island," some speak of it as a continent, which for unnumbered generations has been considered a myth, must now be accepted by fair-minded archeologists and other scientists as a proven fact that such an island at one time did exist.

The wonderful amount of material, especially fossils of different kinds, relating to the island of Atlantis that were gathered by the Schliemanns, father and son, noted archeologists who devoted their lives to proving that such an island really did once exist. Other scientists of note working independently, or cooperating with the Schliemanns, have added their acquirements to the proof.

In his majestic and poetical language Selestor, to whom we are indebted for the contents of this book, has pictured for us the highly civilized state of Atlantis' inhabitants, that in several sciences were even farther advanced than our nation is today, especially in mentonomy--a study of the mind.

     
Selestor's Men of Atlantis, by Clara Iza von Ravn, [1937], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 8] [p. 9]

  

CONTENTS

         	CHAPTER

      	 

      	PAGE

     
     	I

      	Growth of an island. Its location. Physical features and peopling

      	<page 11>

     
     	II

      	The government of Atlantis. Educational methods. Peopling and customs.

      	<page 18>

     
     	III

      	The origin of wheat. Marriage customs. Laws regarding children born. Cremation   of the dead. Some industries. Music

      	<page 30>

     
     	IV

      	Institutions for the training of youth. Music. Arts. Industries. Some   customs. Food

      	<page 38>

     
     	V

      	Other inventions of the Atlantians. The science of Ellipse of Sound

      	<page 46>

     
     	VI

      	Atlantian knowledge of creation's laws. Origin of the priesthood.   Authority of the priests

      	<page 52>

     
     	VII

      	Weakening of priestly power. The punishment for certain crimes

      	<page 60>

     
     	VIII

      	Punishment by the priesthood for murder. Punishment of women for   children's death

      	<page 64>

     
     	IX

      	An ancestress of the Assyrians

      	<page 68>

     
     	X

      	The navy of Atlantis. Minerals of the island and theories regarding them held   by the mineralogists of that day and country

      	<page 73>

     
     	XI

      	Mining and minerals of Atlantis. The man who came to Atlantis from   "Spain" to study its minerals

      	<page 81>

     
     	XII

      	The crime of old King Osiris and the King Atlantis gave to Egypt

      	<page 89>

     
     	XIII

      	The flight of Prince Osiris. His Egyptian court

      	<page 94>

     
     	 

      	[p. 10]

      	 

     
     	XIV

      	The death of Prince Osiris' bride--Albirothisis

      	<page 103>

     
     	XV

      	Origin of the Mongolian race. Kling, from Atlantis, tempted

      	<page 110>

     
     	XVI

      	The first Mongolian city. Mention of Yucatan

      	<page 120>

     
     	XVII

      	An Atlantian tradition

      	<page 124>

     
     	XVIII

      	Battle on Mars as described by the watching sage. The army of shadows

      	<page 130>

     
     	XIX

      	The great sea-fight of Atlantis. Setting out of the Northmen for plunder

      	<page 136>

     
     	XX

      	Warning of the sage and setting out of the Atlantian navy to meet the foe

      	<page 143>

     
     	XXI

      	Arrival of the Northmen and their allies. Morning and the sea-fight

      	<page 150>

     
     	XXII

      	Death of the king of Atlantis on the day of the great sea-fight

      	<page 161>

     
     	XXIII

      	The destruction of Atlantis. Activities of  inhabitants on the morning the island sank into the ocean.

      	<page 165>

     
   
     
Selestor's Men of Atlantis, by Clara Iza von Ravn, [1937], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 11]

  

Selestor's Men of Atlantis

  

CHAPTER I

Growth of an island. Its location. Physical features and peopling.

Atlantis was once a speck blown on the ocean's waves, a spot upon the foam, a floating nut that gathered to itself still other flotsam through the aeons gone and grew as all hath grown.

At first a clod of earth on which no life existed, but the birds of air found rest for weary wings, and sore distress of thirst was quenched in the low pools which caught the water from a weeping sky. Wrecked ships gave matter for its shape and size, and elements in motion added much towards the building of that ocean isle--a grain from out the granary of the deep.

Thus long it floated, sent out roots and sprays down to the coral of the deep sea bed and anchored; solid was it, not else could it have arisen from that dread wall of water in which it was engulfed.

The aeons are the builders in God's building mart, and gave it size and beauty, all that land e'er gathered or land needeth. Fairer far it was than mine [**] which shows its wastes of sand unsightly; blossoms on that isle were touched with rainbow tints as fair as those where ether makes the planes which ye call "Paradise."

[p. 12]

The seeds of fruits and trees were wafted from that land named Africa, and gems which made much wealth were once in galleys borne, and boats once torn to fragments by the wind and waves had given treasure to the ocean isle.

The gold had formed in God's great crucible where matter formeth by a method man cannot grasp but through the aeons, for no speck of time can so create that man may turn and say: "Behold the wonders of the earth and sea which have been formed in this brief span of time!"

Volcanoes there rose pointed, high, through that fixed law of earth revolvement known to them who study earthy substances. Hot from friction of a mingled soil the growth is brief and thus a passage gives throughout the cone; gasses then are formed through suction, friction of the ether and the water force and all that activates the law, or task, and liquid from the solid thus is born, as steam from the heart of solid substance forms.

The cooler surface of the earthy crust checks spreading principle and thus, condensed, the vapor rises, bursts the bonds of earth and makes a channel for the heated stone and moulten substance-lava.

Like to all growths of short duration, these volcanic mountains; brief their beauty as a Summer's morn when all is calm, before the thunder's crash bursts fully, rending face of sky, distorting, piling high its clouds of blackness.

And thus had grown Atlantis off the Western coast of Africa one long day's rowing if the winds were fair and waves beat not.

The girth of that lost land was thrice, mayhap, of this strange spot thou callest "State," [**] and every span was made a nest for seed, or to up-bear some

[p. 13]

work of man's deft art, or yet of forests grand with growth of giant trees.

It rose a jewel on the ocean's breast and not one link of land to land was cast, but he who sought the shore of alien spot must journey in the galleys pierced for oars where slaves sat dumbly rowing all the day, chained, numb with labor or went down to death with shackles smiting and with curse on lips that man dared chain his fellow-God's own son as he--the brother--who was held as slave.

The miles which lay between the isle and Africa were, by computation of the law thy nation knoweth, five hundred stadia; it none the less the refuge was for persecuted men who risked their lives in fragile barks and every refugee was welcomed to that isle.

They built them homes and throve upon its shores, for there was need of many men to till, to weave the golden reed, to build, at first but crudely, then the costly piles that crumble, crumble where the fish desport in sullen pleasure and where bright shells mark a spot within the shadows of the deep.

The verdure on the island's plains from Africa was borrowed. The people of the isle, ere reason taught or one had learned a government to form, made war upon the tribes of that great country--in that day more great than any land of earth, vast temples rose where forests crowd the soil and cities mocked the marts ye view today.

The people of Atlantis, question ye? A boat once drifted from the shore of "Italy"--then a barbarous land of murderous men who only held them higher than the brute, for those who knew them ranked them equal to the lower shape.

Such people drifted, reft of sail and oar and cast by sea upon the fertile isle remained to people and to build in time, when generations passed who owed their lives to this one boat of fishermen and maids.

[p. 14]

[paragraph continues] From wreck of ships that drifted there to beat, perchance, in staves upon the shore, they added to their nation, to their grain and to their flocks, which but a bleating lamb began.

The men of old Atlantis held the form of men today, save that the skull did thicker bone growth show and slanting was each forehead. Shape designed to change as ages rolled along.

Aye, beautiful the women of that race; lithe formed and pale the olive tint, nor faces black did mark the race and hair and eyes were dark as bird that croaks complaint.

A people born to look on God's great world as His fair gift must turn to Him their constant thought, and thus a people born to worship they.

Long isolation from the world doth breed much thought, and thought is builder, thus they grew a people none might rival.

With scorn ye learn my people were descended from that race begat by fishermen and wanton maids--but twain. Yet thus I speak: no shame is in my heart, for all God's creatures hold the spark of lust and only mind directeth what the lower will deems needful. Estate and name have had no place in God's creative law.

Atlantis first was peopled by the sons of they who drifted, but through the centuries came an alien horde, and yet the Government observed the purity of strain and none held power save those born on the isle, or when a custom held, by few observed, of taking foreign offspring if it pleased the mood or sight and giving birthright. This was done according to the law of priest, not King who made no laws which did conflict with old observance of his sires from the beginning--first--of Government and code of laws held sacred by the king in line unsullied.

[p. 15]

The traders lived apart if alien to Atlantis, such there were in numbers; a people none did love save their own kind. A crafty sect from over sea; a set of men with faces whiter far than their Atlantian lords, but in their brain was craft which knew no check if so a purpose came into that brain.

Long haired were they, with beards that flowed into their knees; their women beautiful and tender-nurtured, all unused to toil. They came from where the sun set. Western land they called "home." A race begot by zealots for a system all their own, nor brooked the customs of their neighbor lords nor yet their speech. Their language teemed in syllables, and names cut short with consonants were theirs.

Their God a unity of forces--matter typified by instinct and intelligence. They flesh abhorred as food, though as the centuries passed the custom grew to eat of flesh as the Atlantians; thus, their early whim in food forgot, they did excell in bartering meat of quality far purer than their neighbors knew or sold.

A care was theirs that animals they slew should bear the stamp of health and symmetry, for their contention was the food one ate gave to the body like condition.

They burned to God such matter as was fit--a simple sacrifice of flowers or fruit was theirs like unto the Atlantians. Their priests were men of mind, yet simple in their speech, nor arrogant like the Atlantian priests--all arrogance and consciousness of a power none should admit save in their soul.

Nay, not of theirs but of Atlantian origin the cross. A symbol in the temples to that god they designated "Ram." Aye, it was born in mind of one who woke to consciousness of God's creative force, not form, and also man's great part in distribution of the gifts of Him--the Mighty One. A crossing of God's work by man's to make a perfect whole.

[p. 16]

The symbol of the stars so set in form bespake God's nearness to the land He had created; they taught God's nearness and man's art to so protect that with which He had studded Earth's great plains and hills. A symbol sacred; near the Throne it brought man's consciousness, so, when the cross shone brightest all were joyous; peace and plenty it bespake.

Yea, thus it was and is unto this day; a cross betokens God's great power and man's adaptation of material given for his uses by that One who set the stars on high in form of cross.

The Atlantian language nearer thine [**] than any other tongue extant. Absorbing characters that learned were by man self-taught through wisdom of the soul. Aye, like unto the Greek, perhaps, in measure, for the people of those isles but spake the tongue of their ancestry--all Atlantian as they were.

The characters for speech, at first but crude, soon caught the grace of every art employed by those deft fingered people; greater far than any nation that has trod God's earth since their grand day was set.

The characters? Aye, less Greek than Magyr were they, in their infancy but crude. The picture of some object meant emotion also pictured as a human form in contact point of similarity with need, or grief or pain.

Old records hid neath sand shall yet be brought to light, absorbing men of nations near and far, which show ye all I mention; plates of metal made by skillful smith by skillful chemist's rule.

Thou asketh for proof of characters? This I show as taught me or as eye of soul beholds: A man in drunken frenzy, and all helpless first I show as

[p. 17]

on the tablets drawn, or cut by tempered "steel" the greater was the cup he held, the grapes full big, extolled the strength of wine which could a man subdue.

A sickness of the heart was well explained. Though man might smile to cover his intense but hidden grief, there ever rose before his eyes the image of his bleeding heart inscribed upon the tablet, or the scroll, in pictured form significant; thus was all conveyed to mind of they who sought to read.

Footnotes

^11:* Egypt.

^12:* State of Washington.

^16:* English.

     
Selestor's Men of Atlantis, by Clara Iza von Ravn, [1937], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 18]

  

CHAPTER II

The government of Atlantis. Educational methods. Peopling and customs.

The government was modeled from that of sons of Mars; at first a war-like monarchy whose head descended from the house of one lone shepherd, who rose from skin-clad people to a man of might in brain power; discerning in the sons of his loved land a war-like tribe to overthrow and bind unto them forces from the lands afar through centuries of toil. A course mapped out from sire to son from which none deviated.

And thus the government was shaped, and held for years, by one deft brain that builded as did the host of mortals on the planet ye call "Mars," and thus I swear.

How, ask ye, was the knowledge of those men to him conveyed? By that thought power all own, but not all rightly use. Yet he who was descended from the shepherd learned, through close communion with the laws of Nature, that all "space" was full of thought and listening, at an hour which held for him most leisure, he heard a voice from out the silence speaking to the sense which all men own. Secrets vast were told, unwittingly, for they who told deemed not that "space" hath ears, and thus he learned the lessen of a ruling mind, of power to wield the baton of the law, to quell sedition; justice to present and Peace to hold.

He builded from foundations pure and strong. Twelve trusted friends a council formed with him--the leader born and taught by soul to so direct

[p. 19]

and so to serve with will that all the others listened to his word.

And one grown old in wisdom of a kind that then prevailed--the making of much wealth in swords and vessels for the water gates--had charge of all the stores; and even he--crowned king--could of no substance give save he--the head--consulted with the twelve and spake the word of promise. King in name yet was his office tempered with the wisdom of his peers in age.

And thus the kingdom grew nor wasted gains in ill-spent revel or ambitious wars, but courted arts and planted, rearing high grand monuments that crumble 'neath the sea!

Wives were chosen not from alien lands for each wise ruler; but with beauty born, a daughter of the twelve who sat and judged, admonished and, perchance, reproved him who was lord of all. Nay, but one wife each knew, though when she passed to higher ether--soul instead of clay--another came to bless with tenderest love.

As centuries passed there reigned one monarch--him ye call Osiris--for such I swear was ancestor to that god-king of my land whom ye are taught to doubt as myth or mock, but who did live indeed and reign.

In this king's day the number of the statemen grew and many thronged the hall where justice held her sway, and kingdoms far learned well the power of him who sat upon Atlantis' throne.

The years of the duration of the Atlantian government from the time of the formation are not numbered on the tablets, but we gather much from history of other lands and the signs denoting culture following crudest ignorance. Thus we speak: "Seven thousand years Atlantis throve in government." Yea, fully. More mayhap but it is scarcely true that

[p. 20]

one million years passed by without a change as has been asserted.

Seven thousand years are all I grasp, and still another may a different version give, for even in the histories writ so plain that men today read fully all there written, they differ strongly.

Ever so it was.

We march by epoch.

First the Shepherd King, then followed others of his line for full one thousand years. The stream was lost in other branches then, yet were they fit to govern. Men of that great council who had striven hard to bring to shame the line that mocked the Higher, and asserted that their reign began in gods who handed down to children god-fathered, born of maids, all the mighty line.

A break in line of reign there ne'er had been for centuries, for one, extolled by all, stepped forward and did claim the kingdom's lead and others willingly permitted.

Such kings as this were Ormandorth and Sestrom, Ohydid and old Polcythine with twenty sons who turned to lands afar and wonders wrought in this, thy land, ten thousand years agone, before the plague of fire from the sky [**]--a settling of the star directly over the land, and pebbles hot were cast from a volcanic mould.

The cities were destroyed where rivers now do flow, or forests spring. The rocky strata of a hundred hills bear witness what I speak is truth. And perished thus the line of Polcythine through wandering sons who ne'er returned.

And so the line was taken, when three thousand years of government flew by, by king a rover bold, a son of him who wore the cross of promise; one who

[p. 21]

stemmed the flood of bitter opposition to a war which nearly wrecked the navy--in that day a feeble line of galleys, later great and striking awe to every heart where sailed the wondrous fleet in southern sea.

That cruel king died ere Osiris reigned; his father, stern and subtle of that line so cruel to his kind and kindred. The taint of cruel blood ran all adown the line like foulest taint of dread disease, to lift its head on some uncertain day, or like to serpent hid it lay beneath the smiling calm--beneath the kindly deed and kingly courtesy.

Broad subjects were discussed amidst the making of Atlantis' laws, as the Creation--all the laws of growth enlarged upon--expelling of the water from the clouds and Spring and Harvest time were brought to mind.

Close observation of the stars' poise was made so as to teach best state for permeating books, ye speak, we the tablets.

The hero was sent forth to war at certain periods marked by stars, and Government forbade that ships of commerce sail when stars portended loss. The tablets tell the tale--each moon--change marking destruction by madness or disease, or yet of safety and success with blessed health.

The laws were regulated by the Mars trend for the wars, and Mercury held the subject for the insect plague, and all were guarded from their ravages by the instructions of the Government whose laws fulfilled must be or punishment was meted out, nor stayed.

Ah, nay! The idea of the pyramid was born not in Atlantis. The pyramids were builded from model from afar, nor in Atlantis rose the shape; there round obtained in form, a pretext for much chiselling and caught the fancy of the builders there.

[p. 22]

From other land the pyramids; from "Yucatan" a land that rose and fell in government for centuries before Atlantis reared above the sea a mark of civilization.

This is truth.

Unto Atlantis came the sons of Yucatan--in truth as spoilers first, but later stayed to so convert--and did become the citizens who always caused much agitation; in the army, navy, all adown the line where ran their blood.

A fretful, soulful people; turned to war or prayer. To building quaintly, hugely, cornered structures. Angles were their theme and model patterned from a mind that followed rule, not lines of grace, and thus were born the pyramids in brain of one who had conceived a fortress strong, impregnable. A fortress set on mountain top, the blocks of stone raised by the law I mentioned [**] and the help of slaves, or captives, who were held by thousands in the parent land. (Yucatan)

Nor would Atlantis bear the structure-pyramid. Threatened exile to the one who contemplated building, but this one did carry into Egypt when the exodus of princes did proceed the water death. And when the day had come that, at command, a tomb was builded for a monarch old, rose he--the son of sons of him who from Atlantis came--and builded as desired through help of chosen ones who studied so complete the hints obtained from him--descendant of old Yucatan and foster child of lost Atlantis' shore.

The object strength. No earthquake's shock could overthrow, no whirlwind topple to destruction, no foe could penetrate. In Yucatan--the land of mystery ye call, yet I, "the land of silent power"

[p. 23]

of speech to them who open wide their ears--that pyramid first builded was a home for hosts of warriors.

Tunneled in the hill on which it rose were chambers vast--a city--well ye call such labyrinth, and sealed to all intruders could it be; its streets, its groves, its parks, save for the opening in the pyramid, a handful guarded in the time of siege. For from the plains, now barren save for "farms" that dot them here and there, came swarms of men akin to brute in force and brain. The offspring of the steppes were they, where solitude breeds thoughts, yet grand or fierce or foul.

Their leaders, men of minds so well endowed they understood all arts and sciences. The rabble, creatures of the outcast-man in that young age when first the cities rose where serpents whirr in deadly stroke, and wolves howl long when night shuts down, and red men creep to labor or sun-warmth on sight of greatness that hath struck with awe the men of worlds now passed away. And this the land that gave Atlantis foes, or allies, when her navy grew so great it were defeat to seek her, warring, on the sea.

Atlantis made her boast that none might build her temples mighty. But in that far off isle was one who wrote on parchment all the mode of rearing and of hewing from the rock such pillars as were needed. His sons, too, learned the method. It was my father's ancestor who spake the way of reading poise. He left that sunken isle while yet it stood in glory.

He was of that band who did betake to boats in young Osiris' reign, for reign did he in all the state his sire had kept when Egypt's shore was reached. And thus was Karnak builded. Karnak grand, whose

[p. 24]

pillar'd arches touched the vault of blue in man's imagination.

Yea, Karnak hath a measure all its own. A measure born of greatness of the mind that delved and brought to light from atom's realm the thoughts which soared in beauty, solid worth, and made a city where the night looks down through roofless palace, temple, tomb! A work that man hath wrought, but Fate in stern decree, so linked to the Ages that as one are they, mowed from the earth; its grandeur lost to eye save where a broken arch or pillar speaks in tongue of ruin, potent.

Yet the mood of them who builded lingers still about the arch that crumbles where the stars look down and Moon glints with new glory--glory vast but mocking. Such is ruin--but reminder of a day now passed forever. Yet it holdeth tantalizing mood; for like the gauds which hide not yet entrance, it rests where eye may linger and be held yet meaneth naught save that man's builded greatness is a mock.

It warmeth not the heart, but gnaws its way through all remembrance of another age that may not rest beneath the selfsame sky that once looked on its greatness. Old Karnak stood as warrior-shield on heart-defying hordes that looked with greedy eye, well knowing that within those temples vast lay treasures--"emeralds."

Aye, emeralds the men had brought even from Atlantis; globes whose worth meant fortunes for each owner journeying, but so sacred they that none dared barter for the gold each saw yet dared not gain at risk of ruined life. For such the story, that he who bartered one, if gift it was, brought untold sorrow to the latest of his line. And thus there resteth one within the breast where beat the heart attuned to mine in other age!

[p. 25]

Alas! that day has fled and yet another dawns upon my sight. Within these temple cells lie buried, pillar'd o'er, such sheets of metal as had known the fire of old Atlantis' smiths, who beat so thin the weight was naught, a scroll that tooth of Time eats. not, and characters and lines mark history of the land beneath the waves.

And on one sheet is marked instructions plain to read the colors of the rainbow, Moon and clouds and blossoms; tone of birds, aye, all that star-men taught. And there lies wisdom held from higher planets where the journeying soul resided for a space to learn the tongue, the song or story.

________

Yea, O Mine Own, the early races of old Yucatan--"Mayans" ye call--had there dwelt long ere peopled was Atlantis, and from the "Orient" came they--subtle souls who knew of "Ur" and "Babylon"--in later day and came unto the wilds of Yucatan through stress of famine not but stress of war. In that young day no jungle growth prevailed in Yucatan; thus was it writ: (hieroglyphics) in alphabet of other age.

Long years have made the tangle; serpents vicious, poisonous, dwelt not there in that young age, but out of "India" came the serpent mass, a treasured "curiosity" for one vicious priest to torture with wild fright his rebel followers in time of war, and thus they multiplied as forests grew, became a menace and ye see today results of one man's vicious mood ...

Yea, those Mayans from the heights of India came, and fled one company from king's oppression and remained to people wilds, yet not the tangle of the jungle waste unknown in that first age of Yucatan.

[p. 26]

[paragraph continues] Those mighty builders methods used as they did who raised the pyramids in Egypt later and subject they to man's achievement--the poise of stone and currents of the air as I have written on an earlier page.

Behold, O Soul of mine, I bring thee proof that Mayan industries throve through knowledge gleaned from other land in that dim past, for not upon the soil now clogged with rooted trees had they been born, but upon heights with snow besprinkled, or vast plains where they were once inhabitants, but fleeing from oppression set their feet--a generous band of "experts," on the soil of Yucatan.

They grew as nations grow and held throughout the years the knowledge of the past when structures rose through patient toil like to those other ones in land afar, and every man was disciplined to learn the method and to build those piles which crumble 'neath the ravage of the wild and mock the modern trend of minds which vaunt themselves as master builders; thus they grew apace to mock the builded cities of the western land to which they drifted in those later days when population, hunger weakened, war encroached, did set them forth to lands afar or "homeward" unto India; set them forth to perish, some of stern fatigue, of famine reft of life, or on the ocean sailing, sunk by storms.

Yea, wolves did howl among the temples vast where serpents multiplied and warred on weakened man, and many died by poison fangs.

Those ancient Mayans, O mine own, a people were who ravaged not as nations throve beside, but peaceful bode amidst their palaces, grew wise with age and sedulously they worshipped gods who throve on their credulity, for not the image only did they worship, but the living man who represented Deity, grew wise and bold as followers did endow

[p. 27]

with attributes of wisdom and of power that quelled the storms and caused the gentle rain to fall.

Yea, I give thee origin of human sacrifice as thou hast asked. It rose from subtle motives, power, held by them who would dictate life or death and followers caught the thought, and thus, behold, the lovely virgins hurled to pits or slaughtered on the altar, bathed in blood creating frenzy in the multitudes.

They reasoned, they those priests so arrogant, that subject to their will became the virtuous maids cast at their feet by parents less than brutes, to whom the suffering of their young is agony of self.

They bought them power, those parents vile, by "casting to the gods," the fairest maids, and thus the habit grew and fouled the land by such indulgence. Knowledge in the brain, or mind ye speak, creates not tenderness or pity in the heart, and there was one, called wise, so cruel that the other priests shrank from his proud presence, who did conceive a viler sacrifice than instant death.

"The serpent sacrifice" 'twas called, and in a pit were nurtured poisonous snakes by thousands, and upon a "platform" in that sullied pit was placed the victim and the serpents twined and struck at one who shrank and shrieked for aid and prayed to heedless gods who represented wanton cruelty.

The years passed by and serpents grew and multiplied, but at the last the Mayan "gods" did weary of that mode of sacrifice and lost the habit; yet until the last a sacrifice of man and virgin fair was made to satisfy a senseless thirst for lust and power.

Nay, mine own, Atlantis was not peopled when the monuments to greatness first rose on soil of Yucatan, vast mansions first builded in the mind of them who years before had watched the growth of other palaces, and so designed to build still greater

[p. 28]

far those habitations and made a mock of greatness borne in minds long passed from bodies.

Yea as one hath said, their tools were simple, yet the toil performed was equal and more lasting than that which implements of modern men do fashion, and exact the poise of stone which, formed by a law they understood full well, that built the pyramids in later age. Yea, from the hills of India came the tribes, sent forth by sore oppression, from a race who once had conquered and who on the plains had dwelt, and also builded from designs of their proud ancestors.

They were men of mind endowed with reason; calculation and that sentiment which yearns to reproduce the works of God, ye call, in marble, stone of certain value bent to methods man designed; stone which caught electric currents; thus the secret note of poise which lifted with aid of men by thousands brought, perchance, from other climes. Men of intellect not yet conversant with the secret law of builders in that age.

Disease did fell that nation-smitten without warning; plague in grimmest form assailed. Yea, records be where men may one day find, that tell of disease encroaching hand which none could stay; of wolves and crawling things which battened on the scattered dead in seasons dark when from a distant isle came men with plague infested, and disease and death unto those early Mayans brought.

No leech of skill had they to warn them, thus many died and others fled from that "accursed spot," and foul became the cities vast and temples spoiled by one invader fell. But ere one temple was destroyed, in hidden crypt the blocks of stone inscribed with name of that disease, disaster, were safe hid from the despoilers who came once yearly to engage the men of that reft land in war.

[p. 29]

And thus the people dwindled, fled from that disease-infested spot, and wars and great invasions rid it of the remnant of that race which once dwelt there in great magnificence.

"Accursed spot," 'twas called, with all its grandeurs did it perish as a spot of great fertility, and wondrous structures built from moods of minds attuned to lofty models, and to patient fashioning of structures so designed they stand through centuries.

Thine eyes shall read the writing classified with other ancient tablets' mysteries, and all, at last, revealed be the mystery of that land.

Footnotes

^20:* Perhaps the dragon of the Norse sagas.

^22:* The law of poise.

     
Selestor's Men of Atlantis, by Clara Iza von Ravn, [1937], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 30]

  

CHAPTER III

The origin of wheat. Marriage customs. Laws regarding children born. Cremation of the dead. Some industries. Music.

Thou asketh of the origin of "wheat," the golden corn that rustled at the breath of eve and drank the waters of the Southern Moon, and glistened as the coin which all do crave?

It sprang to being from a wayside spray that God created for the birds which sang in that lost land, now sunk but shall arise again with all its drowned wealth of upbuilded fanes and walls and palaces which Ocean hides and laves, and yet rebuilds with shapes in pearl, and shell and life that drinketh deep of ocean life and knows not sun-shape.

Upon that isle 'twas nurtured, grown by process learned from nature's secrets by the wise of that sunk land when black as midnight's scroll were, mostly, eyes and hair of men who peopled earth.

They digged and planted, garnered too, and made the fleecy stuff for food that men today call by such name as then they had not spake, yet still the body nourished was the same.

Great ships sailed, dragged to the water's edge by bulk of grains, propelled by oars that sped them onward to a land more blessed, for none save they, my fathers of the ancient line, did grow for centuries that food, that grain which was once a seed.

A liquid yellow as the light of morn was once distilled from out its heart, and drunk alone by sages, kings. Not the fiery fluid which today ye know, but an elixir mixed with well-riped wine which

[p. 31]

then produced a power of thought and vigor of the brain that gave discernment to the dullest mind.

The raving were made peaceful; the fever-smitten were thus healed; they called it "breath of gods." The liquid, priceless, hidden was in one vast temple when the watery wall rose up engulfing all that land. Nor yet the secret was to Egypt borne, for they who drank, as they who had distilled, were not of that small band which sought fair Egypt's shore.

________

The marriage laws, ye question? Priesthood reigned, save for a space at least, and laws for marriages were made to fit the priest's own will; nor king did understand that "counsel" meant the tightening of a bond cast in the name of gods that he did claim as his protectors.

Nay, no voice had they--the wedded--to speak of choice or hate; for at their birth the priest, the leech, the monarch, mayhap counsel held. "We wed these scions of the house of Ram (or Ses)," whichever god the parents claimed. And at the time when "woman" on the brow was writ, and manhood spake in nature's mark and law, the priests assembled and the monarch held a grand assembly, all the state partook of that one union holding revel high and showering gifts.

"The gods are binding fast two hearts," they spake, "'tis well." But should a wife be smitten ere a birth proclaimed her lord a father, he who wed must pray to Ses for years ye number ten ere he another bride could claim; and she must have been blessed at birth as bride of one who passed. "Widows" wedded only with the priesthood. All pertaining to the marriage state was wrought with words so solemn naught but death could change.

[p. 32]

Instructors for the youth could claim both wife and slave; a second wife who bore no sons nor daughters (this the leech forbade) and, thus barren found a grave--a saddened lot when motherhood in that young age held all of joy.

An infant born was closely watched by leech, and if, perchance, the moon had risen round six times and it showed weakness of the brain its life went out to gods who bore the soul, they well believed, to heaven for infants' souls. If at its birth the shape lacked aught of symmetry, or strength to wail was lacking, it left no memory of its birth or name upon the parents' minds, who all resigned did speak: "The gods receive."

Aye, named. Named ere the light was shown to those dim eyes that looked from body on the things of earth; for leech's skill foretold a daughter or a son--much longed for; but the matter of the sex could He alone present who giveth all! No wisdom learns the method. Thus God's mark is set on all. He maketh as His will dictateth nor shall man so shape his ways but they shall fit the mood of that great great God-mind. Ye shall read the law!

At death a father portioned off his household goods, the gods had yielded him throughout the years, to every child like portion; and so sacred was the gift, he gave the mother to the eldest's care. Tenderness surrounded her till death and honors heaped on monument proclaimed her name and station, deeds for good or ill, for nothing was withheld.

Nay, Earth received not to her arms the husk of them who passed, but fires were builded high of fragrant wood and subtle breath of spice condensed in fragments of fine stone; and on the pyre was cast, in robes of white, the form once loved but tendered to the gods when soul had fled.

[p. 33]

A monument was raised and feasting took the place of fasting, for the gods were said to Celebrate the soul's return unto the Arms that cast it forth. All was well. None feared the end if so it were peaceful. Death did hold enticement unto him who well had wrought his life's appointment.

________

The priesthood gained its power from sons of men who formed the counsel--nobles. Sent afar to learn the ways of men of other lands, they wondrous knowledge gained and knowledge meaneth power! Each noble of the counsel gave but twain--the elder sons.

For though believing in the gods, a subtle voice contended to the people that the brother priests might plot great power to wield; thus from each household twain at most were given. "To warfare was he born," was written on the tablets when the third son of a household saw the light, and thus his destiny was fixed by fate, by priesthood and through teachings, and those youths were taught the use of spear, of bow and of the missile thrower which the men of later age did cultivate.

Aye, death it dealt to many, scattering fire as well as missiles at the foe; a fire they could not quench; and in the air it circled drawing breath from body; fire so dense with smoke and pungent smell the smitten died ere word could pass his lips. Yet one afar, so wise they named him Calus Heldi (man of mind) did give relief to those--his warrior friends, inventing such a barrier for the mouth, the face, as checked the ravage of the fire until its discontinuation was result.

He wove of "wire" so cunningly designed it held within its coils that gripped the ears two tiny flasks

[p. 34]

of purest glass which held a drop of strong distilled vapour from a shrub; and this strong vapour met the deadly fumes and checked their virulence. 'Twas simple, seemingly, so simple they who battled scoffed when first he spake "behold, I save from death our valiant men of battle."

Yea, warriors came from lands afar unto Atlantis. Great galleys beat at times upon the sand; great boats which stole at night from out the dark and hungry foe, barbarian, crept to cot or palace walls, beat back by guards or left to slaughter innocence and age or manly priest who spake of gods to ears deaf to the Higher.

Atlantis knew the grace of music; builded instruments to catch the notes of Nature; of that subtle music of the spheres which gross ears attuned to jarring sounds of Earth may never hear, but builded so completely were those harps of metal frame and silken cords, bound down the finest crystal which quivered at a stroke of the magnetic ether so that a tone from out the "silence" came and smote the ear of listener till his soul was all attuned to higher music, drunk by those around the throne of God, ye speak.

Thus every palace held the instrument, and men played not upon it, nor beat they music from the keys of ivory then, but left the task to sighing winds, to streams so vagrant in the atmosphere that one would smile at thought of unseen hands of breeze which gave out music ravishing the soul, yet so it was.

Great instruments there were in fountains set, where marble rose pillar'd, high, embossed with pictured scenes of marriage fete, birds that sang sweet songs, or animal that prowled with grace of shape which mocked, again I speak, the artists wondrous skill.

[p. 35]

For, life imbued, the smallest creeping thing is fraught with beauty in comparison with modeled clay or stroke of brush by man. Those courts held vases of the beaten stuff [**] ye coin, and barter, not "for good of soul," and crystal basins held the bloom of rose, or pungent dust that cast sweet breath around, and tiny trees sprang up, as Nature there had placed, in basket rooted in rich soil.

And everywhere cringed slave to master, blind to beauty, set alone on making life a joy to them who held in bonds of law man-made!

The instrument which made the fountain's tone a murmur of sweet sound asketh thou? Enshaped like fan that cooleth heated brow, and spun of cords of metal made by smith who worked from dawn till midnight on one strand, spun fine as infant's hair, yet toughened by a method lost to art, even then complex and fortunes representing.

Slaves and gems, aye crowns, would have been bartered for the secret. Yet the secret was Baun El's alone, nor king nor noble sought to wrest from him what he had won through strong approval of the gods, they spake, and dared not wrest from him lest plague of blindness smite their eyes, or numbness seize the hands, which sought to grasp the secret of the God-sent knowledge.

Thus he worked in peace and builded for the king, for nobles, fans for water-music sweet.

In every strand was wove a gem of worth which meant a slave or kingdom, and as the fountain rose and fell the song rang soft or loud, and when a storm swept o'er the ocean it did drink the unrest of the atmosphere and made a swelling cloud of music that would smite the soul of listener.

Unto their knees fell slaves, so smiting was that

[p. 36]

cloud of sound and even nobles wept, the inner sense so torn by strong emotion, as the soul rebelled and strove to burst the bonds that held to form. Ah! music is the language of the heights! Yet not the beaten melody ye hear, but soft, or silent to the clay ear deaf to higher notes.

Aye, skilled were they--the sons of old Atlantis in all arts. They builded volumes from the store of mind, gleaned where strange peoples dwell on other spheres; some, creatures of a form ye ne'er have known, and others like to men of Earth with beauty rare, and heart attuned to all the great and soul-learned knowledge from the first.

Their language but a motion of the lips, yet brain cast out its thoughts so plain to those about that inner sense was touched and tuned to harmony of thought and sound. To sense spake melody in sigh of winds that swept the plains on planets, verdure blessed, and banks of bloom cast out their fragrant speech to souls attuned to language of the beings deemed inanimate, yet holding life in every fiber, these.

Aye, life in color, too, and shape and language which the toiling soul did learn and gathered knowledge where it only wonder held before. Vast knowledge from a source man dared proclaim but made for toy to beautify the state each soul may dare to keep!

They wrote in volumes what the star-men read--from birds a melody of thought which turned unto the Higher-songs of birds. Aye, voicing thought as man may voice his thoughts in accents harsh or low.

Each presence cast a color to the eye. A friend shed softest hues, a foe a glare of light that warned and checked complacency.

They wrote that ether yielded force for labor. Streams of ether carried shape to other realm--the

[p. 37]

shape akin to substance, yet the clay shape lay in state when soul did journey.

They of Atlantis read by subtle thought cast out and seldom read amiss; and we of Egypt caught a glimmer here, a memory there, of what our sires did know; yet not all the knowledge which men of that sunk land did glean, for war and pillage cursed my land till fled the higher science.

Ah! I wander from Atlantis to that land whose glory passed, as passeth fleeting cloud, where naught save alien force exists today to typify the power that ruled the world!

Atlantis? Aye, Atlantis was our theme; broad isle that held the shrubs of Africa and, later from the land ye name as "Asia"--land of balm and subtle spice.

Atlantis held the sons of self-taught sages; sages taught to read by introspection all which met the eye, and from the silent voice that filleth "space" they caught the meaning of the planet laws--of people on the ether planes--of growth made sure by scientific rule and keenest insight born of observation of each small detail and taught the secret unto others.

Footnotes

^35:* Gold.

     
Selestor's Men of Atlantis, by Clara Iza von Ravn, [1937], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 38]

  

CHAPTER IV

Institutions for the training of youth. Music. Arts. Industries. Some customs. Food.

Institutions for the training of the mind of youth were builded in a circle, neither high nor grand; and cubes of glass in bars of bronze gave light when storms or clouds the sky obscured.

A garden in this circle shaded o'er from summer's heat by branching palms gave place for exercise, and also for the education of those youths who sought to till the soil; for all was done by pupil-digging of the soil--the planting of the seed--the budding task, to set to foreign wood the home-grown shrub or tree.

Rare fruits, too, were in that circle grown and their progression from a wild and bitter fruit--a food for birds alone, was but a pleasant task for them whose minds were turned to secrets of the growth which nature knows.

Wise men from lands where war and strife prevailed came from afar to teach the art of war, and "statesmen" gave here their garnered lore of forming governments on plans humane and well endowed with all that makes a country great. Some with ambition, hoping soon to lead, bore well in mind the duties of instructors and others studied water navigation.

Plans were laid within the chambers of the "school of mines" to excavate from earth such riches as should make the world stare, dumb with astonishment.

[p. 39]

The art of shaping characters was but the work of time. At first the tongue Atlantis spake was barbarous, crude, the accent of the ignorant who ne'er had looked upon a written page. In time that barbarous tongue was softened, rounded out by words from priest or statesman who had sought of other lands the shore; of castaway on ship, or captive.

All the castaways were given welcome, that their tongue be taught to youth, with methods of their country. Many lands thus lent their methods to the shaping of the language--written speech--that in the years gave fame to old Atlantis. There the leech's skill was taught by one grown old in service mild to many--the service of the healer.

No rule for song was taught in great degree, for in that age men sang as sing the birds, their teacher but old Nature. Burst from throat such melody as heart did prompt.

Yet in the temples children of twelve years, none older, younger, once each day did sing in trained rhythm when high noon cast light within the circle marked upon each temple's floor; and in a garland stood they; fingers twined within the fingers of his fellows, slowly circling round the blaze of light. Within the sacred circle stood the youths and voices like the birds from forests depths pierced sunlight golden with their melody.

When reached that tender year ye number "twelve" they stood each noon and sang unto the gods. Old Phenox came to bless, the priests did teach each urchin lifting up his voice. That year of song was called the crossing of the threshold of the door of childhood. None might turn, reentering childhood's state again. And all their melody was as the note the captive bird sends forth when loosened from its thrall; for life stretched out before them,

[p. 40]

life and hope, the hope of youth, alas, too often drowned in bitter tears!

No child upon that isle so poor he might not taste the joy of knowledge; for the state, the kingdom later, claimed each child when born, and only guardians were the parents named. And so was carefully prepared each mind to farther bend the impulse to greater lore, and worked they all as for one common good when "land" or "country" was the subject for the best endeavor.

No language save their own the women early knew; it was decided wiser to withhold the knowledge gleaned by man, for woman was considered but a toy. A useful adjunct to the pride of man. Yet some proved willful and did gain much lore, all secretly. The priestcraft taught, and held in high esteem, the women of the land who knew of star directions--subtle voice of Nature--all which man might learn.

In the beginning laws were made to fit such disobedience--banishment from home, from husband, and another given in her stead; but later, when the priests did interpose a milder sentence was pronounced. It was that all who stole the knowledge fit for man alone--must don the manly garb. Yet ere the island sunk were many mothers teaching offspring arts, the sciences, and were not held accountable by law.

The arts? Ah, she--Atlantis--was the monarch of the earth in arts. Her carven figures rivalled life indeed! Pale marble spake to sense as flesh were there all animate, and subjects wrought in bronze spake from the temples vast whose paves were laid in symbols, marble flecked with golden groups of birds, or histories wrought in gold and metal fair that science had commingled.

Metal that the waves had cast no foul decay upon

[p. 41]

nor wrought a change save that the creatures creep about inscriptions to the gods or king whose people loved him well.

A marriage feast with figures true to life lies lapped by waves and coated with fine sand, yet if the power of man could raise the slab, so mighty, it were fit to place in any hall of earth, a work that Time hath touched not with his gnawing fangs which crumbles all, if so man's work as God's be not akin to that eternal wave which marks the growth of Time.

The cups for feast were beaten not from gold, but shaped of that transparent stuff which tossed to pave doth fall in fragments. Clear as bubble blown from foaming sea and tinted with the hues that rainbow showeth. All about the globe were woven with the skill of cunning craftsmen lilies pale, or rose, that all save scent marked perfect as marked God who gave it birth from out the soil.

Still other cups were wove from crystal as a basket grows from taper fingers, each clear strand apart, yet so welded to its fellow that the wine passed not between; in color cups like these were blue or gold or mocking wine with redness. Vases, too, were builded of the braided crystal for the chamber's use, to lave, or hold therein the flowers bright which slaves had gathered.

Gold was beaten fair in dish for flesh and trays to bear the food from fire to banquet hall. The knife, ye call, was shaped as tool thou useth to sever loaf or meat. Not gold but other metal played the part of furnishing the men of old Atlantis [**] their most useful implement; but that thou graspeth of fine gold was wrought, of "silver," brought from far and greater value held than gold which lay

[p. 42]

among the sands upon the shore in pebbles large or small.

The child at play, perchance, who ne'er had known the city's greed, might pelt his fellows with the grains. "Barbarian" children were they called who dwelt where forest hid their hut, and beasts and fish did furnish all their food, save the date and fig that cast ripe fruit unto their feet.

Couches were built from ivory tusks of creatures wandering where the growth of trees might hide from man. The covering for such couches woven were from strands of thread first spun by worms then fingers soft and deft did fashion.

Linen, too, they knew; but this was brought in galleys from that land whose people passed and in their place had sprung a savage horde who knew the dregs of birth as in that day when first man sprang from force of nature; cradled in the cloud and rocked by winds, and warmed by Sun and fed on God's own atmosphere.

Yea, sandals covered feet that nature made so graceful 'twere a sin to hide in shapen casket that fair print of God on man form. The veils the women wore were made in looms which even the queen did own, and on which her maidens wove, in patterns fair, the fleecy stuff to cover yet not hide.

The graceful grass was bidden to its folds, the vine with purple clusters, the drooping palm and plant ye name as wheat, which giveth food. Most beauteous garments wove Atlantis' slaves, although the wife of noble, all engrossed in making beautiful her form, did weave a garment that no slave might take into her hands.

This garment glistened as the lily's leaf--a robe of silken splendor wove on loom that nothing of a meaner fiber might employ. The robe was worn by eldest of her flock who sought a bride, if sons had

[p. 43]

blessed her house, and were she blessed with sons, in marriage bonds the eldest craved and wore the glistening robe. And thus 'twas handed down from sire to son--a marriage robe of worth which marked long years of toil.

But one departing to another land unwed bore not with him the sacred robe of life. Aye, jewels strung on golden cord they wore; great blazing stones which Africa's mines did give and emeralds green as leaf. Aye, emeralds. Thus they called them, spake that self-same word; and from Atlantis brought my sires the great green globes of light which thou shalt see--a record of my line--hid in a mummy's breast awaiting but thy hand.

Volcanoes in a state of lesser rage and heat cast up from mud great shells that bore such pearls the eye did give a thrust of light in viewing what the smith held on his tray--the moon--pale ring of pearl of palest rose, or jet which mocked the eye of the beholder.

All were won from him--the smith--with grains of that pure metal--"gold" to commerce known. No coinage they attempted; scales had they for weight and grains of gold were laid thereon.

Ye ask the food which they consumed--the people of that land? Thy table speaks the answer, in degree; such as thine concoctions harmful, learned of priestly cook who brought to simple-minded peasant ways of food that brought no good to him. Fish, flesh of "sheep," ye speak, and wheat--the mixture of the maize and "rice" with fiery fruits that grew there as the years brought foreign tree and shrub unto that isle.

Wild honey brought in galleys from afar, pomegranates, melons, figs and nectarines, the orange, citron and the grape gave all the nourishment they needed.

[p. 44]

They took no blood save that the meat contained; their drink was milk of asses and of goats, not kine which never reached that isle. Later came the method to extract the juice from plant and fruit, and later yet from wheat a draught distilled the priests, sole mark of their own will to so concoct that it became a sacred drink to quaff.

A "feast" was made for men alone. No maid nor wife did sit at festal board such as thou namest, but slaves, light-footed, sped among the guests and danced to beat of hands on polished disc which gave out tone not harsh but ringing, telling of the mood of them who watched the lithesome forms of grace clad all superbly and with modesty.

A household feasted at the well-spread board alone. No guest was bidden when the children grouped about their parents, taking food from their well-loved hands.

Yea, seated not reclining were the elders. Children stood, perchance about the mother's side or grandams. Not the father's, yet a father's hand did reach to each the fruit it best did love, or when sipping gently his well-sweetened wine, bade each red lip quaff but one draught from out his bowl or vase. A loving service from a father's heart set for his hand.

Yet fasting was the rule for child of the Atlantian. Lithe of form and delicate of face were they. No foul distortion from the over-feeding which did mark the alien inhabitants who pressed upon their children grossest food.

And thus Atlantian bodies, spare, gave vital force unto Atlantian brains, for fed by motive power of thoughts from higher things, not grosser, which must eat the vapour giving life to thoughts that spring from bodies mental poise, suffusing brain, and so our thoughts are born. But all absorbed the

[p. 45]

body's finer force, through gross assimilation, brain is starved nor taketh to itself the finer trend of higher thought cast down from Force above.

Footnotes

^41:* Africa.

     
Selestor's Men of Atlantis, by Clara Iza von Ravn, [1937], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 46]

  

CHAPTER V

Other inventions of the Atlantians. The science of Ellipse of Sound.

They measured grains of metal by the weight of rule and caught the secret of another metal still; 'twas made by so compounding several metals, that there stood forth a wondrous slab of lightness and of gloss, on its bright surface, golden slab it seemed, the characters were carven so to represent the objects one might wish to hold in thought, as well as characters denoting time and substance, journeyings, reigns of various kings and deaths of nobles, criminals. All writ so fair upon the gleaming stuff by chiseling, and pleasure brought to science's laws and rules could never be surpassed.

This metal wore not neither rusted, nor yet cleft in particles, but stood superb throughout the ages; aye, ye could see it still if ye, perchance, could raise the block of stone which means the temple wall; and lying prone, or standing where first set would be this tablet; aye, would hundreds be as as fair as any page from master's hand today.

Components for "cement," ye speak, were understood as now, and firm and smoothe rose many a palace wall made of the sand and slime--"bitumen," ye. Pebbles were, too, employed in building. Of colors unknown to you cold people of the North. Aye, shells so turned by flexity of carbon gas that stone they seemed and set in pillars'-walls. The secret of the priesthood, understood by few, to crystallize or "petrify" all things of nature. None that secret took to Egypt, lost.

[p. 47]

Aye, even blossoms could they so solidify. A difficult but certain task to them who understood; and these, too, live beneath the feet of things that walk and swim--the monsters of the deep.

"Sea onion" made in cups like ivory seemed when petrified. The "kelp" they wove in nets so strong a "shark" could scarcely rend. Aye, dipped in liquid made by science's rules made perfect in its toughening quality, retaining color, shape, the all which nature gave with added worth.

From bones of certain fish--the "shark," the "gar," they made them weapons in the early-crudest age; such ivory as ye seldom see because the seeming, worthless bones by simple method long ago employed. A bath in nitrate was compounded, though they who made knew not a name for that one simple liquid of which their fathers held the knowledge since earliest dawn of race.

A bath in sunshine, laid on rock which held a property those men of earliest dawn ne'er knew held values, but a certain instinct told them of its worth to harden when in contact with another, foreign matter. Such the work of earlier and of later day that held the hands and minds of old Atlantis' sons.

A happy custom sprang to life in that past day--the custom of so reaping sound from out the "silence," ye, that melody was brought to ear.

Old instruments are found today which people know not nor can speak their use, and little dream they gleaned the strong, vibrative force of Nature's laws which are exact and reproduction sometimes a work that art may win. The tissue, clear and strong as gold, doth melt to Time's hot touch, but shape of frame have ye in "museum," lauded as some great pedestal, staff, "the origin of looms," perhaps, but never music instrument. Yet so it was.

When breezes strong, salt and full charged with

[p. 48]

deep vibrations borne from far in circles, as vibrations trend, smote the sheet of luminated composition--silk and metal particles--they made a rhythmic melody of worth which sages studied to determine storm forecast or fate of sun-smote country, passing of a storm upon the desert, peoples on a raid, the nearness of a foe, while all swung to a tune remote or near as circles broken did denote the foreign body in the rhythmic whirl of vibratory coil; for Circle is Eternity! Great master stroke! Completeness.

These the words that God doth change by naught in Nature nor through all His laws!

A simple mind determined all for man to ponder on. The son of statesman sitting where the shade made happy bower, had watched the waves and drawn from out the mind realm, through the eye, a force of wondrous discernment, power. The structure which he builded, with the help of sage, to catch the circle's action long did want completion.

Suddenly, at dawn the sunlight on the water made the mark that smote the power with which to grasp, and all was plain to him.

Ellipse of light. The motes of atmosphere. The current on the dampened surface of the sheets of glass took form before his eyes. The science of ellipse of sound was born! Made perfect by a law well known to mariners of steering by the gurgle of the waves 'gainst rock. A tongue all nature owns.

Discernment taught them then the proper stuff to weave to catch the sound in form. Attraction well was studied, and the shape born in their mind was emulated. Circle made of floss so delicate it seemed the gossamer of the spider's house, yet strength was there. A metal in the sand which made the glass soon told its certain worth by testing.

Strands of glass enwoven with the silk--a sensitive

[p. 49]

to sound which draws (casts) atmosphere and dryness points to source. A movement breaks the rhythm, ear well trained catches the weight of volume--shape of volume--thus the law is read. Long years of study taught the distance. Near, a medley; far a rhythmic murmur of the chords, the distance for such sounds did he determine by examination.

Sent he boats afar or near which brought to bear a clang of shields and spears, great shouting, all that might disturb, and when the record smote the sheet enwound about a staff of glass he marked the distance to the point where rested fleet, and thus determined distance readily.

The men of that lost land were thinkers. Thought is born in brain which long doth feel the pressure of a word spake with a grain of wisdom; thus it holdeth meaning on which pondering bringeth great results, for like all growths it clingeth to the source, and Source is nurtured in the lap of Age, and thus doth drink of substance which promotes a germ that breeds yet other thoughts that makes a garland of the knowledge scattered through the matter of a mind.

And so it was those men of "lost Atlantis" learned to fashion instrument to cast their thoughts by delving into matter of the brain; it drew such atoms as did smite and yet again cast forth the word to them who waited.

Suddenly the thought did come to one who long had delved in brain-lore, its forces, all that makes a stroke of will of other methods; for a stroke of thought can give a world of power to them who dwell on thought as force--as factor in the world on which ye bide--on planets where thy kind, yet wholly not thy kind, do live a life of nearness to the Source--to breadth--to Scope--to lightness of the

[p. 50]

heart which is the spring of Form set in a model made from molecules condensed and cell besprinkled, yet with purpose, law and reason.

Nurtured through the ages by that great Force which is the Spring of Life that buildeth worlds and maketh moods from out the work-shop of a Mind so vast that it doth hold the great immensity of "space" within its bounds. And like the insects swarming round seem planets, world, the All.

The law is simple in its workings, but, ah man! Ah, man! the spring is set to beatings of a Heart that grew when Time was not! A Heart that casteth life-blood to the million, million arteries of the world! That checketh not the beatings of the hearts of men by aught that is amiss, but is so well attuned to laws of growth that all may live, but in that vaster Life.

That Life so vast, so full of mystery to thee that thou hast cast the thought from out thy puny mind as something harassing and fraught with woe; and yet the mind rejecting is attuned and liveth in the fullness and the warmth of that so well attuned and perfect Heart.

The law of the beginning none may know; but law of Life on ether planes we drink, who stand bereft of "body" and where mind and shape of soul are formed of ether-force magnetic, which may pierce all substances and yet be soft to feel the moods of sadness in the one it loves.

It penetrates the brain with sense of brain to thee unseen, and yet, that force of brain unseen by eye is stronger far than bands of brass ye weave! And ye, who by the flesh are bound to earth, may drink the higher knowledge through the soul, if so ye live the Soul is recognized and questioned as a thing apart from Mind.

All better promptings cometh from the soul. All

[p. 51]

evil whispers are the lower self, yet welded are the soul and earth-mind, kin, and yet are severed by the sense of God, ye call for want of name to designate the vast--the mighty--all pervading Force, which entereth every form born from the womb of mother. Blessed state, for she is co-creator, nurturer with the One we name with reverence and awe.

That One so subtly held to self yet casting out the sparks of Life and Knowledge. Growth and reason's flow, yet ne'er depleted. Wondrous birth of Time and forces which we read not, yet they lie about us giving unto each a spray of force.

Not in fullest power doth Nature fill the form of man, else Man were but a senseless block whose shape and subtle sense, attuned to law of growth alone, were all his heritage, but atoms rarefied build up the form which is the plan of soul. These atoms hold the essence of a Life. God-All-in greatest portion.

Such is Man. Built of the sentient matter from the stars--the work of sunbeams--ether held in leash by strong electric force. Of tide-play of the Moon the creature formed from stroke of Potency which lies within its center and its growth-realms.

Such is Man--the man of clay, all imbued with life which is the motive force. The Soul--that subtle spring which beateth out the numbered days and years, and draws to higher Soul by love inborn through its soul-birth, biddeth man to hold the thought that divine himself is he, and that he may drink the nectar of the thither spheres which bringeth strength to soul.

     
Selestor's Men of Atlantis, by Clara Iza von Ravn, [1937], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 52]

  

CHAPTER VI

Atlantian knowledge of creation's laws. Origin of the priesthood. Authority of the priests.

Atlantis knew the secret of the past, as ye today know language writ on page familiar. Thus were read the stars through eyes of sages and from the tiny speck first cast from Growth Divine, a mote of Thought from Him--the Builder--they fathomed the mystery of peopling, of the verdure planets bear.

The growth law they did learn by inner sense--to highly strive that all was cast to Mind, yet delved they not as men today must delve, but learned that law was knowledge of the sort which aids the brain to gather all it needs through introspection.

Practice ye who will.

The secret springs of life, if once ye yield to pressure of the inner sense, or soul, speak all of Nature.

No need of tomes to tell of Nature's laws when all is first implanted in the soul of man and, dormant, may be called to life through recognizing of the inner self--a something known before the world loomed large unto the eye.

Great scrolls they made of finest colors woven with the hues of rainbow, sunset clouds and all that Nature casteth from her loom of dyed and mingled substances, so wove to mood of maker that a poem it doth seem.

Atlantians read the moon as page of book or thoughts condensed on pillars. Thus they spake: "The Moon-men, mad, have cast their thoughts to

[p. 53]

[paragraph continues] Earth and harm has come to us who dig and delve, and strive to carry to each dome and build such structures as the very sun doth mock. Alas! we cannot ward the harmful stream of thought condensed which smiteth brain with woe!"

Sun language read they. Messages of growth stood forth on parchment, sheets of gold or bronze, ye call, of which they, too, did make them gates as well as barques to carry thither, yon, all merchandise. Great sheets made whole by cunning use of spikes so beat in wood that strength made sure the task of building messenger for water-road abroad.

Heed ye! the secret lies beneath the wave, but semblance have in that carven boat which men of statue shrunk make small in wood of tree-trunk; yet in them no slave sits dumb and plies the blade. Aye, blades were plied which rested in the holes pierced high for oars, and "decks" raised in their midst, where sat in state the noble who did journey.

No great distance, oft made my sires of that sunk land, for all that made a land of worth was there, save in that season of volcanic mud and blight. Then forth to other lands they sailed in fleets of well-made boats when storms, the sages said, were held in leash by great Orion's belt.

To Africa always went they--land of corn--of rice--ye call, of wool, of shrub, of date, of ivory and skins of gloss and ebon hue. Later they went to Asia's shores when fairly peopled. To other lands whose inhabitants were the rioters that strayed from higher shores, their beaten tract lay on to that land which ye call "Egypt," I, the loved and lost, but rising yet again though peopled with the alien. Ah, my land!

My fathers of that lost Atlantis, speak did father much from star-lore through the mind, and learned from Mars the lore of working brass and metal

[p. 54]

made from lead and grains of powdered pumice. Smoothe and fair to eye the molten mass on which the men of lands afar engraved their higher thoughts, or made a history which is read by peering souls who look beneath the waves and gather much that speaks of conscious mood.

They read the motes and streams of atmosphere, made discs through beating metal from the stone and mixed with brass or bronze, and caught a stream of strong, magnetic force through iron crude with other substance known. A disc of polarized white metal caught the current, drank it up and made the music of a certain word cast out by spiral form--'twas done.

Nay, they knew not messengers of land as thou, nor tubes for speech, but o'er the water flashed the message as the summer air, and sought objective point which skill designed. For speech was caught on disc and read with satisfaction or with dread.

"Bring hither from Atlantis sacks of gold," he read, "twice twenty. We send thee linen--honey--swords and javelins broad." And he, with ready stylus, at the disc marked on his tablets: "Twice twenty sacks of gold they from the upper Nile desire."

And this ere Ophir gave her secret to the hands of one poor slave!

Priesthood came to light in that far island in the early dawn of race. A castaway, who dwelt from birth upon a northern cape, was priest first to Atlantian people, when the world at that one spot was bound to savagery. Yet kind in heart the handful that had sprung from fisher folk, as I have told before, and gave him shelter.

He of all the boat, one hundred toiling slaves had manned, was spared to tell the tale of mountain waves and frightful blasts that heaved the foaming

[p. 55]

sea and break in staves the ship. And as he spake of hardships all eyes were turned on him in pity, as they understood.

A tongue long lost to most he spake, but one of that small band--himself a fisher castaway--could catch his meaning and expressed his sympathy. The son of Ocean's spite reared to his gods, for preservation of his life, a wall of rock and set thereon a disc of polished gelb he wore upon a thong about his neck.

All understood though having not one god their own.

And thus as he--the son of Ocean's spite--poured forth his gratitude, they knelt beside and lifted up their voice in thankfulness, in imitation of the man who prayed. And thus was priesthood born.

And that first priest--a man of will who boded check but ill--soon made his presence felt and all did turn to him for counsel. Waxed he strong in power and handed down his law to every soul that spake: "I pray thee give me counsel." Thus 'twas done.

Like all beginnings, but a speck--of time--of potency--of that which binds and welds when growth hath been attained, and binding millions by the central thought, all bowed at his command as when a king stepped down.

Yet he was meek in mien. A thoughtful man who knew the power of law and sought to bind the minds of them who dwelt upon the isle, with purpose. This at last was done. His name? They called him "Bernastje" meaning Thought. A name corrupted.

Thus priesthood was established. Down the line which followed all his sons were priests and teachers. Healers of the sick by art drawn from the mind, at first, of that head priest who brought much knowledge. All their power lay in strong heredity.

[p. 56]

In the beginning none of other line did give their sons as priests, but as the souls contended for their rights, and many dwelt where but a handful stood, still others were appointed. So the line of priesthood grew and power also grew.

Little felt at first the power, but later, when the august government was formed and nations learned the island was a-weight with gold, the priesthood cast a spell of angry thought about the ministers of state, forbidding them to barter island wealth in quantities, preserving in their line a love of home and that which home contained all jealously.

Then strife arose, but by a threat that gods would bear the wand of stern destruction to the isle were priests but crucified or banished, or yet shifted tor the captive men afar, as sometimes done, fear gripped hard the government and priests remained in power. 'Twas well. The weak submit and strength in mind or hand brings power, awhile at least to him who holds the gifts.

Earth mind is prone to weaken at a threat made in the name of that which is not understood; for darkness holds the evil which we dread, not light of day. For light is intellect so trained that all may know without the word of man what for him lies in store.

________

The work of priest was fixed by inclination. Some knew the gift of love to man and held them ready to deny self-love and yield to others that which giveth peace. Still others bartered words for golden grains that promised senses joy. They made the laws to govern school and home. The marriage, birth and death.

Health laws in measure also made they and the fixing of the tithes each made for prayer to gods.

[p. 57]

[paragraph continues] Also one made a law that man hath known, and needed, since first his eyes were opened to the light--the law of ministering to the unfortunate one whose reasoning mind had fled.

The jangled brain took soothing draught of words from him who patient waited so to learn the words most soothing unto each. Thus was it in that day.

A rhythm made they of the potent words and so completely bound to simple sounds they sang, in tones discordant not but sweet, the jumble to the raving, keeping time to instrument like "zither," a slow, deep music that did lull the sense and often cure effected was by means like this. Adjustment unto certain law--this action of the brain. A single cell adjusts itself to tone--to thought--'tis well--'tis healed; the other cells will act in strict accord, for all are so contained in silken mesh of flesh that each responds.

The law is simple yet complex to them who read not science's method of the whole vast system--man or world--enhung upon a chord--a strand, that vibrates to a tune. And Time doth only change the direct stroke.

The priesthood also understood the law of color on the active, waring brain and with it soothed, or made the sluggish mind to grasp an object. Thus to fall in line in thought and bring forth harmony of thought from senseless round of muttered syllables.

Such disease fell often on the men of galley. Storm, perchance, drove wisdom from their head and Fear's great specter sat beside instead of Hope and Courage. Such malady afflicted child at school who strained much knowledge to absorb and mind was harmed.

A mother at the birth of babe invited such catastrophe by overfeed--a glutton at the feast of

[p. 58]

[paragraph continues] Harvest Moon, when brain disease was rampant in that land of heavy light-pressure, under rays of moon, which now has changed its full condition, through the dying out of light important to all planets set in "heaven" and ruled by strong vibrative law.

Moon conditions change each one thousand years. To earth an almost imperceptible change cometh; yet we who study mark the growth or trend, to so distribute ill or good to Earth, which holds the planets.

Mark we, too, the laws that govern Sun irradiating worlds. Its light less luminous this past thousand years than in the former ages. Thus ye say: "The eyes of children dimmer grow; such, science hath discovered." 'Tis not so. No focus for an orb can be obtained if swift vibrations fill the sunlit air. Vibrations which made round a certain point, and in this day a point is passed and thus is blindness on the increase, as ye speak.

So taught the priests of old Atlantis aeons since, and I, today, give but the thought of ages past.

In temples lived the priesthood. Chambers vast reached out designed once for palace court in which the monarch walked when so it pleased his will, and passages whose windings none might walk save the "annointed" stretched their way to home of priest.

Vast gardens set about the temple walls made private bower where dark-eyed children played and dark-eyed mothers smiled and time beguiled by touching cords of finest woven gold, or other metal. which all deftly strung, made melody that soothed the eager ear of child or yet of him all weary grown of clamouring zealot asking good at his unwilling hands.

He the secrets of "the gods" had learned--mere carven shapes to represent the thoughts that dwell

[p. 59]

within the brain, and yet, in inner soul he grasped the law of higher Intellect that made the earth and all the planets, systems. Time, and measured with His eye the Universe and its .

Aye, so well the priests did know that each endowed the carven shape he represented in his turn with attributes because, indeed, it was a spark of that great Mind cast out, all objects from His being having grown.

The priesthood held much power, as it has held since first man turned his thoughts from God's great works and queried to his fellow: "He that marketh me as man, I understand Him not, but thou art wise. I beg thee state His motive. Give to me the explanation of His ways so vast my puny mind can grasp not."

Man in power is like the creature which playeth with the object of her search ere she destroyeth. By glance of eye he seeketh to show the terror his presence calleth to the one whose life, mayhap, hangs on his word, and play becomes a stern reality till man believeth he is God indeed.

     
Selestor's Men of Atlantis, by Clara Iza von Ravn, [1937], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 60]

  

CHAPTER VII

Weakening of priestly power. The punishment for certain crimes.

The state succumbed to the assertive power of priests until at last aroused by deeds of blood, they bade the priesthood pray to gods, and fix the mind on things above the clouds, and leave affairs of state to men whose minds were trained to earth-ways, not to higher lore.

The story of the slaying of the priest, asketh thou? 'tis thus enwrit upon the page which speaks the truth of such event: One of the number who did give to Ses his daily offering for the people's good was stern Bolandos. Dark of brow was he; a mixture of Atlantian sire with blood of that dark race that first knew form upon the planet Earth.

A man fierce-hearted. Crafty. Wise in guile and guilty of a wrong we give no name else did it breed like wrong. Thus we contend. And he--Bolandos--sinned in harboring love for one fair woman who did kneel each day before the shrine of Ses--the god of Death. And as she knelt she murmured: "Give, oh give! thou god of death--as life--what my heart craveth.

"I love not him I wed because, forsooth, no shelter for my form was there, save that I wed this scion of the house that caused my sire's downfall. Take, O take from me the son of Abbas, him I call my lord send far in galley, that I see his face no more!"

Bolandos pondered long. Priests might wed, for law permission gave, but she they wed must first

[p. 61]

have sealed the vow of constancy to one who, dying, left her free to wed with none save men in touch with gods. "The sons of heaven," they spake the priesthood's name.

"And were he dead," Bolandos muttered, "she of right were mine, for he first looking on her tears of widowhood is called entitled to the one who weeps."

No pity dwelt within his heart nor scrupled he to strike the blow to sever form and soul. But fear of his betrayal at the hands of some just brother or some slave, perchance, or fearing that another first might hear the tale of woe--of one struck dead by dark assassin's blow, held long his hand.

But when the rose tree's bloom did make a garden of the gods that favored land, there came an hour when the crafty Abbas' son did seek the confines of a garden fair, unfaithful to his beauteous Olasandron. This the priest did mark.

Before the dawn leaped up from sea and flung the shadow from old Day's broad face the son of Abbas left his garden tryst: The dew clung to the rose trees. Fragrant night did halt in silence. All things seemed to sleep, and o'er the pave the lover's step came softly.

Down beneath the wayside clusters lay the one who waited for his prey. A thrust of steel--a gurgle! Death was there! and on the sands lay Abbas' son to rise no more! Not one thrill rent the breast of his assassin. Fast he fled and flung his dagger on the sands. On to the temple, where at dawn of day the wife--the widow knelt at Ses's feet to plead relief.

She came. A lily tall. Wrapped to the eyes in fleecy mantle. O'er its folds her eyes shone like the stars. Her braids of jet and gloss, enstrung with jewels--like twin serpents fell inert and fragrant to her lithe, arched feet, and on her gorgeous rug, by

[p. 62]

slaves outflung she cast her beauteous length, besought the god: "O Ses!"

A murmur in her ear. A warm hand clasp. The pressure of an arm beneath the serge of priesthood. "Ses hath heard thy prayer" a deep voice whispered, "Thou art free indeed!"

And she, according to her race and age, bemoaned her fate, her early widowhood, and called upon the great god Phenox to sustain her heart in its deep torment. Thus her slaves bore her away, bemoaning as she passed the great arched door that led into the street.

"All mine indeed," he muttered who had slain. "The slaves bear witness that I first beheld her tears of widowhood, and when the moon shall fail and darkness clothes the night, and yet another rises over Ocean red and full, I shall recall the promise of the king and claim her."

A murmur loud of many voices smote upon his ear. "The rabble calls, and I foretell the doom of some rash lord the state assailed, or sea-king who hath locked with galley vast which bore much treasure and whose clime is known."

It nearer came, it louder grew. He paled; the voices which each possesses in his soul spake of some dire disaster to his hopes of love. It crashed along the arches where the gods in jeweled state, upheld by hordes of priests, sat calmly gazing with their beryl eyes upon the rioters who heeded not the sacred place, but burst upon this vision clamoring with hate.

And at their head, behold, a rival walked! a rival hated of Bolandos, for the priest well knew that he, too, had craved the wife--the widow now--of Abbas' son. Bolandos stood one moment like a lion caged, with eyes whose glare did scorch the looker's

[p. 63]

blood: and riveted were they upon the steel held in his rival's hand.

"Thine! Thine!" they shouted. "Priest as false as they who swear eternal fealty to the gods they barter for the gems each wears upon his crown!"

Upspringing like a maddened beast of prey, one leap Bolandos gave, his rival's hand did seize, and thrust! and thrust! and the keen dagger drank so well the twain lay on the marble at Ses' feet!

     
Selestor's Men of Atlantis, by Clara Iza von Ravn, [1937], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 64]

  

CHAPTER VIII

Punishment by the priesthood for murder. Punishment of women for children's death.

Punishment for murder meant the tightening of a cord about the source of life, and this mode have men of today learned through tradition and through that stream of events which breaks seldom through the years.

To men grown old in crime the punishment became more lenient, for thus the council argued: "The gods a punishment will mete which days, but few, hold for this wreck of manhood, and thus no need have we to aid." So he, the hardened criminal, was bound within a vault which led unto the sea and there eked out a life of solitude, with naught save needed meat and drink to break the hours' long sway.

None other entered the retreat of crime, but rats ran nimbly to and fro and basked within the spot of sunlight which, perchance, lit up the rock-hewn chamber when high noon was rung from throats of bells that cut the air of rarest purity, so cleansed by breath of sea and atmosphere all purged from dust by breezes born from waves.

And so it was that man met Maker face to face in thought--that gift of joy or torture-weapon sharp as steel beat by the smith. Aye, thought! That ripener of crime, of greed, of hate or yet of love and charity. The growth of mind attuned to catch the motive chords asundered from the body's mass of nerves and muscles. Mechanism subtle that doth breed the all intangible, unknowable stream of harm,

[p. 65]

or good, which, bred in brain leaps out to cast to death or raises highest pinnacle of joy.

Such hath Thought been since first the skull of man did fit a mood that grew beneath the cap old Nature made for mass ye call "the brain."

And when we speak of Nature, in our hearts the real source doth beat the current strong of God--of All--of atoms--whirling specks and massive products of a Mind alone. Of Law but never force of man, for man alone can nothing make, but leans upon the vast, majestic Mind.

Yea, woman, too, so soft in love, so strong in hate, was punished for that crime of taking life--the gift which man may take but ne'er return again. Aye, God doth never yield again to husk when once the cord of soul and husk is broke. A body dieth when the soul is free and never more doth that take shape which once hath held a soul.

A woman nurtured tenderly was made to kneel on stones, protected from the sun's fierce rays, and there for weeks ye number twelve each day did kneel with arms upraised to gods. Her torture sometimes shortened by the slave who stood with wand to beat the breath from casket frail if she did falter in her pleadings long. And thus she met the soul sent out to quench her hate.

And if perchance, her babe was reft of life while lying at her side in slumber deep, no murder had she done, so she but sat beside the highway wailing sore: "My child is dead!--is dead!" And this long "month of tears" atoned for fault of oversleep, and such example made the care of young a task so well performed that seldom thus they died.

If to an unwed maid a child was born, all undesired, and it died at her hand, four stalwart slaves stripped from her form the gems, the cloth of gold, mayhap, the fine-spun lace and from the shore in

[p. 66]

barge sped out and cast her, shrieking, in the sea to fierce, finned ghouls.

A father smitten by his son was soon avenged, for he (the son) was reft of hands and eyes and then the strangler's cord did well the task of ridding husk of soul so foul. A theft was punished by the thief enstamped upon the shoulder with the character denoting theft, and he no mantle was allowed to wear for years ye number four.

A maid who had despoiled her mistress wore a scarlet strap about her brow to hide the mark supposed to stand upon the brow of them who pilfered other people's substance. Wife murderer sat in galley all the years that Time drew out for him till death; for he was thought to fit his soul by meditation stern for other plane where (priest told well the tale) great Ses did fix the cord about the neck of soul, enacting well the executioner.

And thus did man take in his hands the task of God to punish for despoiling page of life--the book unsullied first, but blotted sore with stain of unfixed thoughts--of ill to fellow men.

The priesthood punished as was best thought fit, each member of the order who did sin, the nation knowing naught of what befell "the Temple's children." Each was taught the law, and if it were broken by an act forbidden, the highest of the order spake the word of punishment and punishment was given. No plea the order stayed.

Priority among the priests was known alone by age, not service nor yet rank or wealth. The elder priests--the "fathers" called, in dying left their power to next in age. All priests were taught the selfsame laws and science whispered to each ear the same, and mentally they each so strove to grasp, not one could say his wisdom was the less. Such were not law.

[p. 67]

Statesmen did so uphold themselves in honor that a crime such as thou namest [**] seldom found a man so base as to demean his sacred word.

Footnotes

^67:* Bribery.

     
Selestor's Men of Atlantis, by Clara Iza von Ravn, [1937], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 68]

  

CHAPTER IX

An ancestress of the Assyrians.

To barter power was deemed a sudden freak of madness. Seldom was the mood so turned, but if, perchance, this did occur the one so smitten with greed and vile deceit was cast from chamber of the council, stripped of robe and beaten as a slave in sight of all the populace, then sent afar.

But one such case in many hundred years occurred, and none did know of the intention or deceit till fell a tragedy that woke the horror of the island people--held their indignation long. And yet we do admit, unwillingly, that great events, or race of people, knowledge of new countries, spring from crimes of men--from wrong to kind.

And such events occurred when fair Atlantis reared her head above the sea: a wondrous land with power over many lands afar which she did people from her exiles. Peopled she the wastes and forests deep which lay full many thousand miles away.

The story of the violation of the laws of Government was on the tablets graven long before the island sank, yet in its infancy the tale seemed but a prophecy, which none saw fulfilled, the peopling of vast hills and wastes by one--an outcast and his victim--bride yet not a bride.

She--the victim, too, of Fate and Falsity whose offspring filled tents upon the hills nor sought the plains where dwelt a fairer race until, grown strong, they swept in might one day and conquered. Set their mark in later day on temple wall and carven

[p. 69]

gods, so massive that a wonder of the world men later did behold in viewing what the hands of their descendants wrought. And this the graven tablets told:

"There once dwelt in Atlantis a maiden whom they called "the Fair" for beauty was her dower. And she was bartered for a seat of power in the great Council Chamber, where the king upheld the law by signing with a word each edict passed that met his favor.

He--the husband--who so wily won the maid, was not in his first youth nor yet his second. Hair of snowy hue clung round a brow no length of knowledge stamped, and eyes were dulled with wine, and form, which God made perfect to contain a soul, was warped with foul excess.

Him they called "The great and rich Bahanan El." And sons had he and daughters that the state had named, and others who bore no rank or name save that their mothers--outcasts from the pure--gave unto them.

One son--Batisis--looked upon his father's wife--the lily pale and dark eyed Attoline--and swore he would espouse her at his father's death. "For," spake he. "Matter not her age when she is freed from that foul lord who brought to life the atom whence I sprang, I still shall love, and thus she shall be mine."

Alas for Attoline who drooped and sighed with dread of that gross presence which they "husband" called and, anger'd, looked not on her father's face when he appeared at feast or in the hall, and on her mother's neck did weep, and moan and pray that death would come and bring her quick relief.

One day she wandered where the sands met sea and chanced to face the youth who swore she should be his by law of Right. And, seeing Attoline, did

[p. 70]

read the creed of love and so forgot that wives have not the right to love, save him who giveth shelter, name and gold and state, as law of man proscribeth.

Law of God forbids the soul to sully with material gifts its heritage of peace.

Thus spake the youth: "I long have known thy face as one that angels stamped with perfect law, but thy sweet voice, alas; I ne'er have heard. Speak but one word! Thy slave shall drink the tone long after he is banished from thy sight."

"Speak not!" she cried, in voice her slaves might hear. Then lower: "Speak not of thy departure, for the sun will hide its face when thou shalt pass from view!"

He spoke: "Attoline, I have loved thee long and well. Speak but the word and at thy feet I lie like spaniel fawning for a loving look--a creature trodden on yet still alive to one kind word from lips that hold the power to doom to death!"

One glance she gave from eyes whose fire was hid by fringe of jetty lash, and rose his heart with courage.

"Speak, sweet. Shall we depart unto that friendly shore where none may know thy state, or wealth, or past, and humbly live with love our guiding star?"

She spake: "I go. For life is black indeed within the palace where the low-browed lord doth rule and seek to win to his gross soul the love I would withhold for one more noble. Him I know in thee."

"Farewell," breathed he, "for but one hour! and we again shall meet beside the water. Seek thou this spot marked by yon boulder huge and grey. But dead it seems yet it holds in its heart a secret chamber where the torch burns that lighteth me upon the water when by night I roam abroad in galley seeking prey of sea.

"For I am of the people who must wrest from

[p. 71]

men more blest the bread to nourish life, the goods to cover, gems to deck for fete and gifts to buy the god's approval. Thus I speak that thou mayest know I make no boast of goods, of name or state that men of earth do prize; yet in my breast my heart beats high with hope and Courage calleth me her son indeed!"

"And I," she faltered. "Well thou knowest my state; yet will I toil in cot, as toil the kind who envy me, ere I return to his embrace--the foul-souled one who bartered fortune's smiles to him--my father, for my form, my life, my hopes, for all thou namest as gifts the gods do send.

"Oft have I thrust my hands to heaven and cried unto the gods, and offered gifts the poor would fortunes call, yet not one hope gave they of my release save what thou swearest. Hark! my maids speak: He cometh! Lost indeed is hope and happiness!"

The dark rock closed around him. Magic art it seemed to that fond soul whom love had found; and to her maids, who vied in giving service to the one who ever held them equal in the best, she turned.

Bahanan came with anger on his brow, "To whom speakest thou, my wife?" and she replied: "I spake no word. I looked reproof on him who called my name, as thy wife, honored of the people, should."

Her grace of form, her glance of tenderness, so rare, disarmed suspicion and so stilled the demon of the jealous god within his breast, he spake: "I trust thee fully. Take thy way," and, turning, left her, for affairs did call.

The gay throng passed and laughter filled the ear.

The gay throng heeded not the lover's meeting where the shadow fell from tall, oared, galley, nor the veiled form that melted to the clasp of one bold water-messenger or chief. Afar they sped ere that

[p. 72]

dread day of wrath had swept Atlantis from the world's great chart. Afar in safety, for the port was gained ere sea was swept by waves of mountain height.

And she--the beautiful, the fond, the happy at the last, bore sons and daughters to her loved lord, and did become ancestress of that great race which called Assyria home.

     
Selestor's Men of Atlantis, by Clara Iza von Ravn, [1937], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 73]

  

CHAPTER X

The navy of Atlantis. Minerals of the island and theories regarding them held by the mineralogists of that day and country.

The boat which bore the fishermen and maids unto the isle which smiled from out the sea was model for still others, builded slow for want of "adz" or tool to shape with grace the rounded contour of the cypress-built and steel-bound bark, which was the first attempt at ship for commerce or yet ship for war which long after followed.

"Steel," question ye? Aye, steel I think ye name the shining blade, the slab of metal welded to the hull, and thus had they this broadened band of "steel," that metal whose method of construction long was lost to science, industries, but was regained again, when centuries had flown by metal workers, "experts" in this thy land.

"Steel" known to Atlantians first as spoil from out the ocean, from galley vast that drifted smitten, storm-tossed. Rent in twain on reef which led to death all boats that through dire misfortune sought to make a landing on the northern shore. A reef whose stony teeth set fast in many a gallant ship.

A reef which still shoots upwards 'neath the waves, imperilling many a bark unto this day, so mountainous its bulk. And far in shore the rock did set, though hid by giant trees which once invited storm-tossed mariners a-starve for fruits and gurgling springs which forests deep enfolded.

The captain, a builder of the supple oar, a cook

[p. 74]

[paragraph continues] (and tyrant in his line was he) were cast ashore with one great galley's hulk and fell a prey to importuning of the kindly ones that peopled old Atlantis in its dawn as home of nation.

His a matchless mind, the captain's. Yielding knowledge not, but bartering for the leadership of fleet, if so 'twere builded by direction of his men who brought strong vessels for the journeys to far shores. And this was granted, but they did beswear him solemnly that of their race henceforth he would become on of the sons of their fair isle.

That there his dust should lie, did not the hungry sea, which cryeth for such fare, grasp ere he died with head in lap of slave, or wife who loved and mourned him, raised him high shaft of alabaster o'er the carven chest which held his ashes. Such the custom there.

And he, the foster child of that young nation, grew a man of might. The rudely fashioned craft first made was soon supplanted by the graceful barque that hands, grown skilful, through a tutoring brain, wrought wondrously. A barque whose sides bore gleaming gold with name inscribed and flowers carven, or yet a scene from nature drawn, of bird or graceful leopard.

Tusked creatures, too, shone forth in gold upon the well-spiked sides of galleys of the nobles of the state, as building of great barques progressed.

Yet through the years that first crude barque, part fashioned from the galley of the castaways, part from the fisher boat, held well its place--a boat of peace, which carried envoys to the darker land far up the sea, or yet to smiling islands set in southern seas; for stranger spices and such condiments as old Atlantis knew not till at last one, so skilled in foreign mixtures that his fame was great,

[p. 75]

came, well pleased to bide upon the island whose fame reached far.

And as the minds of men reached out to grasp the laws of other countries--other planets, a fleet was builded in whose strength and grace combined the cleverness of nations' round. Each boat a wonder for its strength and speed. Each boat, a marvel for its decoration, vied with other barques in richness.

Flashing gems indeed were set about the crown of some fair sea-nymph, graved in gold or metal that doth linger 'neath the waves yet rusts not, nor is marred by beating waves nor play of monsters. Slaves who plied great oars or stood by messengers of murderous mood were once of foreign galley, mayhap, bent on slaughter: or were criminals who, not condemned to death, might linger in the service of their king--their nation.

Pinned were they to seat by chains in early day and thus were given time to ponder of their deeds. The captain of the fleet, ye call--a fleet which challenged sun-rays shot with gold, which cast its sheen for miles over quiet sea, or fought the waves as valiantly as tiger meets its foe--the captain of this royal fleet was Wanandred--captain of the hosts of sea. The meaning of the name? "Atlantian not by birth, but of the galley broke upon the reef."

He came from far--from where pale faces met the pallid sun, the cold of icebergs. Skin-clad people, brave but cruel; knowing naught of guile but much of patience. Skilful with the oar, the spear, the mattock; not in arts nor crafts as southern nations. In that early day so wise the scattered people of the South they seemed to mock at God's creation, so complete the work turned from their hands.

Their brains seemed set to springs of Nature holden in the Hand that fashioned so completely

[p. 76]

that in time we gaze on growth, on color--on the changes wrought by atmosphere--on wave--play--toss of tide--almost on Time which creeps upon us! leaves us! on the clouds. On all that cometh from the One who doth create.

And those swart men did emulate so well the ether strong was chained to build and bring from far some message light or stern as one dictated. Men, were they, who past and left but meager trace; so meager that the world today turns coldly from such page as I have here embellished with this history and speak: "He doth pervert!"

Those galleys of Atlantis? Eighty feet the longest galley set to war. The wood of cypress, tulip; harder yet a stuff was made from fiber mixed with gum and shaped at will in giant mould of ribbed wood. Thongs, made from the creepers of the jungle, serpent skin and sinews of the bear, borne far with skins from Northern lands, were aids to make the galley strong. Those boats of gum and fiber of the palm were light--were strong--and to the salted water of the sea impervious; but the sweet lake or river pierced with damp and failed to hold to shape the pulpy mass which useless grew.

Each galley held its men in shackles in that early day, and no fierce revolt--no captain smitten by rebellious crew. Yet kindness reigned withal, and kings bestowed some token of their favor upon all on feast days--days when vast pavilions built were named and blessed and the fleet received a store of things deemed needful in that olden time of which ye dream today.

The crew of each wore costume made at fancy of the captain-galley's lord, who yet dared show no unkind mood to men that stern misfortune bound. And smote he one in anger, unprovoked, a punishment was meted out severely by the senate, by the

[p. 77]

king, and in disgrace he sat and plied the oar, where once he reigned supreme, for days ye count one hundred.

If boat were named the "Vulture," of that early fleet (a name ye would not comprehend if it were spoken in the olden tongue) yet that same bird of foul portent, which drew its life from Nature's gifts and lived as now abhorred by men--if "vulture" were the name, the captain bravely decked, wore golden helm beat into shape of bird of carrion on his brow, and round each naked waist of toiling slave was wound a scarf embroidered with the symbol foul.

When storms beat on the casque, or cloak which wrapped each form, the crimsoned bird was stamped full plain. The prow showed boldly giant bird of prey.

The leopard, tiger, or yet lily, so at variance in its beauty pure to fiercer symbols, were the names employed. And all was writ so plain in symbols that the foeman read, and reading, shuddered as the fleet drew nigh; a menace to the "pirate," joy to them who loved Atlantis, gloried in her strength, her arts.

One barque that made the fleet to nations by the sea a horror was the funeral barge, begirt with ghastly trophies of the passed and valiant warriors. Set with staves, red-painted, golden streamers broidered with white urns fell languidly or fierce upon the breeze. In the cage upon the tower sat the great and skilled embalmer. None so brave he be might sully sea with corpse or feed the foul, fierce creatures of the deep, Atlantis willed.

Her sons were hers indeed, and on her breast must rest their ashes when the soul had fled. Thus to the shore they bore them, to great piles, the pyres that lit the night when Moon was dark and low

[p. 78]

[paragraph continues] Orion; and melted husk of them who fell in warfare. Slave or king, in death they equal shared the pomp and were the pride of people who as kin regarded every soul born on Atlantis' shores.

When homeward bent, the galleys bearing dead did creep at rear of fleet. Low chanting smote the ears of warriors on the barques. A song of peace fell low. Soft sounds of sweet-toned instruments arose and split the curtain of the night or met the glancing sunbeams. Smote the strains fond ears all strained to catch a whispered word of love. Smote ears that drunk, but now, alas! would drink no more the voice of him beloved.

Great bands of priests whose white robes showed the mark that boded ill--the fleshless bones as form of man portrayed--walked slowly to the massive quays and greeted all with blessings; raised voice in murmured chants and promised good to souls that left their husk at call of duty, country's need, and passed each token of the men who died, to weeping sire, or son, or yet a friend. And in their chambers dark the women mourned.

The instruments for war were barbed missiles, shot from prow, from stern, from sides through missile-thrower simple, not complex. A wheel, a , piles of seeming toys which opened jaws and crushed the bone or entered body with their barbed fangs. The spear three sided. The stave, the axe with biting blade, and fiery baubles peering from the box which gathered force from out the atmosphere, were later hung on every prow. And thus held war or struggle to maintain their right to merchandise.

In time of peace sweet strains the waves caressed and even slaves sang gaily, keeping time to rhythm of their blades; and garlands from fair hands were cast in showers when galley sailed afar. The banner

[p. 79]

of each boat showed name in symbol clear, or characters, and over every name was set the god each worshipped. Thus each captain's god was borne aloft; and as the sun shot up or sank beneath the water, seemingly, each man of all the fleet did lift his voice and cry:

"We laud thee; God of all the gods who doth protect and hold in bonds of safety us--and ours--our land, our captain and this noble barque." So clearly rang across the water loud this cry when stars denoted midnight, or great Orion swinging far in space, and in his language held the token of a storm, or Venus dipped her golden head and Mars swung boldly into sight.

And men upon the shore would shudder, or yet smile, according to their policy or nation. Thus they spake: "The dogs do prowl from fierce Atlantis' shore!" Or thus: "We need protection, and it comes from dear Atlantis--sister in our need." And never greater or a braver fleet had borne the sun-light on its armoured sides since time began.

Yea, that navy of Atlantis was a fixed mark, from time when first they builded from the wrecked boats, which grew to beauty as the years advanced. The captains of the ships composing fleet were men of mark whose fathers held the state to ancient laws. All, men of wealth and minds superior were theirs.

Yea, the government advanced, or punished for an act of discipline betrayed. A form of service study had the priests maintained. A man must fit himself by deep attention to the navigation rules, and also laws that govern planets high; and waves, which bore the impress of the higher waters, held in check by state of active planetary movement towards the zenith, bearing water held in check of ice or mist that reaches far beyond the lower cloud

[p. 80]

mass, only loosened by agitation of the poles, or of the planets swirling far in space at certain periods.

Did the laws, so well contained in poise and in cohesion of the molecules of congealed force, but come astray through laxity of ether or electric band--which like a wall withholds one from its mate, the higher from the lower--all the seas might rise, submerge the world, or, tipping outwards, make world so dry that water force were known no more.

Thus learned they to so control all force which man is subject to, yet knows not his subjection. Thus they held control of nations less endowed with knowledge. War they sought not; but when thrust upon them they were not afraid to seek and conquered every foe.

     
Selestor's Men of Atlantis, by Clara Iza von Ravn, [1937], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 81]

  

CHAPTER XI

Mining and minerals of Atlantis. The man who came to Atlantis from "Spain" to study its minerals.

Atlantis was athirst for gold which lay within her soil, and also for that ruddy metal which abounds in strongest nitrates from the saline trend of earth. Of these she held rich store, and men toiled deep beneath the surface gold and dug such rare and perfect metal blocks as man hath seldom seen.

Aye, harm was done by digging deep through centuries, for by digging, inner fires were loosed, and wall of water seething through it bore beneath the waves the block of land so huge and rich it seemed the home of gods--Atlantis.

Aye, copper ye call, was buried deep, grown from a force, the sages--men of science--taught, of pressure of the world's deep crust in other age. The suction of the water 'gainst the oxide-gas formed crystals which solidified to stone in substance hard and gathered by the magnet law all other minerals held in great or less degree.

Nay, they taught that sulphur enters not the copper growth; bitumen first in making copper stands. Aye, thus they taught; a hardened slime expresses what I wish to give. I can employ no words they spake in other age. Forbear to judge of all I say today in this--thy alien tongue.

The presence of its neighbor, gold, cast a shade of color on the mass. Where gold predominates a ruddy hue is seen; where "lead," the color ye call "peacock" shows, they spake. Blue vitriol, taught

[p. 82]

they, was an essence of the copper lode, because the overflow of salts was such in casting off when the work perfected was.

Aye, silver, too, but poor in quality, was found thereon, or in, as always when the rock commingling with the leaden pulp, made sure by oxides, in the dawn of growth-formation. Thus the Atlantians spake. Lead bears the proof within itself that all its trend towards the water-force is birthright.

Water is the first formative force of lead; water is the first of lead; a particle of soil, admixed with finest rock so worn through action of the law of molecules in given state doth form. The alum in the water is the hardening property. The iodide, the melting; bitumen in the clay in finest form, the pliable, and thus doth lead stand forth enformed by heat which melted earth's greatest bulk long ages since.

The aeons roll along and leave behind the products of their arcs and pressures, molten state as well. The period of the ice uncovered much, but more is hid where man doth dig and delve to reach.

The copper mines which held the greatest worth lay on the western shore. To East the gold on sands did lie, the grains, they called, the ocean seemingly had washed upon the beach. In that day it was a common product of that land, yet prized as now, for nations far brought products, goods, to barter for the precious metal.

Ornaments were made, some beautiful, and all were prized, for instinct seemed to recognize the purity of gold which they taught God had made of sun-rays smiting rock that held the greatest sulphide matter. Sulphide--a casting out from soil, drawn by the sun rays, and the kindred heat of inner fires.

"The trend of atoms certain forms of metal make," was their philosophy. "The heat or cold

[p. 83]

makes texture. Heat enformed, a finer growth is there; by pressure formed, a coarser grain doth show. Pure oxide 'gainst the mass (rock) which holds strong sulphur fumes, and saline forms but crystals.

Evaporation, the first cause of rock; then stagnation followed by decomposition produced matter partaking of both saline and acid property. Acid from atmosphere, more pronounced in the beginning than later age; saline through water evaporation and planetary property brought out (which in-so-far has not been explained save by growth laws, a property needful to the sustenance of plant and also planetary life). Salt, etheric property, stimulus, electric. Next came hardening of rock formation in which entered the acid and saline-making mineral.

Bitumen may be formed by interior earth fumes, or lava fumes, admixed with the acidity in the atmosphere caused by excessive drouth. Drouth--fervid pressure of heat destroying certain properties in the atmosphere and in the rock at formative period, and bringing out others which might have been destroyed, had water-force instead of heat deployed the mass when in state of formation.

The intense, creative heat which beat upon this and other globes when directly focussed by the sun-rays which were at that period much nearer and the globes unprotected by haze or separate planes or systems of ether as now exist, cannot be described by numbers--statistics--now employed.

Such state was also a cause for mineralization; the upper and lower fires, or inside and outside forces for heat, bringing about a state which today, with reduced heat system, cannot be accomplished. Yea, bismuth was known in Atlantis, as now, in conjunction with other metals. Nor was its presence

[p. 84]

detrimental to those other ores. It was there mined with copper and lead.

Iron they claimed was formed from slough of wooden matter first. A rustless property called simply "matter." Iron, they taught, was not formed as other metals. Iron has two methods of formation according to the "quality," spake they.

One, "the drift formation," comes from wooden property reduced through decay, and when all oxides (oxides lie in wood as in metal though in different form) were loosened and became dust property the fruit of the world-growth and the formative growth of shale substance, akin to chalk, took up the work and so commingling made a substance, lost to all analysis today.

The atmosphere they did assert had much to do with the creation of metal. The heat intense the humid character, the charring and blistering ashes made, which, when the water was infused, in age of steam, with all its saline worth and iodine and alum--all that water held--made mass of iron, ye.

Look to the fiber of the newly dug iron. It is the "ashes" heap ye view, hardened by a process Nature knows, not names. The Iodine gives color. In the seas surrounding Earth, in days primeval, waters held the thickening, stiffening quality of "tar," yet in less degree than that to commerce known. Mark ye its hardness, catching all prismatic light, the color of the iron at its best.

No theory today better fits the growth of that dark ore than the Atlantian. Mark ye also its trend in mass or mine. A "drift" ye speak, of snow or ashes blown, or sand, and iron was a drift in days gone by. Days? Aeons! Cycles! all that God doth count, but man may stand appalled and dare not think the ages in one column, for 'tis Time!

Yea, silver was there found, but not in quantities.

[p. 85]

Thus bismuth they contended, was more pure, for silver detracted from its value and it cannot be found in quantities where silver predominates. Acidity in metal, they believed, was a test that bismuth could not be found within the radius of its growth, for acidity in metal was bismuth's foe.

That certain acid of the ore was called "glo" a casting out as metal hardens and coats the rock, nor is it found inside the mass. As medicine the use of bismuth was not known, but it was used as softening property in brittle rock when ground to make the composition slab to build, or yet for tablets raised to gods, or for the use of mariner, in stating laws in moist, hot countries under the Atlantian rule. Bismuth as a drug was best understood in Egypt when the old alchemists ruled the world of science. Learned they, too, its uses in a draught--elixir--sluggish medicine for ailments of the mad; those "moon-struck," called, for so tradition spake, that bismuth was a casting out of planets in their growth in dawn of time--Eternity's great dust which maketh worlds. Cementing, bismuth, all the molecules of light or air in one great mass.

Aye, bismuth was our subject; little more I say of what Atlantis taught of that prized substance, for they held it of priceless worth in so cementing rock that pillars grew eternal in their wearing, so to hold the thoughts of men whose bodies turned to dust for centuries had been.

Antimony was to the Atlantians an unknown metal. Tin? The knowledge of that substance, metal, was brought from far to northward in the dawn of old Atlantian knowledge, but its uses were not known as now.

Atlantian minds were bent not on that metal, yet a beaten stuff was sometimes brought for barter and later it led to knowledge of its use, for so intent

[p. 86]

the priests on learning others' arts that tin invested was in other metals--flux. And bronze was formed with parts of tin and iron with the copper--flux.

Bronze was formed with parts of tin and iron with the copper flux to give it gloss and substance.

Gold also was sometimes wrought in shape by pouring molten wax and tin of quality, refined into one cauldron, rolling forth the mass upon the sea sand and beating thin. Thus was the metal of the finest quality made. Tough, elastic, brittle not and could withstand the beating blasts of Time and rust not; neither was it rent by waves of sea. And barques were keeled with such--the galleys of the king.

Yea, the copper mines of "Spain" [**] Atlantis knew. A warring tribe took captive such a one as always sought to learn all secrets. He it was who brought the knowledge of such copper ore upon that great peninsula; and forth set men--when he had been loosed from bonds--returning. These men made search for copper, as ye call, and found, alas! a grave beside the "shafts" save one alone.

And he, content to grow in power and knowledge, there abode for "twenty years" upon the soil of alien. But at last his heart turned to his home and kind and he returned unto Atlantis, nor spake he of his intent to those adopted of his heart in "Spain."

But ere his death his early kin and sons he did foreswear to seek the spot and to enrich his early home--his country--with strange weapons, implements of household thrift, by digging, smelting and so turning into shapes the ore as times then taught.

They went--a galley of strong men who learned to toil in mines and those, returning, brought the secret to Atlantis. Men of Spain were not Atlantian

[p. 87]

born when this occurred, but of a race from northward in that day. But later, all Atlantian was the blood infused by trader, toiler in the mines, and they who sought in commerce to maintain a rank above the "people."

"People! hated word to ears that hear the Higher Voice proclaim: My people all!"

And by those men who delved in mines in Spain, was brought the knowledge that Atlantis held great wealth in ores, and digging was begun. Yea, I spake before, the tin, ye call, was brought in boats at large to carry commerce, and its certain worth was partly understood.

The fuel used in "smelting of the ores?" It was hardened tree trunks; aloes make heat as full of fierce and melting tendency as "coal," and aloe trees abounded there. Tulip is also a fierce, hot wood when fire-smitten. Tulip trees grew upon Atlantis, huge as the trees [**] in this, thy land called wonders of the world by ye in this strange spot; and these great tulip trees were hewn to staves and dried in matter-soaked in slime from out the gushing wells to southward on that island.

Yea, wells of slimy wash as thou hast here, and from which ye make light in this new land. And yet those people knew no light like this ye make from the same stuff which permeated wood, caused it to yield them heat for "furnace" great, to smelt the ore dug in that land, now sunk beneath the waves, alas!

Light, askest thou? Oil of the fish gave all the light Atlantis knew in homes when darkness hid the light of day. In southern seas a monster sometimes did appear all phosphorescent, and the fishers slew such monster. In their nets it havoc made. Its pelt

[p. 88]

[paragraph continues] (no scales upon it grew) gave even in death and foul decay a light most luminous.

And to preserve this light, which vanished when it dried and turned to ashes, they soaked the pelt in oil--clarified and pure, and thus was light preserved most luminous and giving out no odor. A phosphorescent light which softly lit the hall as doth moon rays smiting at the full--the southern moon, when stored in crystal globe the oil. A pleasant light indeed.

Footnotes

^86:* Reo Tinto.

^87:* Redwoods of California.

     
Selestor's Men of Atlantis, by Clara Iza von Ravn, [1937], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 89]

  

CHAPTER XII

The crime of old King Osiris and the king Atlantis gave to Egypt.

The Priestess springeth to the thought of temples old and kings who are but dust, save that their souls died not. Yea, thus I speak.

The king who reigned in Egypt when the flood destroyed Atlantis was Osiris, son of him who reigned in that ripe age when law perfected brought to that doomed land all things of Earth. Son of him who died with terror in his rheumy eyes, who clung in mute despair, with tightening, trembling lips to hand of her who smote with sore disgrace the kingdom. Thrust from throne the son who thought to reign when he--the sire--had passed, but was driven into Egypt.

Egypt, land of sun, of sand, of mighty river which drank deep of blood of sacrifice! For he--Osiris, son--in that past day did offer to his gods a gift of life for preservation from that water-death which smote the land--that, cruel, thrust him forth! But later day he viewed with stern despair that impulse of his youth and placed a ban on such deep wrong.

Ask ye again how "lost Atlantis'" sons bent first their steps to Egypt? Ask ye not in vain, for such would be my question--was, in that dim age when youth held message of the olden line as something to be drunk with ecstasy.

The queen Osiris' father wed, in age was not of his own land, but stranger to his people. A sage foretold a doom for him who thus perverted law and wed beyond the sea.

[p. 90]

Close ties were broken through his choice, for of his house he saw no soul of all who had before been welcome to the feast, these turned their faces from his city fair and sought a home afar, and she who filled another's stead had "welcome" boldly writ to all her house and name.

Of the three sons born to Osiris--king--but twain survived their infancy, and these were strong and beautiful as gods, ye speak. The eldest, for his father named, rebelled against the marriage of his sire when death had claimed the queen the law first gave him--king.

Fondly had he loved the one who gave him birth; And she foretold the fate which waited all when death had claimed her--Queen first chosen--banishment to all her house should he, the king, .

Osiris, old and doting, sent his ships afar to bring to him a daughter of that land which since that day Assyria claimed; the race which first inhabited had passed ere I had seen the light--a fairer race than mine whose origin none knew--a subtle race who sold as slaves their kindred, drank of blood and tilled no soil.

They passed as passeth hoar frost; none of earth do hold a record of that race today. One of this race--a monarch--once did seek Atlantis' shore to barter slaves for fruits, or gold, or jewels, and with him in his train of slaves he bore a sister--beautiful as dawn. And thus the king of proud Atlantis craved another of that house when she, his queen, had passed, the wife he loved in youth. So galleys sailed and gifts were sent, and to the ancient monarch came a bride, more fair than she--the slave. It was then the elders of the council rose in great rebellion, but the king was strong in his determination--threatened death--and with his followers (followers

[p. 91]

hath every man) he quelled the rioters, restoring peace.

Yet did the prince, first to the monarch born, though banished from the palace of his sires until his sires' death (and should another heir be born the banishment was for the prince's life and he an outcast), swear by his gods that so disgraced was he, and stung by taunts of them who looked upon the violation of Atlantian law as violation of God's chosen law, that he would never on the island reign, nor stand a subject of the kingdom till his father's death, so, firm, departing took the friends who bode within his halls.

Less than one hundred, ye the number speak, but chosen for their grace of heart and wisdom. Thus they went afar unto my land, a band of resolute and daring hearts who builded well a nation woe befell!

Ah, Egypt! when the heart of earth had ceased to beat within the body that I called my own, I deemed not that thy sun had set! I deemed not that the stranger's hand would rise against thy monuments, my very tomb and tomb of her I loved. That grovelling would become her sons, her daughters menial to an alien horde that writes but agitation on their shield!

Osiris reigned in Egypt first. His court, the rocks that made a mark indeed to them who bode on barren plains, for in that higher spot they first did set their sandaled feet--the feet of refugees. Of them who bowed in grief at thought of palace walls which, kissed by Sun, shot out such gleams of light as comes from towers fair set with polished stones.

________

I told the tale of how the monarch old made one a queen from out that far-off land, in later time

[p. 92]

Assyria, and of the son who might have reigned.

Reigned there? Ah, no! for waters licked the throne, and rotted ermine, silken jewelled robe which clung about a form called "king"! And he, the chastened son, had shared that fate had he but lingered on the mother isle where rosy dreams of power, greatness, marked the pathway of his youth.

I speak of friends assembling in the gloom; I tell of whispered discourse, stealthy setting sail by twos, by threes, the barges; of slaves with mouths embound so that no cry cast out upon the night did ring alarm. Osiris, prince, the future king, fared in the galley eighty manned--Aamhotep to the left, Usertsen at the right with men to battle seasoned.

In their rear the merchants, the craftsmen of the line of Har-Dom El; and in the boats of lesser worth and beauty rode the cooks, the slaves, the little beasts who loved the children smiting playfully, and wives and children, priests with altar stores, filled other barges.

Spoil they bore not. Not one grain of gold, one length of linen, silk one thread the more, nor lace one shuttle's length that was not theirs by right. For Justice was the watchword of that band, and also feared they swift and sure pursuit if so they bore them plunder from the state.

Proud, also, were the refugees and scorned the gifts from king degraded, hampered on his road to heights the soul must climb to reach that higher world portrayed by priest. For marriage was the law which brought men good or ill to soul--that roused or crushed all higher impulse, taught the priests.

Wives were thought to hold within their hands the gift of life to soul as body. From higher planes, etheric, did they spring, contended law of marriage

[p. 93]

read by priest at ceremony. Mismated ones were said to lose all gifts from higher planes.

Earth-trodden, hampered none might hope to reach the heights, and thus in secret did the priest read low--the doom of that old king as set by gods whose laws were violated.

And when afar the refugees did hear the fate befallen king and subjects, all, low spake they in their horror: "Thus the gods decree for violation of the marriage laws read from lips unseen by men of fleshly mood, but law imparted to such priest as sins not, fasts and peers into the higher world through eyes of soul alone.

     
Selestor's Men of Atlantis, by Clara Iza von Ravn, [1937], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 94]

  

CHAPTER XIII

The flight of Prince Osiris. His Egyptian court.

Dark was the night and still, Osiris sailed. One star alone peeped out from somber clouds.

"A star of destiny we follow; guarding eye of god," spake she, the virgin wife of him, Osiris. For thus he swore, that but as sister she, until the land was reached which yet his kingdom in the future days might be, was this young bride, the beauteous one whose name has died to history.

Not she the "goddess" did become, but one who lived and died and lived again and left no trace, no name save in the hearts of them who loved her.

"Aye, the star! perchance the eye of god we follow," spake the all-appointed king, the banished prince--the father of a line so kingly that the world did speak with awe the names of sons and of descendants all adown the line of Egypt's monarchs.

This was he who drew his barques, who pitched his tents upon the shore where Philae stands, ye call. And near the spot the men of origin from out the clouds--the first created man forms abode nor yet attempted war.

Great trunks of cypress shut the sun from faces dark, and eyes that blazed with feeling looked with awe--with pity, too, upon the son of him who for a beauteous face cast off the bloom of kingly tree. Yet kingly blood will bubble in the fount and raise itself in any land. No clime can make it sluggish, bow to taint nor sink to level of the lowly born.

Aamhotep? He was a prince who set to war a fleet at his command. All men then bowed in honor

[p. 95]

to the high born one who drew first breath in chambers of the king. For old Osiris claimed, as soul to soul, a sister, born in wedlock, passing fair and born in that same hour as he.

And when Osiris--king the first--did wed, the sister also laid her snowy hand in that of consort--brother of the queen who lived a life of sweet content and died with blessings on her lips, and swore the king, her lord, that he would never wed, but keep her line unsullied, centered in the son first born to them--Osiris--named as then the custom was for father--that old king who did break his oath and wed, alas! the pagan woman--she of that lost race who won contempt for deeds so foully done that all looked with alarm when men of her strange land drew nigh.

Aamhotep? brave and true and tender he. A maid he wed with eyes of that rare hue, in that young age of earth, the eyes which catch their color from the sky. And she a waif of ocean cast ashore in shattered barque, a royal barge emblazoned; brave with many a spear, and head of bear, and claw of wolf, the banner token of the North.

And lashed to swivel-bench of slave, wrapped close in robe of fleece with gems, the infant lay in arm all stiff in death's fell bonds!--An arm that, hung with jewels, showed in wondrous shape and texture pure the blood of kings, mayhap, froze in the inert veins.

One gem on that white, burdened arm alone was worth a monarch's crown--one massive emerald that shone, and still doth shine if but the light of day could strike it fair, but hid in mummy's breast it lies.

The child of sea, as sacred thing, esteemed was held in royal nursery. Her youth the childhood of her kind who drank of pleasure and content. No

[p. 96]

daughters blessed the home of king Osiris. Sons but three to him were early born. And she, the winsome, flax-haired maid, blue eyed, a thing of lands where ice prevailed and storms blew fierce with cruel sting, was held as treasure. Sacred she as gift from gods indeed.

And young Aamhotep in his early youth did love and long to wed her. The king but smiled: "In infancy," he spake, "I wed in thought, and by the law of Custom, the son of her--mine other--sister--half--and this strange god-sent creature born 'mid elements I ne'er beheld. Blessed be thy union, O my sister's son, with this loved, radiant one."

And blessed indeed was that strange tie--the child of frost and snow, the castaway of elements, and he, the child of fire, the son of forty lords in line so plainly marked none could dispute his claim.

And in their union winter met with summer's fierce and fervid glow, and unto other souls in line they gave their fire, their pride, their calmness and their grace--all that the sons of kings might claim. And loved was Aamhotep of that young prince and kinsman, Osiris. Nor enmity was there, the twain between, so long as breath did animate each body.

Usertsen second was in naval fleet. A minister of state, his sire, well wed and well endowed with golden grains, and slaves and stately home. His children like the buds about the rose. Twelve sons, three daughters clustered 'round the knee of one who seemed a bride as yet when he, the elder son, Usertsen, gave voice and claimed the robe a mother's hand alone might weave.

A valiant man was Usertsen. Born a power who brought to Egypt battle lore, and caused the Nile to broaden at command and by the work of slaves full forty score.

He later waged upon the land called Assyria bitter

[p. 97]

war; drove from its plains the kindred, people of that queen who, being queen, brought deep disgrace upon the fairest name Atlantis knew, the bravest king, the kindest heart that ever beat in monarch's breast. Still others of that fleeing band did win great names among the tribes who sought the state of war.

Great names through skill as artisans or builders did they win. One indeed had planned the building of the king's own palace in far Atlantis--a pile of marble, golden, fluted harp in fountain set adorned. The columns of that palace were like the palm and palm indeed in seeming. Notched marble at the base, but upwards, broader grown, took color from the native tree in jasper, a stone from land afar in merchant galleys brought unto Atlantis.

The dome created by his skill showed Moon and Stars--the Pleiades, Orion, Mars the worshipped one, and other sparks of ether there shone down. And in the center of one mighty dome in temple old, well builded, rose and always rose the sun in waves of rare sardonyx; sun of gold and other burnished metal casting out such sheen that Sun indeed it seemed.

Great garlands twined about the columns' base; the grape with beryl splendor, riper yet, the dusky marble. Leaves of jade in spar mocked nature. All so well was wrought, the leaves did seem to wave at touch of wind across the sea. The selfsame sea that sweeps above and not at base of columns on this day!

The selfsame sea that bore the barques that night; the barques assembling far to sea, as Day, new born, cast her first faint line across the glistening waves in one great fleet, defying stern pursuit.

From northern point of Atlantis floated they. Some from the south, some west, and all intent on one great purpose--fleeing from their homes to

[p. 98]

build a nation unto him, the rightful heir to that stern, dotard king who was thrust from out the palace of his birth to taste humiliation.

To taste humiliation! he, the son of kingly line! and she, the foreign queen, the early slave of one who sold her to a throne, brought forth another son to him--the lord she loathed. Behold! the wailing cry of that young child--"usurper, hated thing" the people called--filled loud the ears of that old, dotard sire when island kingdom melted, palace sunk to deeps and she--the loved, the won by loss of soul, sunk down in waves' embrace.

The luster of her braided hair befouled with slime! Her white hands grasping sand! Her jewels mocking eyes of monstrous things that soon would batten on the beauteous dead!

The sea doth sparkle, sun-smote, as I tell the tale.

I turned from picture of the hastening barques. The barques of men who stern, intent, had but one object to complete; thought not of home; thought not of ease nor luxury which fed the sense. They thought alone of him, their prince bereft, and minds leaped out to future years and drank of joy, of freedom and of power for him who soon would challenge all the world, they spake.

The women of that land were brave, as well. They hushed the cry of peevish child with words so stern that in the future years it still remembered. "Hush! hush, my child! 'tis well; we journey from oppression. He, our king, sits yonder in his galley, and our thoughts are pleasant poems, for they ring to tunes of other kingdoms over which he reigns."

And even the slaves smiled slowly, worn with toil, for haste had sore impelled.

"Our king is young and beautiful," they sang.

"Our king is brave.

[p. 99]

"We journey to that land which soon shall know his power as king."

Osiris, father, in his island palace spake all lightly as the eyes of her, the temptress, sought his face--the subtle woman with ten thousand wiles: "He hath departed! stole he out at night and seeks, perchance, a land afar. And others go; his friends, his allies. The son of her, our sister loved, our chancellors; the priests who prayed, condemned or yet abode content to listen to the music's plaint nor exercise their minds with matters grave.

"Depart they like the rovers of the sea! I call not back these rebels of my line. 'The world is wide,' they speak--the sages who from far appear through stress of elements. Ah! well! I seek no wider world than is contained within the walls of this, thy chamber, sweet. Let them depart!"

And so his galleys idly swung to play of chains. The slaves slept deeply or deeply quaffed the malted draught or juice of grape, and lovers met and mated, aired their woes; the old died, young were born and Life and Time and atoms of the air all moved to Law.

________

But thrice three years did pass ere sunk the island home. Egypt already had become a power in war, for certain mighty tribes adhered to young Osiris' rule ere sunk Atlantis. This the old king learned and knew the power his son had gained.

A city sprung as though from magic touch beside the Nile and to it came "barbarians," in that day, and others learned from the misty west, and from the plains which then did teem with life and energy.

And thus the court of young Osiris bore a dignity, a power and Fame already marked it. Known was it to people of the North. Aye, thrice three years,

[p. 100]

ye call the circles which the sun doth breed, had passed when Nature rent the spot within the bosom of the southern sea and forth belched baleful motion, terror, scourge, and all engulfed went forth the souls from form.

This they in Egypt read through stress and flames which lit the sky. From planet's vortex vast a tale of horror sprang. "They go, alas! We live," they spake. "The world doth spell but happiness for us, and ours, at last."

Ah, Philae, thou art but an island spot upon the sluggish or yet swifter stream, yet in the past, all dim to history lost, thou wast the birthplace of mine ancient sires, who sleep 'neath sand that drifts and drifts to tune of desert winds, and  screams, and shadows chase across the spot where feet of emperors trod all stately!

Philae was rent from shore by slaves who cut the rock, cut sod and made a channel where no water ran before. In carven casket midst the mouldering specks of husk shall be revealed thy history ere this hand that pens is stilled, and Earth may read what once the sun hath witnessed; message old, dug from the earth, and written by the hand of him who held the scepter first to Egypt known, Osiris--king!

Aye, was Egypt peopled when prince Osiris sought her shore. Peopled by the descendants of a race of men who collected knowledge by the mind alone. No graven language held, save marks to warn. This race did pre-exist Atlantian age; full 5000 years before the fishermen did reach Atlantis' shore. I give thee not the number of the years exact, because no measure for the state of day or week or years exists, and thus no records may appear.

Yet that great race, impelled by store of thought, held well a line of sages, if ye will, who read the law from memory as 'twas held for many years. Made

[p. 101]

records of events through will and mind and stored them in the brains of chosen ones.

Old men taught younger. At an early age, called ten, the boy was learned in all secret thoughts and thus his training was a source of help and safety to the country. Great circles did uprear upon the sands which bordered on the Nile at overflow--the time, they argued, when the thoughts of men flowed freest.

Thus they read the law--"all nature at its flood."

Aye, men in circles sat and pondered long. Brought from the ether streams of knowledge, which may be drawn by all if well is understood the law. This law perfected they, and so they spake "Another word hath come to me."

The sages numbered many hundreds. Tribes of sturdy men held sway upon the steppes where desert sands now drift, not sea then as contended. But all verdure clothed and fruit in clusters grew by every pool and blossoms sprung, amid the grass so long and green that waved as waves the sea.

Yea, many learned the method--to contain the secrets of a nation--Secrets held as life is held, all dearly; told to none save in the council talk. The youths appointed to this sacred task were held in bonds from birth, nor spake to women more. Nor yet to men save on the sacred themes. But learning, teaching, made the sum of life to these.

Thus was the history of the comet handed down the line till men who learned to build, not dig their homes, had caught the history and emblazoned on stone, or skin, in crevice of the rock it lay fair hidden when my sires from Atlantis came.

I tell the tale as told to me. I read it not. The records lost to all save in tradition as some hint in history gave. Yea, world of disintegration. Comet, to thee, is but a ball of ether, yet the central core,

[p. 102]

solidified and casting out of gasses sometimes loses in shock the central force of rock and thus it falls to earth.

The "world" which made destruction on the steppes was but a comet force drawn in the vortex of an older globe, akin to Moon but greater in its bulk. It fell not all on Earth, else it were here no more as Earth, but mass of molten strata. For, to vortex drawn, it made a wall far out of man's research, yet such exists.

"The nether world," ye speak. Aye, so it be; beneath this world of thine is massed a shapeless, formless mass or matter-dead. The drift, the flux, the substance of no name, which sways at times in vapor of the ether bulk, yet all unseen so far and far it lies.

     
Selestor's Men of Atlantis, by Clara Iza von Ravn, [1937], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 103]

  

CHAPTER XIV

The death of Prince Osiris' bride--Albirothisis.

Osiris sought that farther border from the fear of swift and stern pursuit.

A thousand galleys did comprise Atlantis' fleet; and so had he no hope to reach that land to which their thoughts had turned if so the king directed men to follow, barge on barge and barque with barque.

The fleet could overtake through force of oar, for rested twelve while twelve did furious ply the long day through, and when the night had set they also plied, nor lacked a light to so direct their stroke, that distance, too, was gained.

In that past age, as now, the cage that swung at prow did hold a fearsome bird which shot forth from its eyes a light that mocked the stars. Full half a mile it showed the pathway of the sea. And "farther still! still farther!" was the loud command of him, Aamhotep, when the Nile bore refugees upon its breast. "Still up and up."

The desert passed, the plains which later hid their city's wealth. For storms of sand have filled the arches broad and hid the dome, the wall of brittle spar, the pride of King Osiris. It lieth deep where sands still drift.

The strength of numbers stemmed the cataract. Philae was reached--a point of rock-set land. "We tarry," spake the king, "for she doth feel the stress of flight--our queen."

And so they bode a space where barren rocks

[p. 104]

mocked hunger. Bode till she had passed--the loved one, virgin wife of him, the king.

Alas! I see the picture as 'twas drawn for me. Slaves were so stilled at thought of sorrow smiting, that no voice rose in a wail. The night breeze flapped the standards borne at prow of anchored galleys, barques.

The galley-slave lay still with eyes fixed on the stars and thought, perchance, beyond was rest from toil.

She lay--the loved, the beautiful, the blessed, her beauty fading as the rose leaf dies; the film slow creeping o'er her jet black eyes, her hands all listless lying clasped in her lord's. "I go," she murmured. "Go from hence. But thou, beloved, shalt dwell long years upon this ball called Earth. Long years where palms wave moodily above the spot where rests the urn that doth contain my ashes.

"One shall come at last and thou shalt her behold and dream thou lovest; what care I? for in that higher world I shall be crowned queen and still be thine. She is of earth for thee, I for Eternity.

"Down near the rapids where the slaves tugged long upon the chain of galley let me sleep--'neath carven shape--to meet the eye of man long centuries hence. Let sleep the semblance. I shall watch the night fold wings above the spot, and smile and keep close vigil over thee, my loved, my lord, when in a casket clasped with golden bands the all shall lie in ashes that thy earth-mind deemest that thou lovest. 'Tis not so; the state and semblance of a queen may live on earth, but I am of the stars!

"I go to keep the watch of one who wanders from her earthly home to claim her heritage, in courts of ether built, where One holds sway in mind and love and all the senses. There shall come a day, far distant, when thou, too, shalt claim thy heritage--

[p. 105]

that of a throne less than the builded pile where One, whose face we may not see, abideth.

"Down where the cataract doth lull the sense of vastness and of loneliness thou, too, shalt rest--thy mortal part--thine ashes by my urn, for Earth hath, too, her heritage and claims her children. Brittle toys they seem beside the splendor drawn from Light and Life, from whom the soul descendeth.

"Let my husk--the mortal part--be born upon the barge thou calledst ours in that day we two were wed. That barge a gift from him--my father in the island home.

"Down, down the river sweepeth. I shall be no more of earth. Mourn not. The stars at night shall speak to thee of me, and He--the One whom lesser gods would thrust from out the temple home, holds safely.

"Mourn never thou for me, oh Lord, so loved the day seems night when from my side thou strayest!

"One shall come at last who in thy arms shall lie and down the line of history be absolved from sin, but her thou lovest never, for the tie of soul to soul is held between us, born on heights where Nature readeth Law at first, breathed from the lips of Majesty, the king God of the gods."

She passed. A fitting splendor marked the day they piled the wood, the spice on carven throne, and over all was cast a moulten mass which caught the flames that leaped unto the clouds and bore the soul from husk, they then believed.

Her ashes in the urn of golden metal stands far down amid the rocks that circle round the spot. A carving of her face, divine in love and youth, still holdeth semblance of the one who died--young Albirothisis, child of old Amsolabis--that grandest

[p. 106]

minister, who ruled the king though meek in mien and seeming ruled by him.

No history gives her name, yet shall it live on page of alien people side by side with his--Osiris, King of Egypt first.

The spot where she had died Osiris sought to shield from vulgar purpose. Thus they digged a channel deep, made island of that spot where first their feet in Egypt rested. "Barren be the spot, and lone" he spake, "where I bereft did mourn in this strange land the one I loved."

And down the graceful river moved the fleet and builded grandly where the cataract marked the sacred spot--the tomb of one who passed--nor wife nor maid of him--Osiris. Yet so dear he held her memory that the years fled by and left him aging ere he held his hand to maiden, speaking: "Come to me as bride."

The sand still drifts and, underneath, the urns with ashes of a king and queen hold court. Deliverance is at hand and all the world shall drink the history of the king who mourned a score of years for one they named his queen.

________

Philae asketh thou? Aye, such of old bore mark in that dim day of numbers. Yet no wall doth stand, but farther down are palace walls of marble buried deep in sand. And one hath shown an architrave of white, embossed marble writ with figures of the gods they worshipped in Atlantis.

Thus it is the past leaps out, a ghost of olden time, of time remote. Of time that held the arts, as thou today dost know, with added numbers wrought in gold. That wealth of stone, of metal made from

[p. 107]

brass and stone fine ground and other matter, held at bay old Time and lieth yet up-bearing arch.

A statue wrought to life is also of that metal. Statue made to show the features beautiful of him--Osiris--never found as mummy. False the world hath breathed! Osiris lieth in his rock-bound tomb below Abydos; thus ye speak the name; his hands outspread to bless his followers, his loved wife beside him, wrought in stone.

False the word that husk of him doth meet the eye embalmed and seen in walls of glass! Ah, no! such is not nor has been. Osiris' tomb is hid from prying eye. His generals stand at portal, sword in hand, to guard the sacred dead! Three sculptured forms shall meet the eye of man--Osiris, Aamhotep, Usertsen, wrought so well that later art seems crude.

A casket wrought of cypress bound with gold held once the ashes. Egypt's art to hold the husk was later yet employed, for in Atlantis ashes but remained of forms once loved. Yea, the spot which holds is near to man; is bound by rock and sand. Yet priceless store still lies where camels browse and other creatures stamp in angry mood, and toiling man seeks rest from burning sun.

The temples raised by skill are ruins now, but here an arch, a pillar shattered there, shows still the wondrous colors. Cleft the marble base, and sculptured leaf is broken, yet there lies a wondrous store for man who dreams, and dreams above, and seeks to shape a history from the blocks that teach of peoples once so versed in arts that other ways seem baubles set by gems.

Great vases wrought of many-colored glass lie far beneath the bed of hungry Nile, with histories writ in colors. Foreign form speaks loud ... of craft which mocks at any plan to imitate. Broad braids

[p. 108]

tell calmly that a smith may beat, entwine, and weave his vase at will, but bubbles blown from forms, or cords in shape, may not this day hold wine or lotus. With the strength of gold, thus ancient vase was wove.

A quaintly fashioned volume bound with gems and made from jasper, block on block, so thin the words of other page show through, doth lie within Osiris' tomb.

On this is told the history of the flight. Shows kingly emblem. Stars tell point of date, if so the men versed well in star-lore read. Ah, man in husk of flesh, think not that Earth hath seen the all old Egypt's bosom holds, for thou shalt read in language of the past a history which doth make thee seem a child.

Atlantis thou hast sunk, but Earth doth hold today the records of thy greatness and thy power.

________

Aye, where Thebes stood the camel still may browse, but parchment hid in golden case is still intact, and wall that carven image shows of him--Osiris--still doth stand enwrapped in sands which clog the well-wrought lines depicting flight and subsequent events.

Aye, there is writ a volume on the arts by one named Ad-em. Such the name they spake; none knew his origin. A mother dying at his birth, the victim of some bold marauder; such the state of country at that age.

I know no more. And yet God's image, sometimes sore defaced, did linger in his brain power to extent that carven lines were wonder of all ages. And his tales thus told in stone were listened to with wonder

[p. 109]

by the king who held in bonds a thousand versed in story-telling art.

In line of other digging lies this lair of wonders--objects hid by depth of sand none yet have sought to "shovel." At the base of one great crag another store is hid far out from water's reach; and this shall tell the story of the Norsemen as it was told by mighty Norse invader to the old Atlantians.

The histories of today shall lie 'neath buried earth in centuries to come, and there shall moulder to the prying eye of them who follow, but the stone shall give its secret to the world when volumes frail shall crumble. Speak I thus in prophecy.

     
Selestor's Men of Atlantis, by Clara Iza von Ravn, [1937], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 110]

  

CHAPTER XV

Origin of the Mongolian race. Kling, from Atlantis, tempted.

Atlantis held no kings who warred upon the land thou names, [**] for they were wise and as allies held the people near and far nor yet desired war where peace could give all that they asked.

They knew the law of greed, and this they read with eyes so well attuned to higher moods that all was wisely done, and Mercy tempered Greed.

Those yellow forms thou namest first came to shape, and soon a nation formed, in that dim morn when in the time of dearth Atlantis drew her bread supply from plains now rank with growth of trees--with bloom that cloys the sense, where serpents twine amid the broad, lush leaves, and beasts prowl greedily among coarse reeds which stand where once great grains of maize did grow.

A people dark, but lacking not in brain, lived where the river which knows fleet of boats for commerce laves the banks of slime; yet once upon those banks grew grain to feed the world. And thither sent Atlantis men of trust to barter what the smiths did beat from gold, or yet those pictures rare wrought in the metal fair ye name upon the scroll, and yet not so exact in every point of worth, for it still held another added part which saved the metal for the tooth of Time to gnaw and yet not crumble. Aye, I give the method when the hour hath struck.

One man whom king Arman Dorth sent to hold

[p. 111]

commercial speech with people of that land was Kling. A wise and crafty and far seeing one, who bore him wife and babe with train of slaves. And as he bartered for the filling of his galley's vast, a crafty spokesman of the land of grain held thus his ear:

"Oh man of worth," spake he, "the plains lie to the northward in the sun that thou couldst people with thy slaves and kin and garner greatest wealth. Wild camels prowl o'er sands whose richness, when the river drinks the drouth, will yield thee wealth of grain like this we hold. And where the ooze of rivers ply the soil great grains, whose whiteness mocks the bloom of lilies, grow.

"Let us depart. Take store of grain and make a nation all our own; thou king, I lord of finance to thy house; and thus in time the world shall wonder at our courage and our wealth, and people thrive where now alone the night bat flies and night beasts prowl."

Then he from Atlantis shore spake slow: "I value much thy trust in me, but kindred have I none. None have I save these I bear in carven device--wife and child; for I am but a waif of Ocean. All save I went down in galley.

"I alone am left of four score souls. My father of the plains, my mother, brother, sisters--all, alas! and lesser ties did break in that wild siege of Nature 'gainst mankind."

Spake one: "Thou shalt know a people all thine own ere thou goest hence to that, unseen, far land which shadows people, and where light that laves doth draw its glow and worth from out a Heart that once was all when Earth revolved about a central Sun that held the Life-spark. Nothing else was there.

"Take thou wives of this, my land, and bear with

[p. 112]

her thou now namest wife to that far country. In secret go we. Of the coffers of this state hold I the key, and we depart with store sufficient for our needs."

He pondered, Kling, the man of varying moods, was tempted, fell! The stores ne'er reached that isle where he as wanderer met and loved the one who mother of a nation did become, and lives again on earth, revered, in shape on strange and battered jar which sheddeth incense o'er the worshippers who live and die, give place to other hordes.

Aye, Kling did turn within his mind these promptings of the one who learned of growth of nations by much study. Knew the worth of power, and long had held in ample cave such "goods" as he had pillaged through the years of his high office.

Kling this crafty one had named as chief. "For," argued he, "the chief hath but the word, the power to bind with reason. I hold power in keys that lock and unlock all the coffers great the state doth own. An empty title tempts me not, for matter not what I am called. Praise is an empty casket. Gold doth fill the mind with fairest visions; in their midst the one who owneth gold is shrined."

And thus began their journey secretly. At night the ships set out for northern point well known to the advisor. Many days both long and weary sailed they until that point was reached. Their ships they bartered to squat men with craft for beasts, for food and for safe conduct to the kingdom's boundary.

At last the boundary reached, the caravan's great beasts went crashing through the forests' rim which bordered on the desert. Keen, alert rode spearsmen to the rear as to the front, for in that day the world teemed with fierce ones who sought but slaughter.

Mankind is restless. None may taste the joys of peace while in the body. Earth must fade from

[p. 113]

mortal vision ere the mind is well prepared to grasp the note of peace. And thus the heart of man turns fierce when long balked of adventure.

Interruption is the spur in side of beast which brings forth thought of slaughter; and the tribes inhabiting the land through which they passed made protest--pricked by spleen; and greed was also born through visions of the state the well-born plunderers did affect, and men were made bold by trespass, fit excuse for war.

The hordes hung long upon the footsteps of the caravan, and once attacked where desert met the trees which hid the wild assailants; but their mode of warfare being crude they fell an easy prey to those swart spearmen on the great brute's flanks perched arrogant. So peace at last was won and safety held.

Kling's thoughts were wavering still on his forsaking that fair isle--his home, on deeds of kindness at the hand of her, the foster mother, old and sore beset with ingrate children of her blood; on him--the patriarch Atlantian, who had held his hand that day the storm-cast lad lay weeping sore, with bruised limbs and heart that ached for them who sank in that wild storm which cast him forth upon the harbor of the fruitful isle.

And she, his wife, had father, mother there, beneath whose roof her rosy childhood passed, and from whose sheltering arms he had decoyed with promises of love unfailing as the gods!

Sore beset with memories did Kling glide forth from out his tent at night and paced the sands, unmindful of the eyes which gleamed and glowed, where hillocks vast held long-haired brutes that fought to death. One night he wandered far and halted in surprise, for in the starlight, making

[p. 114]

hideous moan, lay form of man with speech he once had known.

"Ah, son!" so spake the creature, tattered, long of hair and beard, a thing of skin which tightly clung to bone--"My son, why fearless wander on the steppes where prowls the tiger that doth live by blood, and serpents, which do sting the prisoned soul to Light? So young, so fearless, who art thou, I pray?" The voice spake low, Kling fell unto his knees.

"Ah, Father! Stranger! Man with tongue that draws from out the chambers of my mind the mark of speech like unto them who made my life a heaven when boyhood held my form! My father thus did speak, my mother sweet, with eyes aslant and sparkling, sang fond lays in this, thy tongue which then was mine own tongue.

"Whence cometh thou? Do the gods cast down to earth such self-neglected ones as thou to sight appearest? Or from the sands send up the nether gnomes such manhood to the beasts that prowl and sting?"

And, in a voice as feeble as the sigh of wind across the plain when first is born the mists of eve, the stranger made reply: "I am the last of a lost clan. Though lost to men of other lands we held in kinsmen's bonds till came dissension.

"My brothers one by one, with followers, set to reach again our land that always far and far away did seem; then famine smote those lingering, and thirst and pestilence. Thus all were lost to history of the World, for none save I survived.

"The others' fates through years I know not, nor shall know till I have passed! For Death is nigh, but He, my people's God, will gather to Himself the scattered shards and make again a mighty tribe

[p. 115]

if so He wills; but I shall seek the sky ere this be done.

"I bore the name of Asher; I knew thy father, for I feel the touch of mind with meaning in this hour. Thy father was my kinsman. Side by side we fought in battle. Love touched both our hearts, its rosy finger pointing to the same sweet face, vet he, not I, was chosen by the god to claim the one who bore thee.

"He to other land from our far home set sail in galley manned by many oars. I watched them sail--those brothers who with me had wandered far--and then turned I and mine our faces to the eastern sun, intent on seeking burial place, for to this end doth man forever trend.

"The tribes beset us; reft us of our instruments, our beasts, our women. Driven thus to seek but food for sustenance for our worn bodies, not of North or South thought we, but wandering on and on we set at last our feet upon the desert confines.

"Some of the tribe died early, stung by serpents. Others followed, lingering wanly, clung to life till fell disease had claimed, as I have told. I, last of all, was left as though the life which had imbued my form refused to lift itself to kindred ether.

"Long years passed by. I counted not their flight, for I have scorned to measure Time as man may count, but brain hath wove its stories; brain conjectured. Brain hath teemed with products of a state so grown to fit conditions that it felt no woe in loneliness.

"Thus I read the stars. Have peered into the lives of things that prowl and gnash white fangs at all save of their breed. To me an open book the weather's moods. I learn of tempests, sand storms, days to come. I learned to crush with foot, all bared, the deadly head and yet remain unharmed.

[p. 116]

"Low at my feet creep wounded beasts; the young that whimper at desertion of their dam beside my door are fed. (If door, indeed, be skins from thorny rod suspended.)

"Now doth the body shrink and soul look forth, I read of future methods which shall be employed by thinkers wise in many crafts and arts in ages yet to come. I read, alas! my earth-eyes soon must close, and soul be borne to strange and brilliant planes where sense of touch, they taught, is dead, and sight alone and voice and hearing shall so linger one forgets that Earth is his no more.

"And yet I read of earth's strange change. Of people crowding steppes where now the sand alone doth move to mood of wind, or agitation of the globe, or law that doth prevail and which is life! And thus these sands shall move by drops of dew into a mass of blackness. Blades of grass shall cover all, and beauteous blossoms.

"All is writ so plain upon a parchment swinging in the 'space' where sunbeams, making big the tiny dust-speck, laugh at man's all futile grasp, for growth is all about us. This I read in days so long, with solitude alone to call my friend, companion, that the heart stood still with dread lest Night and Sleep and Death might never fall!

"I read thy purpose. Read, and for long days I watched and waited for thy coming. Get thee hence when I have passed and to the northward turn thy face to solitude; and where long stretches of green reeds wave broad raise thou thy tents.

"In time a city vast shall spring of people all thine own. A race of men adhering to thy teachings through all time. A race of cunning craftsmen, skilled in arts, shall rule. The world at large apart shall view with keen surprise.

"Behold, thou art the son of him I loved full

[p. 117]

well, who hath communed through soul since that wild day when, reft of body, lying on the sands he fled in speech to me! And I have woven thoughts as strands to draw to me thy presence, son of him once loved, of her I loved, but later, she--the bone of strife that brought me hence!

"I wander from my purpose through this speech and, weaker growing, cannot hope to tell my secret--secret of the desert. Wild the barren plain where Death stalks white and dread! Aye, even here with none to peer at me, I hold my secret cuddled to my heart!

"In yonder cave it lies. The new day dawns soon. Hold thou my hand till it's appearing, for the chill of night is yet supplanted by another thrill that loosens cords and muscles, rends the bonds and frees the dove that nestles in my breast. To freedom, dove, which is a soul!

"And ere it flieth take, my son, this talisman. Hand loosen! soon thou'lt know the touch of gold no more! Why clingeth thou?"

And feebly, in the hand of Kling he laid a bauble, once worn by her he loved--the mother of the man who knelt beneath the sky, red-stained with hint of dawn, nor knew his history would cling to centuries.

"Take thou the path that wanders from this tiny spring and by a rock, all whitened, seek the long, loose hanging of my portal. Pass within and 'neath the stone which makes the inner threshold find thou that which thou shalt hand adown the years.

"That which the myriad eyes of nations read. That which shall dictate unto kings, that crowns shall bow to, Death himself divert."

He passed as wandering sunbeams smote the rocks and sand and called the serpents from their sleep and sent to lair the graceful leopard. As he spake so Kling indeed performed.

[p. 118]

The hiding place gave forth a priceless store. Long histories of peoples passed of whom no other trace was held. Of people to the westward, where great temples rose, where sons had set them forth to find a land more fitted to their needs. Of those who perished on the great sea flight, of others of the tribe who now abode neath Orient sun. His brothers all in speech and mode of thought, and mode of harmony in song.

And yet they stood apart from alien tribes. Were strangers in a land where strangers sought commingling with the nations at their door. Would stand apart, a race intensified by thought and custom from the centuries' line for ages yet to come.

Marked were they by the hand of isolation. Strong the will still binding to the country left afar. A people chosen for their stolid worth to self. A chosen race to hold tradition strong and mark in time the history of the world. His race that lives today! [**]

There stored, the forming of a government made plain. The law of Life--of Death--the full, deep thought born of communion with the unseen world through sense attuned to Reason. Toil of many years was there bound stone to stone or traced on skins as custom held that age.

And to the North the wanderers bore, fulfilling prophecy of him who learned in solitude the lessons for the world to glean and make it wiser, better, all fulfilled as he had said who in the desert died at stroke of day. The secret learned, the story told in teachings to the young adown the years.

Ah, Kling! thy monument still stands, though Time hath strove to crumble; yet the proof is there and in great tomes the speech of other days speaks

[p. 119]

potently. Thy blood but passed to younger rulers. Down the line hath History handed something of the tale I tell with lips that lie not, neither do pervert, from the first sentence.

Nations grow but slow, yet thou hast grown, O Nation, of such people as ne'er change, to fill the crannied spaces of the plain and overflow to seas. The land which teemed with plenty at its birth hath fallen. In the wilds and 'neath the sands are hid vast temples where stored knowledge lies. And yet they shall endure when brighter lands have darkened--shall become a star of destiny to nations that have scoffed at thee.

Footnotes

^110:* Mongolia.

^118:* Chinese.

     
Selestor's Men of Atlantis, by Clara Iza von Ravn, [1937], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 120]

  

CHAPTER XVI

The first Mongolian city. Mention of Yucatan.

I tell no tale of flight across the waste and waters. Of death struck beasts who fell a prey to creeping things that love the night. Of famine-threatened creatures pining sore for homes of plenty left, alas! too far to turn again to home for help they needed.

Of how at last the river, long and serpent-wise that spews its clear, sweet waters in the sea, that giveth life to banks all decked with green which feeds the multitudes, was made from straggling brook by hands of men who rent the toughened sod and formed a channel broad and deep.

Upon its banks their tents were pitched. The city, populous at first, was built in mind, then took it shape from hands of skilful workers.

Streets which cross and wind were but the fancy of the crafty one who held the keys which locked the nation's useless horde, for many years but useless--useless, as they sought no more their ancient home where gold in grains were held for merchandise.

He argued: "Streets that broadly lie invite the hordes which soon will gather from afar for spoil when known becomes our hiding place. But serpent winding way will show each face to him who peereth from his window low or high. Condensed be our city. All who dwell therein be known. No spy who seeketh word of Kling--our monarch, Kling, the great, or I, who bartered fame adown the centuries long for greed of gold, now worthless, lives to cast an eye to gods.

[p. 121]

"He dieth at a stroke who seeketh our land nor liveth to plead to ear."

The temples founded none might hope for life who deviated from the teachings of the priests. The leeches' skill was tempered to conditions of the land, and teachers taught as seemed good to him who lauded Kling, yet ruled him heart and soul!

They passed--those plotters. In their place strange creatures sprung, the growth of mind impressed with greed and fear and solitude of steppes; yet round the base of that vast temple builded first they clung, athirst for learning.

Thus each mind was shaped according to a law formed from stern need and inclination of a brain that grasped all law and made it fit caprice.

A nation vast there sprung where but a group of wanderers first had cast their tents, yet still a people like and like as kin. For following certain details warps the will, and trendeth to one point a thousand wills bent to the stronger mood of him who seeks the law as whip to lash to purpose every soul within his reach.

Akin; yet not akin, they grew with certain bonds unbroken. Mark of Time rests on the central point where wisely built the One who keeps stern council.

Shape the mind to one example it may grow unchanged and pass its unchanged moods to them that follow. All seek a symbol of some higher mind and bow submissive to a stronger will, and shape their moods to fit the mood of one who wills submission. They grew apace, possessed wise minds and drank the crafty poise of him, their teacher, in the dawn of race; for crafty he and thus adown the line ran guile.

And later, when the land did teem with people who forgot the source of their great nation, seemingly,

[p. 122]

war was proclaimed aloud and tribe met tribe and slaughter fouled the land.

In history the race held the place of hybrid. Atlantian sires, but other races mixed their puny blood through mothers--slaves, the weaklings of the world in that new age. Still, training brought to bear on sons made men of strength surpassed by none in early age, and well were grown the hordes that peopled steppes.

The cities lesser growth in man form knew; for air and water, food which builds the brain and bulk, were there but poison for the child to thrive on. Mind indeed was fed, but body strength seemed lost to growth of mind. The law which worketh out its will that one may thrive but at the others' loss.

________

Atlantis, thou art lost, thy people of pure blood but represented in my land by those who pour o'er tomes and sigh for glories passed. In that land the hybrid creeps to leash and nothing knows, perchance, of that great island's loss where, in the dim past age, his sires far out in line had dwelt.

Ah, yellow slant of eye, the hordes we see, but glorious in their youth in that past day, when swarthy-browed the plunderers bold first set their feet on sands that teem with men who shrink from new conditions; bravery of soul of order that will suffer, yet not draw the sword on foe.

Atlantis knew but bravery in war. The sons of Yucatan have grown a peaceful tribe. Atlantis spake for peace in early age. With both, the mind was all supreme and speech and craft held sway above the sword. The drop which lingereth yet of kinship giveth proof--the gift of barter--of concealment--

[p. 123]

truth to vows if they perchance are made according to conditions naught shall break.

In tomes ye read of one who sought that land in that dim age so far agone it seems but as a vision firmly set in midst of actual life. This one made mention of a fruitful isle that sunk, and struck with terror--so tradition planteth in his breast--the ruler willed the stranger die by stealth lest he create a thirst for knowledge strong of other lands.

"We live and die," spake he--the ruler--"in bonds of country. Cursed be the bones that lie in alien soil. Unrest shall seize the soul which feels its husk a part of any land save of its birth. Ah, people of this earth! thy ways and moods shall change to fit the planes on which ye trend; yet ever are there gleams of that far spot amid the higher scenes ye yet shall know. A memory of the Earth home.

     
Selestor's Men of Atlantis, by Clara Iza von Ravn, [1937], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 124]

  

CHAPTER XVII

An Atlantian tradition.

The fight on Mars? An old Atlantian tale, learned from one who read the planets with a lens of lightest glass made double, treble, full one hundred thick by process learned in that great age, but never more employed because, alas! the method sunk, with him who learned when water wall engulfed.

One read, and, reading told so plain the tale to eager sage beside him, that the mood of all upon the island then was turned unto the story.

Story long forgot by men of earth, and we, who dwell where ether makes a plane of light, remember us that in our youth the tale was told by some old knight, or nurse, with bated breath and whispered accent. Secrecy was pledged lest angry gods cast foul disease upon the eye that pictured--lips which told.

One morn the master mind of him who dwelt in tower made high with marble columns formed for strength, and steps wound cunningly among the carven leaves and blossoms rivaling the snow on mountain spur of North, heard with the inner sense the note preluding conflict. Heard with the inner sense, which in that age was factor brought to bear on all the speech of Earth, and taught by science.

Long ago the tone was needed not by certain learned men, and in Atlantis dwelt the art perfected. In this day the men on mountain spur afar, ye view with scorn, hold simple speech in manner of the Atlantian sage--through current of the mind.

[p. 125]

The brain casts out an ether potent, all unseen yet swift and subtle as the lightning's stroke to them who understand; a potency of mind which dormant hath become in all mankind save favored few who, guided by the mind, seek not the outward mark to glean, but cultivate the inner force of man.

I spake, he heard with inner sense the note preluding conflict. Calm he spake to his attendant: "Swing in line the glass which stands beside the trident. Make it clear by passing silken substance o'er the face and wheel it to my couch.

"Throw wide the casement that my eyes may drink the sparkle on the sea--the forest top that comes unto my casement. Thus my mind grows calm and clear and I may mark events, so that no dream I name the wondrous sights that I shall hand adown the line of sons who follow after."

Light-footed slaves brought scented bath, and laved he well his body--body of a prince whose father sat upon the throne in that Atlantian isle.

He broke no meat, but drank he long and deep a draught of milk of goat mixed strong with spice which nourished mind and body; then cast his length upon a carven seat, with silken screen, beside the casement. Far below the sea danced in the light of sun just rising. Far below the gardens, rose-besprinkled, lay; the breath of million blossoms rose to meet his sense of ecstasy and calm commingled.

He drank the note of warbling buhl that called unto its mate, or osprey's shriek and thrush's note low-hidden in the rose's nest of bloom. Afar were ships of fishers toiling in from work of early morn, and galleys gay with colors wove in silk and fiber of the shrub [**] which stronger holds.

The people at their prayers looked like the flies

[p. 126]

which dart from bird or beak of hungry asp; and soldiers in the lines upon the quays were but as moving dolls--aye, so were they, the puppets of a king who ruled through judgment of the priests; for in that age of priest's supremacy fell this tale.

Aye, long before the sea-fight of the northmen bold or Asia's subtle souls, Zambesi--tool of these, and old Atlantians guarding well their homes. Nay, after years so long--the sea fight--that I do not count, yet speak, mayhap, the tale I tell fell many thousand years before Atlantis sank.

"Wheel to my side the instrument," spake he to his attendant sage, far younger. The man who learned to read each thought made no reply, but wheeled well in line with stars, to eye unaided all invisible, the trumpet-shapen instrument, whose base was metal of that ruddy hue [*+] and gold en-beaten in one gleaming mass, with stones that studded here and there the base.

Great dull, white pebbles to the eye of ignorance, but holding meaning to the man so learned, that everything had tongue and speech and mind.

Great pebbles hurled from planets down to Earth in storm-time of that age. The time of mud from those volcanoes which now lie to sight as spurs of green, so steep and smoothe to eye they seem a fairy garden shaped as cone with carpet made from finest mosses spun. Great cones of beauty yet they worked much harm at seasons.

Slowly bent the sage his eye to instrument and long he gazed. The moon he sullen saw, worn hollow here, at variance there with all the laws of symmetry. The lesser stars, mere floating balls of air, yet shot with rocks from higher zones. At last his

[p. 127]

eyes grew bright with leaping light, as Mars--the great sky war-god swung on high.

"Behold great Mars!" he cried aloud with joy. "I ne'er before have seen his fields of green, for higher hath he floated than mine eyes could reach with all the cunning of this instrument, made from a method learned at the cost of years of life--of study. Instrument supreme!

"But in this day, oh joy! he swingeth nigh in transit lower down by reason of the laxity of ether. The gods be praised! This moment cometh each one thousand years! and I, the blessed, have lived to see this day which none shall see again till I forgot shall be! And yet the knowledge and the history gained shall live long after I have passed from earth.

"Behold!" he cried, all sudden to attending sage, "The Mars men gather for a battle! Ah! magnificent the armor for each leader. Scales of metal earth-eye hath not seen but later shall invest. The scales of copper part, yet part of silver-smoothed the mottled surface by the smith who welds with beaten stroke, nor forges; metal scales made slow by patient toil, they seem; Ah, I shall learn the method.

"Behold the tridents, fiery balls are shot from such as those. I see the fine-wrought spring (by inner sense) the spring which leaps to throw its missile to the foe. The spears, three-pointed, savage instruments--that tear so well the breast. A javelin at the belt made of the woven links and discs and wire of copper hardened.

"Mars men, too, carry spikes of wood like steel; behold the polished point dipped in the blood of adversary--poisoned! doth the inner sense contend, and thus is life all quickly ended. And now behold the shield each bears! a shield en-shaped like leaf of grape; shields made of light yet toughened stuff

[p. 128]

[paragraph continues] --of hide, so toughened by a liquid bath (tradition hath), that even steel can scarcely penetrate.

"About their limbs are tangled cords of silk, each cunningly concealing fiery veins, I wist, encased in metal which to pierce means death when foemen clutch, but well the body bath of wearer doth protect so as a ray of noon-day sun it feels, nor harms.

"Their mode of warfare I as yet see not. Ah! I behold great ships sail outward--upward; one alone doth man each boat, and he unarmed save for his deadly dress which burneth foe, but leaveth him unscathed, for outward point the various tubes and lines concealing deadly methods. Around his body warm, bathed in fumes of smoke from some rare shrub which does protect from death, is wound a silken substance soaked in strong solution of a nitrate which protects, the sages wise have told.

"The ships sail outward from the land and bear a keen-eyed messenger to spy on foe. The foe? I see them not. O men of Mars, whence comes thy foe?--Hark! In their hands they bear them trumpets long, such as our sages spake, their eyes beheld on Mars.

"I hear their music. Nay, alas! I hear it not. Too great the distance for my strained ears to catch, yet I can see the gleam of light on burnished metal; see the fingers lithe press cunning keys--toy gently with the stops and pull from pierced sides the chain which carries note to other portion of the trumpet long--as long as man with outstretched arms could span.

"The color of their garments? Sanguine hue, a redder than the light which sun casts ere it sinks behind the hills of Ocean. Men of Mars, ye learn the meaning well of hues the gods make in the worlds to gladden orbs of men and make the heart to leap, the blood run quicker yet, and pulse beat fast which once felt sluggish thrill.

[p. 129]

"White tufts of silk upon each helm are set. Such helms! of scales the fish might deftly grow, embroidered with each name all set in gems of azure, yellow, too, I see the noble captains of the host affect--the color of the shifting light on corn, the yellow symbol, too, of holiness--the flower's heart--the center of an orb--the pigment pure that mellows flesh in tint.

"Embroidered robes I see not as our day has fashioned, but behold the carven lilies as have we. The golden lotus--white, too, they employ."

Footnotes

^125:* Cotton.

^126:+ Copper.

     
Selestor's Men of Atlantis, by Clara Iza von Ravn, [1937], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 130]

  

CHAPTER XVIII

Battle on Mars as described by the watching sage. The army of shadows.

"Aye, I will finish now the tale of Mars men on that day when sage--Atlantian--peered with eye--sense, heightened by tradition's flow of explanation. Explanation of the habits, garb and methods of those men who long before had taught their arts and sciences to others of their kind through that broad stream of interchanging thought which then was practiced.

"Later lost that art of interchange of speech through subtle note of Nature, understood and practiced by creatures who are less than we.

"Ye ask what foe he spied him through his glass? As he was pondering, on his sight there burst a wondrous vision. The tiny specks long floating to his eye, grew larger; birds at first they seemed, then clearly, flying ships of shape and size unlike the galleys sailing on the sea. Yet longer, lighter, woven from the fiber of some plant and held in shape by polished strands that metal seemed, yet Earth-man hath not seen its like.

"Aye, sails had they enwoven with a care for magnet draughts. Electric entered there, but seemingly abeyed by other force, a combination of etheric gas and magnet cubes which, like the ocean buoy employed for balance 'gainst a certain poise to carry or convey the sailing boat to motive point.

"Great sails set transversely on the sides made coveted balance sweeps. Of lengthened hemp made fan-like, outer sails and cords that caught the breeze

[p. 131]

and slackened (speed?) steered by one observant man who held both magnet and a lever in his hands. Condensed atmosphere rose in a globe placed near the center of the ship, adjusted by a spring of purest 'platinum' and glass to ward electric shock."

Thus, afterwards, learned he the ships were made.

At last he spied the foe-men in the ships as on they came. A race of men whose faces lacked not intellect, but low upon their brows the stubborn hair did grow as apes. Their nether limbs lacked garment or yet greaves, but there a coat of fur showed to the sight.

"What men are these?" quoth he. "The sages of old have told no tale of such as these! As men, yet ape, they seem! The men of Neptune!" cried he loud, at last. "I see the silver spears four-pronged! The circling light above each head that as a halo seems!

"I wist thine eyes ne'er saw such shape"--to him beside. "Deft fingered, yet the fingers longer grown than man's on earth. Not claw-point, but a clean white tip which feels as keenly as the brain contends."

The men of Mars stand watching with the helm on head and spear well pointed. Javelin throwers by the thousand stand with foot pressed hard upon the bars of shields that hold them from the foemen. Shields of toughened wood.

"But why not break in air the ships, these men of Mars, ere these, their foes, alight?"

All strong a stream of thought smote full his brain: "The law forbiddeth strife uneven. Man may hold his land, his home, by vantage of the spear and yet give to his foe a chance for life, nor send the shuddering soul unfairly from its shell." Thus came the power of thought unto him.

[p. 132]

"Mars' ships have warned of numbers. Stand her sons defensive. March the Neptune foemen at advance on leaving ships, well guarded at their anchorage.

"Mars spearsmen make attack! The javelin-throwers stand, and all are so directed by the leading chiefs that colors tell their movements. These he holds in hand--the standards made from carven stem and silken stuff that casts a shimmer 'round and to the eye speaks method of attack."

All was done in silence. Not a voice was heard, but trumpet blew loud blasts unheard by him who in the tower high did eager watch the fray. He saw the fiery, darting prongs of spears which tore the body in that fight. It was a fight of skill which men of Earth ne'er dreamed could be unfolded.

A fight where science stood by science's side with mind all paramount, and body playing part of motive force. For years of mental toil unfolded in that hour in stroke of missile-thrower from the suction-valve, and every spear was poised so that one thrust some vital part did pierce, and fell the man all painless dying.

Science taught the point of vantage to the eye; to northward meant that action on the eye most irritating. The stroke less sure. Who faced the south was sun-smote. This the word; the glare within the circle where the spears tipped white with metal, hardened, dazzled, blinded and no aim was sure.

Each army strove to face the vantage point of compass or yet the breeze that blowed with potency. To east or west was soldiers' vantage point to face upon that planet. Sun-rays smote less the eye, nor carried shadow of a burnished blade to orb with such intensity. Thus they contended and each soldier strove to face the point to east or west as case might be or foe distributed.

[p. 133]

At last the foemen fierce engaged were conscious of a cloud low over Mars. A denser cloud than e'er they sensed before. It shut the sun-light from the field of strife and caused a chill to creep upon each warrior there.

"Behold!" a general cried, "the hands of gods lie low above us smiting us in turn, perchance, as we smite one another!"

As he spake a rush of icy air encircled, a fall of seeming forms, and where the men of Mars stood red enrobed or Neptune's blue, or white like lily leaf, stood shadows--one for every warring man. And yet they seemed not shadows.

Hair was blown from cheeks all rounded, youth was there enthralled beneath the helm of waving plumes and eyes, dark, laughing, scorning, perchance, looked from beneath their silken lash. Their limbs turned perfect as a statue stands of carven marble, and the flesh tint showed them fairer than the pausing warriors there.

Their garment was the simple gown that shepherds wear and reached but to the knee, and sandals, made from hide, bound feet of slender mould.

No sound came from their lips, tradition speaks, but trumpets raised were shimmering bright as light on water. Arrows flew from bows of supple, carven wood and thongs of hide--a deer's, mayhap, or bears, I know not--and upon each shoulder bore each man his quivered arrows--pointed--sharp with stone that shone as diamond drops of dew.

They charged impartially upon Mars and Neptune--seemed to smite with shortened axes to the left and right and fought in line of single, compact hordes; each line a wall of bristling marble seemed, with not one break. A line so long it wound its way yet thrice about the foemen armies, and to distance seemed to creep so far the eye reached not. A line

[p. 134]

of seeming solid flesh, arms touching, knee to knee, with not one break to show that any man had fallen. Fell they not--that host of shadows.

The Mars-men, bold, recovered first and strove to pierce with spear. Next Neptune's fuller charge, impotent, broke not the ranks. A thrill of horror he could mark by look--the sage within the tower--ran through each warrior's frame as loud they seemed to cry: "Our spears pierce not! Our javelins, hurled at air, fall heavy! Bloodless! smiting naught! These men so bold, so fearless, from the clouds come they? Cloud spectres?"

Yet the horror of the fight was on them. Helpless fell the hand that held the spear, and to their air boats rushed old Neptune's sons while Mars' stood helpless, dumb! The men of air rose slowly, seemingly returning whence they came.

I know the science-body is the shell, and soul the all. The "form of thought" once seen seems but as man imbued with every attribute of flesh, yet frail to touch as shadow on the wall it be. Aye, such is thought. The men of Earth strove long to learn the secrets of old Mars and long had waited for the moment, thus, by science trained, the line of warriors slept as body sleeps but in the soul they wandered. Scarce three seconds had they stood upon the planet when the "fight" was done.

I tell the story in all truth as it was told to me: A general of that age when Thought did rule, so planned and taught that from a solitary point of Earth--this very land, [**] ye speak, those warriors, men, were sent long ages since.

And yet ye speak: "In old barbaric days!"

On other planets that which hath no form, but is a force on earth, takes shape and substance, too,

[p. 135]

in time. And to the eyes of Mars' men grows the shape or body. This is Law. A science of the matter formed in cloud on other planes or planets where the growth law differs from our own of earth. Where vapor forms in whorls and added growth makes spirals, branching, that which to our eyes is but the mist which sun drinks.

Footnotes

^134:* America.

     
Selestor's Men of Atlantis, by Clara Iza von Ravn, [1937], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 136]

  

CHAPTER XIX

The great sea-fight of Atlantis. Setting out of the Northmen for plunder.

Thy mood is ill, my scribe, for learning all of that great sea fight of the centuries gone--a thousand years before Atlantis sank.

Yea, thus I swear who read the time by Stars and Moon in transit. Mars in mood of harm and Mercury fiercer yet with venom plied. Great nations then as now did sprinkle Earth with tribes of warriors born with love of spoil.

A thousand years before Atlantis sank there rose a cry from Northern borders peopled with the "Slav"--the Norsemen of a line that later cast their lot in lower country, driven from their homes by one oppressor--later king of North.

In early life a henchman, later king. His blood the blood of peasant mingled strong with some bold, roving warriors from the South who ventured far into that frozen clime.

This king was Olaf. Aye, dim history speaks that selfsame name so "common" to thine ear. A clod sometimes, sometimes a keener soul doth answer to that name, but in that day when "Olaf-of-the-bear's-claw-set-on-helm" did strike a blow, his name took on the meaning of a single star, there was none other.

The meaning? I know not. But a sound, perchance, from childish lips took to it other sound and made the name.

King Olaf called his warriors--fur-clad men whose flaxen locks hung low, encrowned with cap of

[p. 137]

fur and steel combined, a cunning builded structure meant for war.

"Ho! to the southward! Black-eyed maids are there, with lips that madden mood, and laughing glance and arms soft twining. Aye, for I have seen in train of captives many such and I will bring anon such in my train.

"The southland holds much treasure. Gold in grains so large they are but painted pebbles, one might think; such precious stuff hath seldom lay within man's sight as we shall garner in that distant land. The mighty Lars, 'the-Eagle-of-the-Crags,' hath sailed him thither in his early youth and tells the tale. He speaks of island set in laughing sea where 'palms' wave.

"Know ye what that name may mean? A tree with plumes and fruitage sweet to lips and gladdening to eye, when day by day the barque has glided swift and brought the word of land to them who wait all eager at the prow. Aye, 'palms' they speak, and roses dot the sod so green it seems but one vast emerald set upon the sapphire sea.

"Great temples, too, have they and palaces and wondrous pictures, true to beauteous life and state, and music met the ear, as in the dark he stole up softly; muffled oars dipped slow and slaves mouth-bound so that no cry escaped.

"I know not all the wonders there may be upon that island. Ye shall see and name in our own tongue, for by our gods I swear that ere the snow falls on Britanji's spur we start us southward; winter is there Spring, and Spring a joyous time of warmth and gayest life in nature. Southward, Ho! we journey, set for war."

The planets breed dissension. War and strife float on the winds. The sun strikes sheen on spears

[p. 138]

in many lands at seasons, for it throws dissension in its beams which smite all shores.

Thus Asia--land of yellow peopling forms--had turned her mood unto that island fair, the home of her ancestry. Land where first her ruler dwelt in youth and manhood, fraught with greed of power which wrecked full many a home, and tore the child from parent arms and made his name a by-word--word for theft of trusted grains and theft of talents great bestowed not on the land to which he owed his fealty--Kling.

To southward set the sons of Asia, over barren sands, through tempests, crossing sea upon the borders of that land where the Zambesi ran. Upon its banks were cities grand with fairest temples set. Revolt was rampant. Slaves were worn with toil and spoil spake big to them, and hate and wrong called out in tongue of flame: "Revenge!"

Thus their ears were open to the wiles of those bold men of Asia, strong in mind and subtle as the serpent; brains were theirs condemned to carry guile, to plot, to hold in keen abhorrence any state of mind that dealt with pity where an enemy was held in bonds.

There, within the shade of templed marts they dwelt apace--those men of Asia. Spake softly they, the leaders: "Well we know thy state, the state of slave bereft of all that makes life joyous. Master wills hold closely every impulse; souls are warped to suit the mood of them whom Nature made of lesser worth invested though more favored state.

"We go to wrest from tyrants gold and gems and fairest women. Wizards on that isle who do create most beauteous things, and wealth so lavish that it piles the sands with gold. Come ye, too, with us. The fleet ye watch lies far out to sea. Unto her captains, brave, take ye this store, this parchment,

[p. 139]

too, which tells of all our needs--our brother love." Then bolder:

"What matter if the city loses fleet? It holds great power still and gems, and lofty piles, in which your children groan in bonds of toil! Be free, O men of Africa; To the sea! Thy galleys loose; they lie at anchor guarded but by thee, their captains willing to my service turn.

"Let loose the galleys manned by thee and thine, and these, my trusted warriors fill the bulk of ships which hold so proudly many hundred souls, aye, thousands! and my warriors, like the sands of desert, droop where deep in forest paths draw to the hills.

"Awake! cast off the bonds of slavery and come, O men of Africa's city great! Set thou to sea! I hold thee worthy of this prompting. Thou shalt know the joy of spoil! the bliss of power thou shalt know. Come, sail to sea!"

And thus from day to day the wily strangers plied with words, and wine, the officers of duty to the fleet that stretched out proudly-whitened wood and bark, great iron bands that made the cypress firm; and floating banners, dangling in the breeze, were later wafted broadly as they set them forth at midnight when the plot had worked its potency.

And he--the crafty leader of the Asiaites, hied him forth to whisper to the leaders of the bands that lurked amidst the forest leaves and trunks like domes and pillars of some mighty hall whose setting was the stars which peeped from folds of purple curtains.

Heavy scent of bloom checked breath and made the night a dangerous time, and beasts prowled hungrily and sniffed the scent of human bodies, filled with rushing blood that tasted in their senses warm and sweet.

"Come forth," the leaders whispered. "Dawn

[p. 140]

shall come and find but leafy isles where now ye lie in wait. Let beasts prowl growling for your absence; spears are needed for another duty. Come! The galleys lie at anchor down the stream and ye have but to step upon their decks and waft away to pleasure on the sea.

"No man hath wings, and these alone can bear the king and his retainers in pursuit. So, free are we to sail at leisure, swiftly, to the island fair where that awaits which makes the eye to leap, and cause to sigh in lover's deep delight the tender-hearted youth.

"The bravest first shall land to gather spoil. Haste ye! The night falls swiftly, dawn shall break if swift ye come not. To the galleys, men!"

The city, wrapped in slumber, heard no sound. No light shone forth to show the hurrying forms of slaves. No voice harsh rose to beckon thought to plunderer's crime. The city slept since revel worn, and stilled in slumber king and noble lay; and thus the foreign army sailed that night with scores of sailors at the helm or plying oars of galleys.

Even the kings begirt with golden staves, and sculptured plumes, and garlands swung on prow, went down the "river" never to return. So went Zambesi's fleet to war, with alien hordes to man, and win them glory or yet feel the shame of swift defeat.

The sun danced on the dimpling sea. A cool breeze rocked the galleys. Stern and grim rode Asia's chief at head--the Mongol lord so subtle and so brave. The Northmen rode with cries of joy to feel the soft breeze on their cheeks that, bitten sore by frost, had grown as toughened as the reed which waves o'er pool.

"I see a speck of life upon yon height of water," Olaf spake to one who stood beside, and in his hand

[p. 141]

he held an instrument, then rare, made from a lens of glass and horn of ibis, instrument to throw such action on the eye as might impress the mind.

"A moving speck? It is some bird that wings across the water," spake another knight who doubted always what his brother spake.

"It is a fleet of fishers. We shall take their spoil!" a general named for vulture piped, as near and nearer drew the mass outlined against the sky. But no! the vision burst upon them swift and true at last--a line of galleys numbering as their own three hundred, aye and more.

The sun shone on the galley's spears. A light that seemed from sea flashed on the staves each common held in hand and made the line of boats a line of fire seem.

"Our gods are false!" cried Olaf. "We are made the sport of tyranny, of rank deceit! Atlantis sailed northward and we meet her fair in battle! No surprise we give, no spoil held easily; but spear to spear and stave to stave and galley locked with barque, manned by as many and as brave as we, perchance; we may not gain the day!"

One versed in war--one from the southern isles--cried loudly: "Not Atlantis' fleet, for fleet hath she, but this is from the forests. I have seen such standards. Where the water laps the banks with marble set, such galleys lie.

"The standard of the leader bear you well in eye. It is the king of forests, inlet broad. Zambesi hath the serpent, eye of fire--the palms at prow. Behold the blood-red garments of the captains of her barques. Zambesi sets to war as we. A rival!

"Yea, but waste we not our spears nor war on such foe as she. We will combine our forces; the victory won--that makes the island ours--we battle

[p. 142]

with our allies, spoil their fleet thus double booty, double glory, waits."

And thus a truce was made. Full willingly did Asia's leader hold the offer good, and side by side they sailed--the crimson kite and polar bear, each holding in his heart the selfsame thought of brotherhood in strife against Atlantis; later, war on each and spoil fierce wrested from a rival's hand.

The men of Asia planned attack, as did the Northmen, on the northern coast where trees set closely hid the inlets deep and no great quays with ships to guard were there. For trusted they--Atlantians--to the rocky heights that girt the northern coast that few, thought they, might scale.

Yet strategy was Asia's strongest mood, and Northmen laughed at heights they could not scale, and rock-hedged inlets seemed but pleasant brooks, so sought they that stern shore.

Aye, from the south Zambesi's sons did sail to reach the northern point. Atlantis held a menace at her Southern ports--a menace to marauders all well knew.

     
Selestor's Men of Atlantis, by Clara Iza von Ravn, [1937], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 143]

  

CHAPTER XX

Warning of the sage and setting out of the Atlantian navy to meet the foe.

The blue waves dimpled in the morning light and all Atlantis met in fete, nor thought that nearer, nearer drawing yet were barques by hundreds--hurrying wolves of war that hovered nigh and waited for the night, to set their feet on forest bordered spot and march on home and wrest its treasures all, in human life and gems and gold.

To wrest the marvels that the years--the centuries--had wove, had beaten, wrought, in weeks, in years a single piece, enwrought with thoughts that spring from other climes and planets.

The fete--the birthday of the monarch's son, young Ambisamis, born to wear a crown in that same year when the great sea-fight fell; for died his sire ere the sun set upon that fete day.

Loud the music called to banquet hall or dance, or yet to prayer, for them whose days were few and who did turn their eyes to gods, as then, and only then the people learned to pray. Prayed they with mind so set on higher mood, that Earth was all forgot and roamed the soul afar as body knelt, and in the suppliant's eyes a light that borrowed not from Earth.

All sudden, faint and far away, the call of trumpet crossed the cadence sweet of voices raised in song, and instruments of strings that fingers smote all deftly--the harps of air or yet the water harp whose music rose and fell so soft and low, then loud and clear as bell from tower calling men to war.

[p. 144]

"A herald!" spake the king who sat at meat in splendor of his office--gold and gems and silken robe and crown that seemed as stars.

Adown the board his ministers, clad all in gaily painted robes of state. Some showing roses twined in garlands bright, some golden, painted, waving ears of corn, some vines with tendrils, Nature's beauties all. Each statesman holding in the hand which showed his monarch's ring--a gift all prized--a goblet fair of that rare fluid, yellow shot with rose, a wine distilled with care. Elixir made for kings alone.

The trumpet's call grew louder, near.

"A herald!" murmured each. "Who dareth on this day to send our king a message?"

Spake the king: "Our mood is sore displeasure! Let him wait."

And waited he. Out on the carven marble of the outer court reclined in angry mood a man of lordly mien who bode alone and drank such wisdom rare as few may hope to gain.

"I wait, indeed! when in my hand's palm hold I the life of all who bide upon this isle! This isle is doomed, speak they not fair as I had deemed my king might speak to me!" And swift as spear thrust came the thought to him--the king: "A favor granted is a blessing gained when stress of pleasure holds. Bring to us him who calleth for our ear," spake he.

A kingly form in robes of plainest jet. No gem upon his hand nor on his breast. Black browed, with curling lips. A warrior frame, yet born denying strife. Vigils long o'er tomes and studies of the farther globes and planets marked the far off mood of heavy lidded eyes.

"I come," he spake in answer to the call, "to show my monarch that his country's good is my delight.

[p. 145]

[paragraph continues] The voice of Nature speaks to me in silent tones. Eye glance hath told me not this hour, but later shall. The dip of galley oars fill now mine ears.

"The Northmen come for plunder; fiercer yet, the men of Asia hover where the line of sea and island verdure hides. Tonight they fain would creep upon our land and fell destroy. I speak, but thou art king, thy galleys swift and thou a man of action." Low he bent, then left the banquet hall.

A thrill ran through the frame of each who heard. The message called to mind a woeful state. The king rose slowly, braided glass in hand that trembled as he spake: "Men, rise and cast aside those robes of fete and to the boats bid every slave that pulls a galley's oar! Each captain of a host, of twenty men the leader!

"Bugles blow the call! the leeches to their towers--men who make the body whole when rent by spear--and those grim souls who bare the body Death hath smote and make it fit for funeral pyre, come all!

"We need a leader. I, thy king know battle not. What warrior leads today our fete that blooms to battle's fuller rose whose petals, dyed in blood, shall meet the sun?

"To northward lies the fleet. Aye, fleets, the sage hath said who never error made, nor had his fathers of the olden line who came from that dim land where forests wave above a slimy river.

"Men, to battle on the sea!"

None shrank from duty. All had strength of mind to so upbear him in his monarch's eye none faltered:

"We are thine, O king! For life and death! For battle, too, are we! Set sail, we, in this hour."

Loud rang the bells that called the men to quays. Wine drunken some were treated to the flow of

[p. 146]

fountain filled with nauseous drink and soon their muddled brains drank the command.

"To war!" The cry rang through the festooned streets, rose garlanded in honor of the prince.

Stern faces looked with love on weeping maids, and mothers sighed in meeting eyes of him who first lay on her breast--the son, perchance, to look no more with reverence on her aging form.

The galleys swung in line; a showing brave they made. Less than a thousand in that day and yet--the timbers new, the axes clasped with hide, spears burnished bright--the slave that rowed whose former langour nothing spake in sinews for the beating waves.

Those slaves were men in mien, for that past king bade all behold the soul within and live as free as One intended when He cast the mould of man about the ether form. Each slave of galley bore himself a stave, and in the thickest of the fight he bounded from the swivel bench and struck such blows as soldiers learn to strike and foemen fell, through him, on every hand.

"Far, far to sea!" the captains called to each full galley of their eager men. "We meet in war the wolves that come from North! The serpent of the forest lends his fleet to other nation! Thus hath said the Sage who never told what has not soon befallen."

And in their midst the galley of Ulsantis, a mighty admiral who first drew breath in galley; chosen son of old Hambrydisis--crafty lord of sea--who knew each isle and shore for leagues and leagues, and countries far, so far that none save he had set his foot, from that calm isle of men, upon their borders.

Chosen, too, his son that day to lead in battle; for the rightful lord of fleet lay writhing sore in

[p. 147]

pain that none could soon allay, although the king's own leech sat by his couch with cooling mixtures.

Incense burned on coals that glowed within a chalice woven from the gold which had wrapped the king's own infant cradle; coals from pungent wood that cast an odor on the atmosphere for many paces round.

"Aye, let him lead until my pain be passed--Ulsantis," spake the stricken one. "His brain doth leap to message from my mind; so I direct that he will not mistake. Bid him be calm, O Herald! Bid him speak to men as slowly as the sun steps to its rounds from out the ocean when the morn is clear and naught disturbeth Nature.

"Bid him to speak as bell rings out its summons, clear and firm and true each order ringing to the ears of men."

Ulsantis in the galley, painted, broad, with lilies jasper set, and studded thick with metal made from foreign ores, rode at the head of fleet. Twelve galleys deep at left, a hundred at the right, the foremost line of chosen men those at his side; and thus they kept the long day through in order of their setting out.

Not one oar's length from its fellow forward rode, but prow to prow they glided, leaped the waves. The sun set like a fiery wheel, of air and many leagues to North the invading fleet still lay.

The galleys of the island rested not, but row on row of men sank down to rest while others filled their places, slowly rowing as the night fell down and stars hung glittering. All keenly felt the stress of caution. Lips were shut to speech. The breath came slowly. Muscles strained and chests expanded as the morn drew nigh and galley leaped to stroke.

"Bring from the casket deep the instrument which telleth of the presence of much life upon the wave,"

[p. 148]

spake he, the great commander, as the light of dawn flashed o'er the sky.

They bared the casket from its silken folds, which checked the jar of rower's stroke, and bore it to the bower of the leader, perched high above the deck on which the soldiers lay, and yet were they above the rowers.

Carefully the hands let loose from casket that no jar might break the keen, absorbing sense of spring and bar that made the instrument a thing to fear. Springs of hair and metal wheels, and fastenings that were made from substance of the stars cast down on earth. The magnet of the moods of men mayhap it was, for the keen-eyed thing directed, so it seemed, that gods indeed had builded for the use of chosen ones.

And he alone of all that fleet might read--Ulsantis. Read he, too, with eager face the message from the springs when, set on pivot high, it took the meaning from the fresh sea air and turned in dizzy whirl, then stood at bay with finger pointing northward.

"There they lie--yet distant, for no shrinkage towards the core doth indicate their nearness. One hundred stadia they to northward lie. We meet them not this dawn. The sea laps yet another night our Galleys ere we conquer them," the warrior cried. He spake to him attending: "Set the instrument no longer. Bear away as carefully as thou wouldst bear thine eldest son were he by illness smitten.

"Careful lock in iron casket, cushioned rare with silk enwound, nor let the jar of oars disturb the rest which meaneth unto us a kingdom's liberty."

The smiles of Nature, hidden, burst at last as one faint flush chased others o'er the sea.

Slow crept the fleet. No trumpet sounded morn, nor bells clanged: "to thy prayers, the gods awake!"

[p. 149]

No voice in song cleft shrill the freshening air, but whispers told the needs to all who sat at bow, at stern or in the galley sheet, that metal harbor for the one who spake the evening's approach.

The cup of warmth passed swift from lip to lip by youths who served. The broken meat still held, but sparingly they ate. "We feast anon when stress of war is passed," they murmured, "if the gods so will; if not, we feast on blossoms fraught with spice where nectar holdeth for the one who asks--but asketh, all is his who asks, indeed!"

Up higher rose the sun. The morning born was well towards its zenith when spake one who held his instrument to eye in galley of the leader: "Methinks the sky-line dark about the northern boundary of our isle."

"What? Hold the galleys! They are come indeed! Let low the anchors! Bide here till the night shall fall! The long night through the great Moon circles, gives us light to send the souls from bodies sheltering.

"Halt the barques within the shelter of yon wooded cape and close to shore, that not one prying eye may dream the soldier faithful guards his isle."

All swiftly sped the men, so sure of word none asked for repetition. Anchors cast, deep sheltering point with giant palms protected even from the Northmen's eyes.

     
Selestor's Men of Atlantis, by Clara Iza von Ravn, [1937], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 150]

  

CHAPTER XXI

Arrival of the Northmen and their allies. Morning and the sea-fight.

Swift came the foemen's galleys ere the night fell down upon the sea.

They danced upon the waves and boded ill if supple, smiting hand of that invading army held to grim and wanton slaughter. Wolves, in truth, were they!

"They pray to gods with black, black hair and eyes!" sang Olaf merrily.

"To gods who so forget that sleep falls heavily upon the galley's lord who bides on shore while galleys swing to anchor.

"Sleep falls upon the watchmen at their gates, on youth trained well for battle.

"Age, too, sleeps, for so my gods do whisper in mine ear.

"My men, row gleefully, for night doth fall all soon and we must reach that border faint--outlined--the outline of an isle so ladened with its riches wonder we that it sinks not.

"O beauteous isle of sea and sun, I come with arms outstretched to seek a welcome!"

Loud he laughed and long, and others took the laughter from his mood, and voices mingling echoed on the waves.

Behind the wooded cape the stern Atlantians sat in galleys stilled but for the rippling sea. Each thought of home, of loved, of altars where the ashes of their dead were blessed and urned for centuries.

[p. 151]

The leaders, every man a king in mien and thought, for unto him looked every soul for succor on his isle. He failed them not.

"The tide doth higher rise and closer we to shore must creep, nor show one spear to foeman yet." This was the order silently obeyed.

"Tonight our feet shall tread the flowery isle," sang Olaf's men, as near and nearer drew the galleys to the shore.

A league beyond the border!

Sunk the sun and bright as burnished silver swung the Tropic Moon, her million lamps all lighted. Day indeed it seemed again had dawned.

The wily men of Asia spake at length: "Ye men of Northland love the cold, white moon, but we who dwell where reach its smiting beams know well its virulence, its baleful power.

"The forest aisles are lit as well for beasts that prowl as man, and if, perchance, Atlantis' king and guards sleep not, what better target for their spears than we who land with moonlight showing well each helm?

"Seek we not at night our booty. By the light of day let warriors wander through those aisles of green where serpents lurk and beasts, for ivory slain, go crashing.

"Seek the isle at morn and set us men as vanguards, to the rear--keen-eyed, alert, who know the island's speech and they are faithful to their leaders."

Bold Olaf pondered and at last he spake: "Let bide the galleys near the shore; when day shall dawn we wander through those aisles of green indeed! for night shall see us reeking, heavy--piled with spoil."

Impatient bode they on the drifting barques throughout the night, and when the morning broke

[p. 152]

again the isle which seemed as shadow rose full clear.

"Oh, beauteous isle we come!" sang Olaf loud, and flax-haired warriors joined again in song despite protesting of the Mongol hordes who took their joy in silence. No halting of the men whose homes were menaced, then, but from the sheltering curve, past wooded point, which well had hid their fleet, the galleys shot with speed.

By tens and tens they hurled them to the wondering eyes until the sea seemed filled with flying boats that caught the sun on spear-point, helm; and prow gave back the color of the rising sun. A glorious sight that in the heart must live long after all had passed, and Time grown old to tale, and men had died and others born again who sailed the selfsame waters.

The Northmen gazed and lips fell parting. "Whence comes the fleet?" they asked in awe-struck tones, and every face showed wonder--wonder turned to hate.

"Betrayed! Betrayed! what galley left our fleet? What traitor babbled to approaching hordes? Cut out his tongue when these Atlantian dogs, first beaten back to land, shall so divulge his name we know the traitor; Asiaite is he! Forth to battle, Men!"

Thus Olaf; and each Northman at the sound leaped to his spear, or axe or yet a stave that smote and cleft.

"To battle," was the cry.

"The snow land wolves are false!" the Asiaites softly spake. "We know their value! Know their blackened hearts, and after death is dealt to them of that proud, flying fleet we tear the wolves in twain, and hearts that beat in breasts of traitors

[p. 153]

now, shall quiver on our lances! Aye, they all shall perish! lying dogs of snow!"

Ah, bright the sun bore on the armored hordes!

A trumpet from Atlantis' fleet called low. Called louder, and fierce thousands caught the note and swelled the sound in volume floating o'er the sea. Low calls, low answers. Louder yet the strain had swelled again. The answer seemed a challenge to the foe. It rose triumphant; every listening heart was thrilled with that wild prelude to the fight.

It brought to eye the vision of the strife. There clung the clutching warriors, heard the calls of captains calm, the hurry of the conflict when the foe fell thickest; then there came the tranquil strain that marked the end when victory was won.

The foemen heard and wondered at the cloud of sound. The troubled, shivering waves seemed waters dark indeed.

The trumpet's call a voice from Hecla's base: "Come hither! Hither! Hither!" floating died, in moans.

The brow of Olaf dampened, turned to ice. His heart sunk, laughed he loud withal: "What play of children! Warriors! look to swords. We still yon harper's notes! death-gurgle sounds shall be all sweet beside that strangling wail of trumpet in barbarian's sinewy, grimy hand."

His locks were yellow as the light on corn, his form as pine the straightest, his mien a king's indeed, but--Olaf--!

Asia in her borrowed boats felt thrill; a sound, in mind, familiar spake to them of lands where once their blood had run in veins now ashes--dust; perchance the things that grew upon the plains afar where now their homes awaited after--victory? each asked the question doubting in his heart.

"We fight with gods," they muttered, man to

[p. 154]

man. "What hope have we with such, who hold in sway the voice of birds, of nightingales, the moan of ravens, reed-gull calling to her young?"

Their leaders felt the mood and swiftly spake: "To war! To spoil! To black-eyed maids whose lips shall speak of love as slow the summer days wear on!

"To spoil! To sands where grains of gold doth lie! Great garlands of bright gems! Where piles of silk hold scent that makes the rose seem rank as any weed! To spoil!"

The sullen men of Zambesi but fixed their eyes on the well favored men who from Atlantis oft had sailed unto their shores in boats unlike their own yet equal in their worth, and strength and swiftness.

Sullen spake these men: "We war not on Atlantis."

"To the gyves! To chains, they go!" called he, the leader, head of that bold band of Mongols.

But one captain eager spake, who peril saw--one captain of Zambesi:

"Men, we may not fight this day within the narrow confines of our galleys, on our brothers warring--brothers in our need. They gave us freedom, chance for equal spoil. Atlantis is our foe, since we are part of this great army which hath set to war."

Thus in the galleys of the plunderers peace prevailed.

Swift rowed the invaders; Olaf of the north at head of fleet to right; to left, the yellow men, and black and strong as tiger old and hardened in his fights rode men of Zambesi beside.

Atlantis with her eagles, yellow bloom of lilies at her prow, came swiftly; heeded not the stroke of missiles at her left and right.

Ten slaves to the front of bold Ulsantis stood with shields of metal rare that blunted spear and

[p. 155]

warded stroke from that proud head whose brain directed all.

"Ho, men of snow," they shouted, "come ye nigh! We feed the fish upon thy northern bulk today, a dainty rare for sharks.

"Ho, robbers! Wanderers! Ye of Asia! Plotting in your line for centuries, keep thy lances for thy victims less, alas, than we!"

Then from the throats of all there burst the long, sad wail presaging war or death. A wail that shook the fleet with trembling mood. A wail that o'er the desert have I heard when mighty men were met in savage war. A cry, which, handed down the line gave foe in Egypt, centuries after, fear.

It was the cry of Ram and Phenox, Ses and other gods "who victory gave."

The Northmen's cry rang out, at first but trembling; for the foemen's cry spake tombs and places where the souls of Northmen trend, not to their minds.

Low fell the cry of Asia. Plains and sands, to them familiar, seemed afar, and thoughts turned from the water to the waste and made the voice to falter, yet the blood of stern resolve took fire at last and ran in fire and made the hand to spring to weapon, fierce the cry rose then.

Thus galley met with galley. Spears which gleamed drank of a redder fluid than the light that showered over, heeding not the fray that reddened sea, made waves to dance as body leaped on body, thrown to sea by mad encounter that would rock the land and cause the sea to bubble, foam and roar, and waves dashed high as sped the galleys on.

Fierce cries marked battle of the common horde, but silent on his swivel bench the slave, bold eyed with lips a-twitch with wrath, had held his oar till at

[p. 156]

some well aimed stroke he fell all palsied and his duty done.

Atlantis, silent from the first long cry, dealt blow on blow. The master mind, that drank from him who lay in pain upon his couch, directing all with even words and calm, through instrument which made his voice to sound familiar in the ear of every man who fought in galley of his land.

Ten galleys did engage ten of the foes. Reserves flew swift to aid when one succumbed to stroke, and thus a wall of warriors met each charging boat. Condensed the numbers, so that none might say: "The gap is made! The break we pass with speed!"

The empty galleys swiftly bore to rear. The wounded followed in the cushioned barques, and fierce as tiger dam twelve long-speared warriors guarded well each boat, so that no foeman dared to brand the dead, or captive make of wounded.

Thus taught the men of Mars, and thus Atlantian sages learned. The galleys of the Northmen sought to lock with the Atlantian, but their three-edged spears beat hard on wood and clave it, broke to left and right, the Atlantians, nor halted.

"Fare away!" cried they.

The galley slaves who rowed with wondrous skill, made boats as rams that fight and drave the foemen far, some overturned, some cleft by axe so sharp that steel itself was bitten; rent in twain the stoutest timbers by the Atlantian's spik'ed sides and valves of fire at prow, that men ne'er dreamed were heated by a force drawn from the air, but showed not fire, was keen surprise indeed which boded death to every man who made a point of entry where the balls hung low from iron caskets, but ornament in truth they seemed.

With numbers sought the Mongol to maintain his vantage.

[p. 157]

Flesh is frail when formed in wall, and every fierce advance was checked by missile-throwers of Atlantis who fought, nor made attack, for thus Atlantians were forbade, but held protection of the life and home a duty all must learn.

As creature playing with the thing which lieth dead by one soft stroke, the island soldiers fought till came an hour when Law was all forgot and man leaped forth a demon of the sea.

One boat held priests who prayed with men who died--young priests who side by side had strove with these, their brothers of the spear, when from an island of the southern sea came men for plunder.

The Northmen spake: "They shrive their dead!" they smiled. "What need have warriors for the parting boon when war absolves from sin they who have died? Sail out with me. The man who battles not in galley now must die! The fish of foul portent shall batten upon priestly fare today!" And so three galleys sailed to beat to nothingness the galley of the priests.

Swift sailed they and swift halted; their intent so sudden that the men of peace turned pale though fearing not for self but for the wounded men who called on gods with pain-drawn, quivering lips.

A crash! A crash! the ladened galley sank at blows of Northmen. Far to sea it lay.

Like lions roused to anger rose the men of that great island fleet. "Behold! the blood ye shed shall be as naught to that which we this day shall spill, to redden sea for league on league of Northmen's, Asia's blood! Look well!"

'Tis done! The serpent-shapen caskets took for aiming the clayed, death-dealing matter, great spears were set and staves made ready in the hands of slaves and silent-lipped as wings of Death fold down swept every galley--each for every foe.

[p. 158]

Fell slaughter reigned. The great and three-edged spears held by Atlantians fell as swift as shafts of lightning on the helm of steel or toughened fiber; deep on skull they drave. A pulpy mass it seemed beneath the metal made by science learned from nations far, and planet-men and they with brain so tuned to subtle notes of usage that it seemed as gods had talked to men with lips to ear.

Proud Olaf fell beneath a mass of dead, and sullen rowed his slaves far out to sea and followed many.

"We take no captives here! We ask no wolf to share our beauteous isle! The sea may swallow and the fish may eat!" was each Atlantian's thought.

The men of Asia fiercer battled yet Zambesi's warrior's silent fought with spear that drank not deep of the Atlantian blood.

The shock on shock of galleys sent by oars that snapped not, neither failed in object sought, made noise as muttered thunder; the fiery missiles swiftly flung from hand so skilled that never man escaped; the shouting, shrieking of the rabble of Zambesi's horde, when closely pressed, fell like frail reeds before the silent thrust and deft--shot showers of fiery balls.

One galley sunk another followed close, sucked down, or shattered by the bolts of stone fierce-heated, which Atlantis' steel-clad galleys bore.

The Northmen's last fierce effort to surpass that silent army was a gallant thing to witness:

King Olaf's son, a youth of tender years, stood at the helm of galley turning from retreat; with armed hand and breast secured from spear by rows of steel-shod shields by mighty men upborn, and in his wake one hundred galleys bore with remnant of the Northmen, caught the Admiral's eye.

Like thorn-set stems the Northmen's bristling

[p. 159]

spears protruded, ten on ten, and staves glanced high, and missile-throwers' shot, from tridents.

"Lost the Atlantians now, nor dare their men throw missiles save in extremest moments," spake the youth, for thus was told the island's custom.

Those northern galleys flew across the waves and smote with prow such galley as the captains marked to smite, with force like that flung out by giant's hand.

Men staggered, fell, nor fell in death, perchance, but rose sore bruised in body yet with soul so willed to battle that each hand clutched harder yet the spear.

All loved the foeman youth for that brave front, and not one spear was pointed, stave was thrown at that proud flaxen head, whose locks strayed bright beneath the heavy casque.

And stood he proudly still, young Olaf, when had fallen twelve hundred warriors; fell in sea or writhing sore in galleys, bearing dead and wounded, which was sunk by Atlantis' spear-like spikes resembling those about a palace tower set.

There clouds of fire. There silent, sullen, mien; there galleys smiting charges hold the foe at bay and show their hopeless mission and the day was done!

There dead-filled galleys pile on earlier pile; the fish float heavy from their feed of dead, and to the northward hastening are seen such numbers as have chosen flight to glorious death.

"We homeward turn, O men, O gods of this great isle of sea!" so wailed the foe in song.

"The day is done! the chance for victory o'er! we to the desert go!" With glittering eyes the Mongol softly spake.

Zambesi's somber men spake scarce a word, but, hopeless, glared:

"A king of this Atlantis is our friend; behold!

[p. 160]

henceforth his subjects, we. What ho! We swear our fealty," loud the leaders spake.

And galley met with galley, back to Atlantis bore the slaves of him, Zambesi's king, who later pardoned all, the fragment of a band. And over all, the shattered, saddened souls who bode in battered galley--bode in shell of body still, there fell a calm when voice of trumpet spake.

The night lust falling. Soft and low the call as mother's to her babe, then loud and clear, then angry murmur swelling, later fell in fierce glad cry of victory as sunk the sun to rest, the sun which vied in blood-red glow with foam upon the waves of stranger hue, all spotted with the life-blood from the veins of men so brave their names were spake with reverence by younger lips that followed o'er the sea.

Atlantis laid her dead in funeral barge and slowly homeward set. The trumpets plaint the long night through foretold disaster to the waiting ones, and to their ears it numbered all their dead, but spake no fell defeat.

"The dead are warriors, such their fate," they spake, but far beyond the shining Moon their souls are wending.

"We mourn not for them; they are quaffing glory from the Fount.

"Their life-pulse beateth on the ether planes.

"We still of earth may envy but not grieve, and yet our galleys number less by half than when we fared us forth.

"But, joy! Our foe hath ridden out to sea in battered hulk--a remnant of that army mocking us this morn."

     
Selestor's Men of Atlantis, by Clara Iza von Ravn, [1937], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 161]

  

CHAPTER XXII

Death of the king of Atlantis on the day of the great sea-fight.

Thou asketh of the fate of him, the king who reigned when the great nations met in war upon the day that followed fete?

Aye, thus I speak as through thy hand I mark events to make the world of knowledge learn that I am man, though yet unseen by thee or others' eyes--am called but "Selestor."

False the name, and history writes in tomes my name once known to nations; yet I hold it well to guard the secret--secret of a line which, sunk in deep oblivion all that bore the emblem of a state but mocked today.

The death of him who reigned when Northmen bold did seek to barter strength for beauty's prize, for gems, the isle itself, exchange perchance for northern border cold and grey, the haunt of bear and snarling wolf, and frost, black, deadly to the tender Southern ones. Such was our theme.

He whom Atlantis called her king was wise, not wily, and excess he did abhor; and yet that day his galleys sailed to war he drank him deep of "liquor," as ye speak in modern times.

An alcoholic liquor made from wheat and juice of palm. A mixture fiery and reserved for revelers; but the king befitting thought the draught in time of stress, so drank he long and deep.

His brain grew dizzy nor sight nor sound he knew, and falling prone, ere slaves could spring to save, the kingly brow smote marble and his senses

[p. 162]

fled and yet he lingered. Slaves stood near to spring at leeches' bidding for the quickening draught or cooling mixture, for the bowl of gold that caught the flow from pierced arm.

And yet no sense returned till evening. No glance of recognition met the gaze of her, his queen, nor of them--the buds of kingly tree to bloom when he had passed, the daughters fair, and son, the prince--the king!

And as he lingered came an ancient one unto his door--door bereft of hanging, that the wind of eve might freshly blow across the clammy brow, perchance bring healing in its salted breath all scented with the kisses of the rose, the lily white which marked the king's domain, the jasmine growing where the palm tree's shade cast cooling shadows.

All was peace and calm, save in the hearts of subjects, torn that day with various woes--the youth of nation on the sea to war--the king in stupor--waiting they.

Crept an ancient one into the hall where on the ivory couch the king lay prone.

Spake she, unchecked, for grief had so sore beset the leech that vaunted skill fulfilled no purpose.

Statesmen stood dumb, the queen had fled and by the hand led children weeping sore--the offspring of a line of kings for generations, but their hearts, as tender as the slaves bore sorrow ill.

With lips that set all firmly, brow that frowned, spake she, the ancient: "King, but not a god, ye now are called! and going take not state nor thing of earth, not life nor love nor gold to mark thee aught save but a wandering soul!

"And yet, mayhap, the state which Earth doth keep the gods permit in realms more fair than

[p. 163]

thine, which yet is fairer than this earth holds other-where."

"Why speakest thou? Begone! hushed the voice of one big with authority. And slaves were bidden take the intruder from the palace.

"But the ancient rose to height unthought of: "Touch me not! He dieth! He--the son who drew his life from this shrunk form! This do I swear who face the stroke of Ses and shall I, whose moments thus are numbered, dare speak me false?

"Ah, nay! His sire a king, but I, whose glorious crown of womanhood was beauty and my curse, bore him who lieth on the ivory couch!

"The rightful heir, ye men of earth may speak, died at his birth; yet ye knew naught of this, so well my secret kept the favored slaves.

"He liveth yet again on ether planes--my son! Not her's--the hated rival's--the queen ye knew who early passed. My son! The pomp and state, with knowledge, too, were mine as thine and in them gloated I. No less a king because, forsooth, the maid they chose for him--thy sire--was not thy dam.

"I was and am no slave. A 'trader' was my sire. One of that land ye speak of as a cloud, or mist, so far away it seems to you who journey not. And scorn ye, too, its people who, born to war, in time of stress take to them deadly moods and harbor hate, and so demand what thou dost deem a sin--the eye for eye and tooth for tooth--adown their line for centuries.

"He dieth!

"As the sun sinks!

"Low lies he!

"My son!

"The well beloved!

[p. 164]

"The son of him beloved in my youth and loving me till beauty fled. Farewell!"

Her chant was finished, sank she on the threshold. Passed her soul.

The secret, kept so well by them who, awe-struck heard, no seeming break in line occurred; and thus the prince born of the sinning line reigned long reigned well.

The sun had set ere called the gods the soul of him, the king, to realms of peace.

And double sorrow had the people all, and double mourning, for them, the battle slain, and for their reigning king. A monarch wise in much that wisdom gives to thought--a purpose for the betterment of people subject unto him. And kindly spake the nation as one voice:

"The son, now king, perchance will strive to reign with just humility, yet fail to reach the standard of his sire."

And thus it fell.

All day, I spake, the king did linger, but at eve the mists of deep oblivion left the sunken eye, and reaching out his arms as though to clasp he cried:

"'Tis won! I see them meet the foe!

"Tonight Earth's sun doth set for me indeed, but subjects spring around me on the ether planes where soul doth trend.

"My subjects sent in haste through stress of battle, yet I seek not alone the planes, but with fitting band, a king and subjects!"

Thus he spake and died.

The third in line was he. His sires brave and wise. His son no traitor to ancestral grasp of power.

    
Selestor's Men of Atlantis, by Clara Iza von Ravn, [1937], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 165]

  

CHAPTER XXIII

The destruction of Atlantis. Activities of the inhabitants on the morning the island sank into the ocean.

I thus explain the destruction of Atlantis--land of the beautiful, land of gold, of knowledge, of science, art, music; all that man beneath God perfecteth added to God's own work.

Aye, beauty of form as well, for died at birth the child who bore not the imprint of the higher model in perfect form, lacking naught that would please the eye of man, or god, they taught, for the people of that lost land worshipped as did we of Egypt.

But to the theme again I turn.

No curse weighted the atmosphere nor brought harmful conditions upon the land as hath been asserted. The unfixed condition of worlds at that early age caused the vast upheaval which destroyed the fairest spot the sun has shone upon in its rounds of aeons.

Law did not then as now exist, perfected through the patient ellipse of centuries, aye, aeons, that brought to one great focus the lines which denote a perfect balance of globes, descending at a certain ratio as they meet at one fixed point, to continue their round to other point, assigned through law which hath adjusted the motion of the moving bodies designated as Moon, Stars, Earth.

The law was not perfected which adjusts gravity and points to danger signals, known in nature by those so-called senseless objects and by them avoided.

[p. 166]

Not by the higher Intelligence are they guided, but by the intelligence of Law which all, so named, inanimate things possess.

We who create not globes cannot explain the inner working of this law, which regulates the revolvement and growth of bodies whose vastness strikes with awe the minds of men.

But we gather from effect what may be termed the "silent" mechanism of those wonders of the Divine and gathering a particle from one direct our attention to still others and, through patient study, the whole plan is borne upon the mind--that reflex of the higher Mind which needeth no toil to perfect that which hath grown from His own growth and is part of His Magnitude.

Thou shalt yet see with mortal eyes a spot of that vast Atlantis whose fairness lies beneath the waters.

So plainly marked shall be the spot on which once stood a temple dedicated to Ra, yet not so called by those wise scholars of the sunk land, that thou shalt not mistake the fragment which through the swing of the centuries and the sweep of the cycles hath defied Time and the roll of Eternity.

I bear in mind the day when first I peered with soul-eyes into the mysteries of that land from which came mine own fathers and their fathers for generations. The records tell not the date of their abandonment of that early home which has known devastation.

I first beheld the figure of a maiden clad in sacrificial robes kneeling at an altar, her face distorted by the death agony, the hands uplifted to the impotent god who scowled upon her body, reft of soul; and then mine eyes turned to the higher plane. The soul was there, all heedless of the form that knelt beneath the waves.

[p. 167]

And thus I saw them--maid and wife and child--the form--but useless cask which spilled the golden wine that means the breath of God.

THE DESTRUCTION OF ATLANTIS

The force of will is strong within, but elements do war, and speech from me to thee is difficult; yet thus I tell, as plainly as the powers permit, the history taught me by the lips of him, the ancestor of ten thousand years agone who marked the day of doom to that, his land.

Thou yet shalt see with eyes of flesh, and mind shall drink the wonders on the stone--the carven symbol of a mighty race.

Yea, day had dawned. Not by the Moon's pale ray or starlight's flutter went the land to rest beneath the water, but like wheel of blood the solar orb rose fully.

Just a span it seemed above the water when he who looked from highest point to mark the planet's course as he had been appointed, saw the light and muttered in his beard--a century grown: "God's doom is on us! But one God is there, though others swear that Ab-Dallah, Soam, Phenox, Ram and Ses have equal power with Him, but I say nay, for I have sought in Nature all the tongue that teacheth wisdom. But one God is there!

"And I forebode the doom that doth befall, for hither cometh on the 'wings of Ram' the water's mighty sledge of Death," and folding calmly to his breast the cross--prophetic symbol of his age and mind--he knelt and sought to pray.

Low down where city's walls were wave-kissed--for the ships to sail from, drift to, for the pleasure boat's advantage--rose the sound of noisy traffic.

Slave marts showed their wares--the young, the

[p. 168]

beautiful, the strong in war a prize, and greed and lust stood by agape and gold beladened.

And there the withered miser's trembling hand held close the casket where the gems were hid which he had destined for his monarch's eye, if so the monarch's Minister of State, but spake the word to weigh the grains of gold and barter for the jewels, water clear or green as spray in Springtime.

Great pearls had he hid in the casket lined with fleece, the finest from the shrub and tinted fair with henna. Pearls whose weight alone bore well the scales which held the hollow globe of jet, or snow or primrose dawn, whose worth meant ships, or palaces or the slave who would outweigh their weight a thousandfold.

Wares of gold and silver, stuffs from Tyre and Gom were spread on what the merchant knew would best display the gleam of golden thread and floss made by that insect horror in its shape doth show to timid ones.

Fair fruits lay basking in the fiery light the golden globe more golden for its ray; pomegranates took to them still a deeper blood, and blossoms turned from snow to rose, and showed red masses where the lilies blossomed pale.

Corn merchants spread their wares in porcelain tubs, or baskets woven of the golden reed or linen basquets.

Heaps of well-riped grain, crushed pulse or lentils, other grains had they, but those I know not as they stand enstamped in this, thy tongue, which is not all, mine own.

The unclad vendors of the ocean's gifts went crying through the arches of the place where flesh was bartered for the well-loved grains that lie with check of earth.

Their trays of brass, or yet of costlier stuff,

[p. 169]

heaped high with shells of broad and comely shape, or wriggling fins and scales agleam with hues that borrowed yet another color from the sun still rising--rising soon to look upon a scene of wild confusion, storm and death!

Strong men walked upright bearing "bricks" or stone to build, or yet rebuild, the costly piles that marked the beauty of the cities strewn like gems throughout the land whose day was set, though not complete its doom

The children--heart-beats of a nation--danced to task, or lesson or their play beneath the spreading palms or rose tree's fragrant shade, or vines hung purple with the globes of life-blood for the weak. The mothers to their tasks of rearing broods, or carefully preparing stuff to cover forms of symmetry. The priest lay in his temple, dead with wine, or knelt, as is the way of priest, before a gem-lit shrine to catch the eye of the kneeling, shrinking throng who caught a hint of doom.

Within the palaces the slaves bowed low as those advanced who held the power to quell, and costly "silk" and fleecy "lace" swept soft over paves of marble, and the fountains played soft measures; from the drops of water came a tinkling song as every drop did hold a certain tone, and all commingling made a rhythm sweet to ear.

For one had builded by the power of mind, an instrument which kings alone might buy, so costly was it; wove of gems and cords of that rare metal which I cannot name, for ye would never know its import or significance.

Yet, all entwined, made instrument which rivalled in its tone the song of birds, of thrushes in the woods, of lark at morn or bulbul when her mate doth hover nigh.

Thus all seemed peace and joy, with beauties'

[p. 170]

glow to give it emphasis, and made the morn to seem the opening to events of life. In the vast chambers where the men of mind had gathered, big with knowledge gleaned and rich in scrolls upborn by pampered slaves, the dignity of State was duly emphasized by the appearance of the ruling lord.

And as the music died that every morn bespake that duty followed melody of sound, a herald, old and trusted, trembling came: "My lords," he whispered, but the stillness reigned supreme and every ear had caught.

"My master of the Tower--one hundred years--a sign hath read in that vast wheel of blood, and bids ye seek the shrine of such a god as each doth trust, but thus he bade me speak:

"There is but One, and He today is wroth and crushes with His breath.

"It comes upon the water. Look ye well! A trembling of the waves, that dance and gleam, show but the quiver of the serpent form before it striketh. Look ye well, O lords!

"The stars last night shone with a baleful light, like eyes of lions caged and thirsting strong for blood; and in the mountains, pointing spear-wise, high, a muttered voice was speaking to the soul of him, so formed of fiber and of flesh are we that one doth tremble when the elements are wroth in unison with God.

"Look well, O lords, and cease to talk of good to land or to estate, for all shall pass as the mist of morn rolls upward, drunk by Sun--the essence of that Life which holdeth all."

He ceased, and sank the hearts of them who never quailed in battle, or when death in milder form had faced them, but his voice was pregnant with the doom which he foretold, and each stood with heart throbbing dully, as the sea swells after storm when

[p. 171]

quiet seems to reign, but Death hath faced the world and still it thrills with that dread presence which ye name as finish to all deeds.

"Our dear ones!" Ah, that taint of self which all the world doth poison! Not his neighbor's grief, but grief of self he dare not face.

"My loved ones! At their peaceful sports they stray or duties for my pleasure and I stand! An atom on the wind is not more weak to aid!"

But one who doubted ever, cried aloud: "Smite him! He lieth! Old and hoar hath he grown lying! Smite the hind who crieth Death on this fair morn when all speaks life. We die not on this day! I swear it by the soul of Him who liveth--Him who holdeth--Him who Both appoint be what His name!"

But as he spake a wail of sorrow rose. A wail so loud it pierced the marble walls and caused them, strong as were the halls of Fate, to quiver at the mad, vibrating sound.

And as it ceased in measure all arose, with faces rivaling the marble walls and sought the court which led into the street, and where in wild confusion swept the throngs on through the darkling streets, for the sun, which shone as blood, had hid its face in clouds of deadly vapour, dense and black, and damp and steaming with a substance foul to breathe as floats the breath of "hell."

And flashes fierce as fiery serpents spun across the sky which but an hour before was like a dome of turquoise turned with beryl.

Close-clinging, clasping, crying each for each, some waited awe-struck, some did seek to pray, and others cursed and moaned and fell upon their fellows with the sword, and "Life for life" cried madly. "Now mine hour hath come, what matter how ye die!"

Thus mad and sane they mingled. Weak and

[p. 172]

strong. The pure, the vile, the greybeard and the child; while in the shelter of the house of wealth, or lowly cot, where when the day had dawned, was hope for yet another life to bless, lay mother's wailing in the hour of birth and adding wails of fear to wails of agony.

Then, like a monster spurning earth and seeking sky, there rose from out the bosom of the deep a something which no man had given name.

Uprearing as the wild steed flies the ground when blast of danger smiteth on his ear, then with the voice of thunder multiplied it burst the bonds of shape and nature's law of law restraint and fell upon the land.

A wall of water as the mountain tall! Black, shrieking beings! Shapes from depths of sea, and wrecks that long had mouldered in their graves of ocean slime, and rocks from depths where rocks long buried lay; and all swept on unheeded and the cities fair that kissed the borders of a smiling sea went down.

Yet higher, where the pointed mountain sides smiled green and fruitful, some had lingered still with horror on their faces, for where the land had blossomed like the rose, and fane and palace, mart and builded wall, and forests vast had stood, when the sun went down was but a swirl of foam, of writhing, hungry waves that seeming mounted upwards, upwards fast ascending to the eye.

Yet those few pictured "When the water fell," the death-struck valleys, ruined walls and towers and forests, lacking naught save leaves of green. Alas, the dream that had no end! their hope bore no fruition.

The quivering mountain sank--an inch, the measure of a man's broad palm--a fathom! Then

[p. 173]

a quiver and a roar marked moment when the land that mocked the sun went down!

Atlantis, thou hast sunk, but shall arise, a slimy thing of Ocean, still to bear much beauty, offering riches to the world which hath not known thy fate.

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: smog.txt =====


    
The Smoky God, by Willis George Emerson, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

THE SMOKY GOD

  

Or

  

A Voyage to the Inner World

[p. 2]

          OTHER BOOKS

BY

WILLIS GEORGE EMERSON

"BUELL HAMPTON." A   NOVEL
   "THE BUILDERS." A NOVEL

_____

FORBES & CO. CHICAGO

     
   [p. 3] [p. 4]

Click to enlarge
"I was left alone with the dead."

[p. 5]

  

THE SMOKY GOD

  

Or

  

A Voyage to the Inner World

  

BY

  

WILLIS GEORGE EMERSON

AUTHOR OF "BUELL HAMPTON," "THE BUILDERS," ETC.

  

With Illustrations by

  

JOHN A. WILLIAMS

  

CHICAGO

  

FORBES & COMPANY

  

[1908]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com December 2008, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

Click to enlarge
Cover

Click to enlarge
Title Page

[p. 6] [p. 7]

Dedicated
 TO
 MY CHUM AND COMPANION
 BONNIE EMERSON
 MY WIFE

     
The Smoky God, by Willis George Emerson, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 8] [p. 9]

  

CONTENTS

           

        

        

       PAGE

     
      PART

       I.

       AUTHOR'S FOREWORD

       <page 11>

     
      PART

       II.

       OLAF JANSEN'S STORY

       <page 45>

     
      PART

       III.

       BEYOND THE NORTH WIND

       <page 81>

     
      PART

       IV.

       IN THE UNDER WORLD

       <page 127>

     
      PART

       V.

       AMONG THE ICE PACKS

       <page 155>

     
      PART

       VI.

       CONCLUSION

       <page 173>

     
      PART

       VII.

       AUTHOR'S AFTERWORD

       <page 184>

     
   [p. 10]

  

ILLUSTRATIONS

           

       PAGE

     
      "I was left alone with the dead."

       Frontispiece

     
      "Twenty-eight years--long, tedious, frightful years of   suffering."

       49

     
      "A vessel larger than our little fishing sloop could not have   threaded its way among the icebergs."

       57

     
      "By what miracle we escaped being dashed to destruction, I do not   know."

       73

     
      "It could hardly be said to resemble the sun except in its circular   shape."

       89

     
      "They spoke to us in a strange language."

       101

     
      "We were brought before the Great High Priest."

       121

     
      "There must have been five hundred of these thunder-throated   monsters"

       135

     
      "My father shouted: 'Breakers ahead!'"

       151

     
      "Less than a half mile away was a whaling vessel."

       165

     
      "Whereupon I was put in irons."

       169

     
   
     
The Smoky God, by Willis George Emerson, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 11]

  

The Smoky God

  

Or

  

A Voyage to the Inner World

"He is the God who sits in the center, on the navel of the earth, and he is the interpreter of religion to all mankind."--PLATO.

  

PART ONE

  

AUTHOR'S FOREWORD

I FEAR the seemingly incredible story which I am about to relate will be regarded as the result of a distorted intellect superinduced, possibly, by the glamour of unveiling a marvelous mystery, rather than a truthful record of the unparalleled experiences related by one Olaf Jansen,

[p. 12]

whose eloquent madness so appealed to my imagination that all thought of an analytical criticism has been effectually dispelled.

Marco Polo will doubtless shift uneasily in his grave at the strange story I am called upon to chronicle; a story as strange as a Munchausen tale. It is also incongruous that I, a disbeliever, should be the one to edit the story of Olaf Jansen, whose name is now for the first time given to the world, yet who must hereafter rank as one of the notables of earth.

I freely confess his statements admit of no rational analysis, but have to do with the profound mystery concerning the frozen North that for centuries has claimed the attention of scientists and laymen alike.

[p. 13]

However much they are at variance with the cosmographical manuscripts of the past, these plain statements may be relied upon as a record of the things Olaf Jansen claims to have seen with his own eyes.

A hundred times I have asked myself whether it is possible that the world's geography is incomplete, and that the startling narrative of Olaf Jansen is predicated upon demonstrable facts. The reader may be able to answer these queries to his own satisfaction, however far the chronicler of this narrative may be from having reached a conviction. Yet sometimes even I am at a loss to know whether I have been led away from an abstract truth by the ignes fatui of a clever superstition, or

[p. 14]

whether heretofore accepted facts are, after all, founded upon falsity.

It may be that the true home of Apollo was not at Delphi, but in that older earth-center of which Plato speaks, where he says: "Apollo's real home is among the Hyperboreans, in a land of perpetual life, where mythology tells us two doves flying from the two opposite ends of the world met in this fair region, the home of Apollo. Indeed, according to Hecataeus, Leto, the mother of Apollo, was born on an island in the Arctic Ocean far beyond the North Wind."

It is not my intention to attempt a discussion of the theogony of the deities nor the cosmogony of the world. My simple duty is to enlighten

[p. 15]

the world concerning a heretofore unknown portion of the universe, as it was seen and described by the old Norseman, Olaf Jansen.

Interest in northern research is international. Eleven nations are engaged in, or have contributed to, the perilous work of trying to solve Earth's one remaining cosmological mystery.

There is a saying, ancient as the hills, that "truth is stranger than fiction," and in a most startling manner has this axiom been brought home to me within the last fortnight.

It was just two o'clock in the morning when I was aroused from a restful sleep by the vigorous ringing of my door-bell. The untimely disturber proved to be a messenger bearing a

[p. 16]

note, scrawled almost to the point of illegibility, from an old Norseman by the name of Olaf Jansen. After much deciphering, I made out the writing, which simply said: "Am ill unto death. Come." The call was imperative, and I lost no time in making ready to comply.

Perhaps I may as well explain here that Olaf Jansen, a man who quite recently celebrated his ninety-fifth birthday, has for the last half-dozen years been living alone in an unpretentious bungalow out Glendale way, a short distance from the business district of Los Angeles, California.

It was less than two years ago, while out walking one afternoon, that I was attracted by Olaf Jansen's house and its homelike surroundings,

[p. 17]

toward its owner and occupant, whom I afterward came to know as a believer in the ancient worship of Odin and Thor.

There was a gentleness in his face, and a kindly expression in the keenly alert gray eyes of this man who had lived more than four-score years and ten; and, withal, a sense of loneliness that appealed to my sympathy. Slightly stooped, and with his hands clasped behind him, he walked back and forth with slow and measured tread, that day when first we met. I can hardly say what particular motive impelled me to pause in my walk and engage him in conversation. He seemed pleased when I complimented him on the attractiveness of his bungalow, and on the well-tended vines

[p. 18]

and flowers clustering in profusion over its windows, roof and wide piazza.

I soon discovered that my new acquaintance was no ordinary person, but one profound and learned to a remarkable degree; a man who, in the later years of his long life, had dug deeply into books and become strong in the power of meditative silence.

I encouraged him to talk, and soon gathered that he had resided only six or seven years in Southern California, but had passed the dozen years prior in one of the middle Eastern states. Before that he had been a fisherman off the coast of Norway, in the region of the Lofoden Islands, from whence he had made trips still

[p. 19]

farther north to Spitzbergen and even to Franz Josef Land.

When I started to take my leave, he seemed reluctant to have me go, and asked me to come again. Although at the time I thought nothing of it, I remember now that he made a peculiar remark as I extended my hand in leave-taking. "You will come again?" he asked. "Yes, you will come again some day. I am sure you will; and I shall show you my library and tell you many things of which you have never dreamed, things so wonderful that it may be you will not believe me."

I laughingly assured him that I would not only come again, but would be ready to believe whatever he might

[p. 20]

choose to tell me of his travels and adventures.

In the days that followed I became well acquainted with Olaf Jansen, and, little by little, he told me his story, so marvelous, that its very daring challenges reason and belief. The old Norseman always expressed himself with so much earnestness and sincerity that I became enthralled by his strange narrations.

Then came the messenger's call that night, and within the hour I was at Olaf Jansen's bungalow.

He was very impatient at the long wait, although after being summoned I had come immediately to his bedside.

"I must hasten," he exclaimed, while yet he held my hand in greeting.

[p. 21]

[paragraph continues] "I have much to tell you that you know not, and I will trust no one but you. I fully realize," he went on hurriedly, "that I shall not survive the night. The time has come to join my fathers in the great sleep."

I adjusted the pillows to make him more comfortable, and assured him I was glad to be able to serve him in any way possible, for I was beginning to realize the seriousness of his condition.

The lateness of the hour, the stillness of the surroundings, the uncanny feeling of being alone with the dying man, together with his weird story, all combined to make my heart beat fast and loud with a feeling for which I have no name. Indeed, there were many times that night by the old

[p. 22]

[paragraph continues] Norseman's couch, and there have been many times since, when a sensation rather than a conviction took possession of my very soul, and I seemed not only to believe in, but actually see, the strange lands, the strange people and the strange world of which he told, and to hear the mighty orchestral chorus of a thousand lusty voices.

For over two hours he seemed endowed with almost superhuman strength, talking rapidly, and to all appearances, rationally. Finally he gave into my hands certain data, drawings and crude maps. "These," said he in conclusion, "I leave in your hands. If I can have your promise to give them to the world, I shall die happy, because I desire that

[p. 23]

people may know the truth, for then all mystery concerning the frozen Northland will be explained. There is no chance of your suffering the fate I suffered. They will not put you in irons, nor confine you in a mad-house, because you are not telling your own story, but mine, and I, thanks to the gods, Odin and Thor, will be in my grave, and so beyond the reach of disbelievers who would persecute."

Without a thought of the far-reaching results the promise entailed, or foreseeing the many sleepless nights which the obligation has since brought me, I gave my hand and with it a pledge to discharge faithfully his dying wish.

As the sun rose over the peaks of

[p. 24]

the San Jacinto, far to the eastward, the spirit of Olaf Jansen, the navigator, the explorer and worshiper of Odin and Thor, the man whose experiences and travels, as related, are without a parallel in all the world's history, passed away, and I was left alone with the dead.

And now, after having paid the last sad rites to this strange man from the Lofoden Islands, and the still farther "Northward Ho!", the courageous explorer of frozen regions, who in his declining years (after he had passed the four-score mark) had sought an asylum of restful peace in sun-favored California, I will undertake to make public his story.

But, first of all, let me indulge in one or two reflections:

[p. 25]

Generation follows generation, and the traditions from the misty past are handed down from sire to son, but for some strange reason interest in the ice-locked unknown does not abate with the receding years, either in the minds of the ignorant or the tutored.

With each new generation a restless impulse stirs the hearts of men to capture the veiled citadel of the Arctic, the circle of silence, the land of glaciers, cold wastes of waters and winds that are strangely warm. Increasing interest is manifested in the mountainous icebergs, and marvelous speculations are indulged in concerning the earth's center of gravity, the cradle of the tides, where the whales have their nurseries, where the magnetic needle goes mad, where the

[p. 26]

[paragraph continues] Aurora Borealis illumines the night, and where brave and courageous spirits of every generation dare to venture and explore, defying the dangers of the "Farthest North."

One of the ablest works of recent years is "Paradise Found, or the Cradle of The Human Race at the North Pole," by William F. Warren. In his carefully prepared volume, Mr. Warren almost stubbed his toe against the real truth, but missed it seemingly by only a hair's breadth, if the old Norseman's revelation be true.

Dr. Orville Livingston Leech, scientist, in a recent article, says:

"The possibilities of a land inside the earth were first brought to my attention when I picked up a geode on 

[p. 27]

the shores of the Great Lakes. The geode is a spherical and apparently solid stone, but when broken is found to be hollow and coated with crystals. The earth is only a larger form of a geode, and the law that created the geode in its hollow form undoubtedly fashioned the earth in the same way."

In presenting the theme of this almost incredible story, as told by Olaf Jansen, and supplemented by manuscript, maps and crude drawings entrusted to me, a fitting introduction is found in the following quotation:

"In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth, and the earth was without form and void." And also, "God created man in his own image." Therefore, even in things material, man must be God-like, because

[p. 28]

he is created in the likeness of the Father.

A man builds a house for himself and family. The porches or verandas are all without, and are secondary. The building is really constructed for the conveniences within.

Olaf Jansen makes the startling announcement through me, an humble instrument, that in like manner, God created the earth for the "within"--that is to say, for its lands, seas, rivers, mountains, forests and valleys, and for its other internal conveniences, while the outside surface of the earth is merely the veranda, the porch, where things grow by comparison but sparsely, like the lichen on the mountain side, clinging determinedly for bare existence.

[p. 29]

Take an egg-shell, and from each end break out a piece as large as the end of this pencil. Extract its contents, and then you will have a perfect representation of Olaf Jansen's earth. The distance from the inside surface to the outside surface, according to him, is about three hundred miles. The center of gravity is not in the center of the earth, but in the center of the shell or crust; therefore, if the thickness of the earth's crust or shell is three hundred miles, the center of gravity is one hundred and fifty miles below the surface.

In their log-books Arctic explorers tell us of the dipping of the needle as the vessel sails in regions of the farthest north known. In reality, they are at the curve; on the edge of

[p. 30]

the shell, where gravity is geometrically increased, and while the electric current seemingly dashes off into space toward the phantom idea of the North Pole, yet this same electric current drops again and continues its course southward along the inside surface of the earth's crust.

In the appendix to his work, Captain Sabine gives an account of experiments to determine the acceleration of the pendulum in different latitudes. This appears to have resulted from the joint labor of Peary and Sabine. He says: "The accidental discovery that a pendulum on being removed from Paris to the neighborhood of the equator increased its time of vibration, gave the first step to our present knowledge

[p. 31]

that the polar axis of the globe is less than the equatorial; that the force of gravity at the surface of the earth increases progressively from the equator toward the poles."

According to Olaf Jansen, in the beginning this old world of ours was created solely for the "within" world, where are located the four great rivers--the Euphrates, the Pison, the Gihon and the Hiddekel. These same names of rivers, when applied to streams on the "outside" sur- face of the earth, are purely traditional from an antiquity beyond the memory of man.

On the top of a high mountain, near the fountain-head of these four rivers, Olaf Jansen, the Norseman, claims to have discovered the long-lost "Garden

[p. 32]

of Eden," the veritable navel of the earth, and to have spent over two years studying and reconnoitering in this marvelous "within" land, exuberant with stupendous plant life and abounding in giant animals; a land where the people live to be centuries old, after the order of Methuselah and other Biblical characters; a region where one-quarter of the "inner" surface is water and three-quarters land; where there are large oceans and many rivers and lakes; where the cities are superlative in construction and magnificence; where modes of transportation are as far in advance of ours as we with our boasted achievements are in advance of the inhabitants of "darkest Africa."

The distance directly across the

[p. 33]

space from inner surface to inner surface is about six hundred miles less than the recognized diameter of the earth. In the identical center of this vast vacuum is the seat of electricity--a mammoth ball of dull red fire--not startlingly brilliant, but surrounded by a white, mild, luminous cloud, giving out uniform warmth, and held in its place in the center of this internal space by the immutable law of gravitation. This electrical cloud is known to the people "within" as the abode of "The Smoky God." They believe it to be the throne of "The Most High."

Olaf Jansen reminded me of how, in the old college days, we were all familiar with the laboratory demonstrations of centrifugal motion, which

[p. 34]

clearly proved that, if the earth were a solid, the rapidity of its revolution upon its axis would tear it into a thousand fragments.

The old Norseman also maintained that from the farthest points of land on the islands of Spitzbergen and Franz Josef Land, flocks of geese may be seen annually flying still farther northward, just as the sailors and explorers record in their log-books. No scientist has yet been audacious enough to attempt to explain, even to his own satisfaction, toward what lands these winged fowls are guided by their subtle instinct. However, Olaf Jansen has given us a most reasonable explanation.

The presence of the open sea in the Northland is also explained. Olaf

[p. 35]

[paragraph continues] Jansen claims that the northern aperture, intake or hole, so to speak, is about fourteen hundred miles across. In connection with this, let us read what Explorer Nansen writes, on page 288 of his book: "I have never had such a splendid sail. On to the north, steadily north, with a good wind, as fast as steam and sail can take us, an open sea mile after mile, watch after watch, through these unknown regions, always clearer and clearer of ice, one might almost say: 'How long will it last 2' The eye always turns to the northward as one paces the bridge. It is gazing into the future. But there is always the same dark sky ahead which . means open sea." Again, the Norwood Review of England, in its issue of May

[p. 36]

[paragraph continues] 10, 1884, says: "We do not admit that there is ice up to the Pole--once inside the great ice barrier, a new world breaks upon the explorer, the climate is mild like that of England, and, afterward, balmy as the Greek Isles."

Some of the rivers "within," Olaf Jansen claims, are larger than our Mississippi and Amazon rivers combined, in point of volume of water carried; indeed their greatness is occasioned by their width and depth rather than their length, and it is at the mouths of these mighty rivers, as they flow northward and southward along the inside surface of the earth, that mammoth icebergs are found, some of them fifteen and twenty miles

[p. 37]

wide and from forty to one hundred miles in length.

Is it not strange that there has never been an iceberg encountered either in the Arctic or Antarctic Ocean that is not composed of fresh water? Modern scientists claim that freezing eliminates the salt, but Olaf Jansen claims differently.

Ancient Hindoo, Japanese and Chinese writings, as well as the hieroglyphics of the extinct races of the North American continent, all speak of the custom of sun-worshiping, and it is possible, in the startling light of Olaf Jansen's revelations, that the people of the inner world, lured away by glimpses of the sun as it shone upon the inner surface of the

[p. 38]

earth, either from the northern or the southern opening, became dissatisfied with "The Smoky God," the great pillar or mother cloud of electricity, and, weary of their continuously mild and pleasant atmosphere, followed the brighter light, and were finally led beyond the ice belt and scattered over the "outer" surface of the earth, through Asia, Europe, North America and, later, Africa, Australia and South America. [*1]

[p. 39]

It is a notable fact that, as we approach the Equator, the stature of the human race grows less. But the Patagonians of South America are probably the only aborigines from the center of the earth who came out through the aperture usually designated as the South Pole, and they are called the giant race.

Olaf Jansen avers that, in the beginning, the world was created by the Great Architect of the Universe, so that man might dwell upon its "inside" surface, which has ever since been the habitation of the "chosen."

They who were driven out of the

[p. 40]

[paragraph continues] "Garden of Eden" brought their traditional history with them.

The history of the people living "within" contains a narrative suggesting the story of Noah and the ark with which we are familiar. He sailed away, as did Columbus, from a certain port, to a strange land he had heard of far to the northward, carrying with him all manner of beasts of the fields and fowls of the air, but was never heard of afterward.

On the northern boundaries of Alaska, and still more frequently on the Siberian coast, are found bone-yards containing tusks of ivory in quantities so great as to suggest the burying-places of antiquity. From Olaf Jansen's account, they have

[p. 41]

come from the great prolific animal life that abounds in the fields and forests and on the banks of numerous rivers of the Inner World. The materials were caught in the ocean currents, or were carried on ice-floes, and have accumulated like driftwood on the Siberian coast. This has been going on for ages, and hence these mysterious bone-yards.

On this subject William F. Warren, in his book already cited, pages 297 and 298, says: "The Arctic rocks tell of a lost Atlantis more wonderful than Plato's. The fossil ivory beds of Siberia excel everything of the kind in the world. From the days of Pliny, at least, they have constantly been undergoing exploitation, and still they are the chief headquarters

[p. 42]

of supply. The remains of mammoths are so abundant that, as Gratacap says, 'the northern islands of Siberia seem built up of crowded bones.' Another scientific writer, speaking of the islands of New Siberia, northward of the mouth of the River Lena, uses this language: 'Large quantities of ivory are dug out of the ground every year. Indeed, some of the islands are believed to be nothing but an accumulation of drift-timber and the bodies of mammoths and other antediluvian animals frozen together.' From this we may infer that, during the years that have elapsed since the Russian conquest of Siberia, useful tusks from more than twenty thousand mammoths have been collected."

[p. 43]

But now for the story of Olaf Jansen. I give it in detail, as set down by himself in manuscript, and woven into the tale, just as he placed them, are certain quotations from recent works on Arctic exploration, showing how carefully the old Norseman compared with his own experiences those of other voyagers to the frozen North. Thus wrote the disciple of Odin and Thor:

Footnotes

^38:1 The following quotation is significant; "It follows that man issuing from a mother-region still undetermined but which a number of considerations indicate to have been in the North, has radiated in several directions; that his migrations have been constantly from North to South."--[p. 39]M. le Marquis G. de Saporta, in Popular Science Monthly, October, 1883, page 753.

     
The Smoky God, by Willis George Emerson, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 44] [p. 45]

  

PART TWO

  

OLAF JANSEN'S STORY

MY name is Olaf Jansen. I am a Norwegian, although I was born in the little seafaring Russian town of Uleaborg, on the eastern coast of the Gulf of Bothnia, the northern arm of the Baltic Sea.

My parents were on a fishing cruise in the Gulf of Bothnia, and put into this Russian town of Uleaborg at the time of my birth, being the twenty-seventh day of October, 1811.

My father, Jens Jansen, was born at Rodwig on the Scandinavian coast,

[p. 46]

near the Lofoden Islands, but after marrying made his home at Stockholm, because my mother's people resided in that city. When seven years old, I began going with my father on his fishing trips along the Scandinavian coast.

Early in life I displayed an aptitude for books, and at the age of nine years was placed in a private school in Stockholm, remaining there until I was fourteen. After this I made regular trips with my father on all his fishing voyages.

My father was a man fully six feet three in height, and weighed over fifteen stone, a typical Norseman of the most rugged sort, and capable of more endurance than any other man I have ever known. He possessed the

[p. 47]

gentleness of a woman in tender little ways, yet his determination and will-power were beyond description. His will admitted of no defeat.

I was in my nineteenth year when we started on what proved to be our last trip as fishermen, and which resulted in the strange story that shall be given to the world,--but not until I have finished my earthly pilgrimage.

I dare not allow the facts as I know them to be published while I am living, for fear of further humiliation, confinement and suffering. First of all, I was put in irons by the captain of the whaling vessel that rescued me, for no other reason than that I told the truth about the marvelous discoveries made by my father and myself.

[p. 48]

[paragraph continues] But this was far from being the end of my tortures.

After four years and eight months' absence I reached Stockholm, only to find my mother had died the previous year, and the property left by my parents in the possession of my mother's people, but it was at once made over to me.

All might have been well, had I erased from my memory the story of our adventure and of my father's terrible death.

Finally, one day I told the story in detail to my uncle, Gustaf Osterlind, a man of considerable property, and urged him to fit out an expedition for me to make another voyage to the strange land.

At first I thought he favored my

[p. 49]

Click to enlarge
"Twenty-eight years--long, tedious, frightful years of suffering."

[p. 50] [p. 51]

project. He seemed interested, and invited me to go before certain officials and explain to them, as I had to him, the story of our travels and discoveries. Imagine my disappointment and horror when, upon the conclusion of my narrative, certain papers were signed by my uncle, and, without warning, I found myself arrested and hurried away to dismal and fearful confinement in a madhouse, where I remained for twenty-eight years--long, tedious, frightful years of suffering!

I never ceased to assert my sanity, and to protest against the injustice of my confinement. Finally, on the seventeenth of October, 1862, I was released. My uncle was dead, and the friends of my youth were now

[p. 52]

strangers. Indeed, a man over fifty years old, whose only known record is that of a madman, has no friends.

I was at a loss to know what to do for a living, but instinctively turned toward the harbor where fishing boats in great numbers were anchored, and within a week I had shipped with a fisherman by the name of Yan Hansen, who was starting on a long fishing cruise to the Lofoden Islands.

Here my earlier years of training proved of the very greatest advantage, especially in enabling me to make myself useful. This was but the beginning of other trips, and by frugal economy I was, in a few years, able to own a fishing-brig of my own.

For twenty-seven years thereafter

[p. 53]

[paragraph continues] I followed the sea as a fisherman, five years working for others, and the last twenty-two for myself.

During all these years I was a most diligent student of books, as well as a hard worker at my business, but I took great care not to mention to anyone the story concerning the discoveries made by my father and myself. Even at this late day I would be fearful of having any one see or know the things I am writing, and the records and maps I have in my keeping. When my days on earth are finished, I shall leave maps and records that will enlighten and, I hope, benefit mankind.

The memory of my long confinement with maniacs, and all the horrible

[p. 54]

anguish and sufferings are too vivid to warrant my taking further chances.

In 1889 I sold out my fishing boats, and found I had accumulated a fortune quite sufficient to keep me the remainder of my life. I then came to America.

For a dozen years my home was in Illinois, near Batavia, where I gathered most of the books in my present library, though I brought many choice volumes from Stockholm. Later, I came to Los Angeles, arriving here March 4, 1901. The date I well remember, as it was President McKinley's second inauguration day. I bought this humble home and determined, here in the privacy of my Own abode, sheltered by my own vine

[p. 55]

and fig-tree, and with my books about me, to make maps and drawings of the new lands we had discovered, and also to write the story in detail from the time my father and I left Stockholm until the tragic event that parted us in the Antarctic Ocean.

I well remember that we left Stockholm in our fishing-sloop on the third day of April, 1829, and sailed to the southward, leaving Gothland Island to the left and Oeland Island to the right. A few days later we succeeded in doubling Sandhommar Point, and made our way through the sound which separates Denmark from the Scandinavian coast. In due time we put in at the town of Christiansand, where we rested two days, and then started around the

[p. 56]

[paragraph continues] Scandinavian coast to the westward, bound for the Lofoden Islands.

My father was in high spirit, because of the excellent and gratifying returns he had received from our last catch by marketing at Stockholm, instead of selling at one of the seafaring towns along the Scandinavian coast. He was especially pleased with the sale of some ivory tusks that he had found on the west coast of Franz Joseph Land during one of his northern cruises the previous year, and he expressed the hope that this time we might again be fortunate enough to load our little fishing-sloop with ivory, instead of cod, herring, mackerel and salmon.

We put in at Hammerfest, latitude

[p. 57]

Click to enlarge
"A vessel larger than our little fishing sloop could not have threaded its way among the icebergs."

[p. 58] [p. 59]

seventy-one degrees and forty minutes, for a few days' rest. Here we remained one week, laying in an extra supply of provisions and several casks of drinking-water, and then sailed toward Spitzbergen.

For the first few days we had an open sea and a favoring wind, and then we encountered much ice and many icebergs. A vessel larger than our little fishing-sloop could not possibly have threaded its way among the labyrinth of icebergs or squeezed through the barely open channels. These monster bergs presented an endless succession of crystal palaces, of massive cathedrals and fantastic mountain ranges, grim and sentinel-like, immovable as some towering cliff

[p. 60]

of solid rock, standing silent as a sphinx, resisting the restless waves of a fretful sea.

After many narrow escapes, we arrived at Spitzbergen on the 23d of June, and anchored at Wijade Bay for a short time, where we were quite successful in our catches. We then lifted anchor and sailed through the Hinlopen Strait, and coasted along the North-East-Land. [*1]

A strong wind came up from the southwest, and my father said that we had better take advantage of it and try to reach Franz Josef Land, where,

[p. 61]

the year before he had, by accident, found the ivory tusks that had brought him such a good price at Stockholm.

Never, before or since, have I seen so many sea-fowl; they were so numerous that they hid the rocks on the coast line and darkened the sky.

For several days we sailed along the rocky coast of Franz Josef Land. Finally, a favoring wind came up that enabled us to make the West Coast, and, after sailing twenty-four hours, we came to a beautiful inlet.

One could hardly believe it was the far Northland. The place was green with growing vegetation, and while the area did not comprise more than one or two acres, yet the air was

[p. 62]

warm and tranquil. It seemed to be at that point where the Gulf Stream's influence is most keenly felt. [*1]

On the east coast there were numerous icebergs, yet here we were in open water. Far to the west of us,

[p. 63]

however, were icepacks, and still farther to the westward the ice appeared like ranges of low hills. In front of us, and directly to the north, lay an open sea. [*1]

My father was an ardent believer in Odin and Thor, and had frequently told me they were gods who came from far beyond the "North Wind."

There was a tradition, my father

[p. 64]

explained, that still farther northward was a land more beautiful than any that mortal man had ever known, and that it was inhabited by the "Chosen." [*1]

My youthful imagination was fired by the ardor, zeal and religious fervor

[p. 65]

of, my good father, and I exclaimed: "Why not sail to this goodly land? The sky is fair, the wind favorable and the sea open."

Even now I can see the expression of pleasurable surprise on his countenance as he turned toward me and asked: "My son, are you willing to go with me and explore--to go far beyond where man has ever ventured?" I answered affirmatively. "Very well," he replied. "May the god Odin protect us!" and, quickly adjusting the sails, he glanced at our compass, turned the prow in due northerly direction through an open channel, and our voyage had begun. [*1]

[p. 66]

The sun was low in the horizon, as it was still the early summer. Indeed, we had almost four months of day ahead of us before the frozen night could come on again.

Our little fishing-sloop sprang forward as if eager as ourselves for adventure. Within thirty-six hours we were out of sight of the highest point on the coast line of Franz Josef Land. We seemed to be in a strong current running north by northeast. Far to the right and to the left of us were icebergs, but our little sloop bore down on the narrows and passed through channels and out into open seas--channels so narrow in places

[p. 67]

that, had our craft been other than small, we never could have gotten through.

On the third day we came to an island. Its shores were washed by an open sea. My father determined to land and explore for a day. This new land was destitute of timber, but we found a large accumulation of drift-wood on the northern shore. Some of the trunks of the trees were forty feet long and two feet in diameter. [*1]

[p. 68]

After one day's exploration of the coast line of this island, we lifted anchor and turned our prow to the north in an open sea. [*1]

I remember that neither my father nor myself had tasted food for almost

[p. 69]

thirty hours. Perhaps this was because of the tension of excitement about our strange voyage in waters farther north, my father said, than anyone had ever before been. Active mentality had dulled the demands of the physical needs.

Instead of the cold being intense as we had anticipated, it was really warmer and more pleasant than it had been while in Hammerfest on the north coast of Norway, some six weeks before. [*1]

[p. 70]

We both frankly admitted that we were very hungry, and forthwith I prepared a substantial meal from our well-stored larder. When we had partaken heartily of the repast, I told my father I believed I would sleep, as I was beginning to feel quite drowsy. "Very well," he replied, "I will keep the watch."

I have no way to determine how

[p. 71]

long I slept; I only know that I was rudely awakened by a terrible commotion of the sloop. To my surprise, I found my father sleeping soundly. I cried out lustily to him, and starting up, he sprang quickly to his feet. Indeed, had he not instantly clutched the rail, he would certainly have been thrown into the seething waves.

A fierce snow-storm was raging. The wind was directly astern, driving our sloop at a terrific speed, and was threatening every moment to capsize us. There was no time to lose, the sails had to be lowered immediately. Our boat was writhing in convulsions. A few icebergs we knew were on either side of us, but fortunately the channel was open directly to the north. But would it remain so? In

[p. 72]

front of us, girding the horizon from left to right, was a vaporish fog or mist, black as Egyptian night at the water's edge, and white like a steam-cloud toward the top, which was finally lost to view as it blended with the great white flakes of falling snow. Whether it covered a treacherous iceberg, or some other hidden obstacle against which our little sloop would dash and send us to a watery grave, or was merely the phenomenon of an Arctic fog, there was no way to determine. [*1]

[p. 73]

Click to enlarge
"By what miracle we escaped being dashed to destruction, I do not know."

[p. 74] [p. 75]

By what miracle we escaped being dashed to utter destruction, I do not know. I remember our little craft creaked and groaned, as if its joints were breaking. It rocked and staggered to and fro as if clutched by some fierce undertow of whirlpool or maelstrom.

Fortunately our compass had been fastened with long screws to a crossbeam. Most of our provisions, however, were tumbled out and swept away from the deck of the cuddy, and

[p. 76]

had we not taken the precaution at the very beginning to tie ourselves firmly to the masts of the sloop, we should have been swept into the lashing sea.

Above the deafening tumult of the raging waves, I heard my father's voice. "Be courageous, my son," he shouted, "Odin is the god of the waters, the companion of the brave, and he is with us. Fear not."

To me it seemed there was no possibility of our escaping a horrible death. The little sloop was shipping water, the snow was falling so fast as to be blinding, and the waves were tumbling over our counters in reckless white-sprayed fury. There was no telling what instant we should be dashed against some drifting ice-pack.

[p. 77]

The tremendous swells would heave us up to the very peaks of mountainous waves, then plunge us down into the depths of the sea's trough as if our fishing-sloop were a fragile shell. Gigantic white-capped waves, like veritable walls, fenced us in, fore and aft.

This terrible nerve-racking ordeal, with its nameless horrors of suspense and agony of fear indescribable, continued for more than three hours, and all the time we were being driven forward at fierce speed. Then suddenly, as if growing weary of its frantic exertions, the wind began to lessen its fury and by degrees to die down.

At last we were in a perfect calm. The fog mist had also disappeared, and before us lay an iceless channel

[p. 78]

perhaps ten or fifteen miles wide, with a few icebergs far away to our right, and an intermittent archipelago of smaller ones to the left.

I watched my father closely, determined to remain silent until he spoke. Presently he untied the rope from his waist and, without saying a word, began working the pumps, which fortunately were not damaged, relieving the sloop of the water it had shipped in the madness of the storm.

He put up the sloop's sails as calmly as if casting a fishing-net, and then remarked that we were ready for a favoring wind when it came. His courage and persistence were truly remarkable.

On investigation we found less than one-third of our provisions remaining,

[p. 79]

while to our utter dismay, we discovered that our water-casks had been swept overboard during the violent plungings of our boat.

Two of our water-casks were in the main hold, but both were empty. We had a fair supply of food, but no fresh water. I realized at once the awfulness of our position. Presently I was seized with a consuming thirst. "It is indeed bad," remarked my father. "However, let us dry our bedraggled clothing, for we are soaked to the skin. Trust to the god Odin, my son. Do not give up hope."

The sun was beating down slantingly, as if we were in a southern latitude, instead of in the far Northland. It was swinging around, its orbit ever visible and rising higher

[p. 80]

and higher each day, frequently mist-covered, yet always peering through the lacework of clouds like some fretful eye of fate, guarding the mysterious Northland and jealously watching the pranks of man. Far to our right the rays decking the prisms of icebergs were gorgeous. Their reflections emitted flashes of garnet, of diamond, of sapphire. A pyrotechnic panorama of countless colors and shapes, while below could be seen the green-tinted sea, and above, the purple sky.

Footnotes

^60:1 It will be remembered that Andree started on his fatal balloon voyage from the northwest coast of Spitzbergen.

^62:1 Sir John Barrow, Bart., F.R.S., in his work entitled "Voyages of Discovery and Research Within the Arctic Regions," says on page 57: "Mr. Beechey refers to what has frequently been found and noticed--the mildness of the temperature on the western coast of Spitzbergen, there being little or no sensation of cold, though the thermometer might be only a few degrees above the freezing-point. The brilliant and lively effect of a clear day, when the sun shines forth with a pure sky, whose azure hue is so intense as to find no parallel even in the boasted Italian sky."

^63:1 Captain Kane, on page 299, quoting from Morton's Journal on Monday, the 26th of December, says: "As far as I could see, the open passages were fifteen miles or more wide, with sometimes mashed ice separating them. But it is all small ice, and I think it either drives out to the open space to the north or rots and sinks, as I could see none ahead to the north."

^64:1 We find the following in "Deutsche Mythologie," page 778, from the pen of Jakob Grimm; "Then the sons of Bor built in the middle of the universe the city called Asgard, where dwell the gods and their kindred, and from that abode work out so many wondrous things both on the earth and in the heavens above it. There is in that city a place called Hlidskjalf, and when Odin is seated there upon his lofty throne he sees over the whole world and discerns all the actions of men."

^65:1 Hall writes, on page 288: "On the 23rd of January the two Esquimaux, accompanied by two of the sea men, [p. 66] went to Cape Lupton. They reported a sea of open water extending as far as the eye could reach."

^67:1 Greely tells us in vol. 1, page 100, that: "Privates Connell and Frederick found a large coniferous tree on the beach, just above the extreme high-water mark. It was nearly thirty inches in circumference, some thirty feet long, and had apparently been carried to that point by a current [p. 68] within a couple of years. A portion of it was cut up for fire-wood, and for the first time in that valley, a bright, cheery camp-fire gave comfort to man."

^68:1 Dr. Kane says, on page 379 of his works: "I cannot imagine what becomes of the ice. A strong current sets in constantly to the north; but, from altitudes of more than five hundred feet, I saw only narrow strips of ice, with great spaces of open water, from ten to fifteen miles in breadth, between them. It must, therefore, either go to an open space in the north, or dissolve."

^69:1 Captain Peary's second voyage relates another circumstance which may serve to confirm a conjecture which has long keen maintained by some, that an open sea, free of ice, exists at or near the Pole. "On the second of November," says Peary, "the wind freshened up to a gale from north by [p. 70] west, lowered the thermometer before midnight to 5 degrees, whereas, a rise of wind at Melville Island was generally accompanied by a simultaneous rise in the thermometer at low temperatures. May not this," he asks, "be occasioned by the wind blowing over an open sea in the quarter from which the wind blows? And tend to confirm the opinion that at or near the Pole an open sea exists?"

^72:1 On page 284 of his works, Hall writes: "From the top of Providence Berg, a dark fog was seen to the north, indicating water. At 10 a. m. three of the men (Kruger, Nindemann and Hobby) went to Cape [p. 75] Lupton to ascertain if possible the extent of the open water. On their return they reported several open spaces and much young ice--not more than a day old, so thin that it was easily broken by throwing pieces of ice upon it."

     
The Smoky God, by Willis George Emerson, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 81]

  

PART THREE

  

BEYOND THE NORTH WIND

I TRIED to forget my thirst by busying myself with bringing up some food and an empty vessel from the hold. Reaching over the side-rail, I filled the vessel with water for the purpose of laving my hands and face. To my astonishment, when the water came in contact with my lips, I could taste no salt. I was startled by the discovery. "Father!" I fairly gasped, "the water, the water; it is fresh!" "What, Olaf?" exclaimed

[p. 82]

my father, glancing hastily around. "Surely you are mistaken. There is no land. You are going mad." "But taste it!" I cried.

And thus we made the discovery that the water was indeed fresh, absolutely so, without the least briny taste or even the suspicion of a salty flavor.

We forthwith filled our two remaining water-casks, and my father declared it was a' heavenly dispensation of mercy from the gods Odin and Thor.

We were almost beside ourselves with joy, but hunger bade us end our enforced fast. Now that we had found fresh water in the open sea, what might we not expect in this strange latitude where ship had never

[p. 83]

before sailed and the splash of an oar had never been heard? [*1]

We had scarcely appeased our hunger when a breeze began filling the idle sails, and, glancing at the coin-

[p. 84]

pass, we found the northern point pressing hard against the glass.

In response to my surprise, my father said, "I have heard of this before; it is what they call the dipping of the needle."

We loosened the compass and turned it at right angles with the surface of the sea before its point would free itself from the glass and point according to unmolested attraction. It shifted uneasily, and seemed as unsteady as a drunken man, but finally pointed a course.

Before this we thought the wind was carrying us north by northwest, but, with the needle free, we discovered, if it could be relied upon, that we were sailing slightly north by

[p. 85]

northeast. Our course, however, was ever tending northward. [*1]

[p. 86]

The sea was serenely smooth, with hardly a choppy wave, and the wind brisk and exhilarating. The sun's rays, while striking us aslant, furnished tranquil warmth. And thus time wore on day after day, and we found from the record in our log-book, we had been sailing eleven days since the storm in the open sea.

By strictest economy, our food was holding out fairly well, but beginning to run low. In the meantime, one of

[p. 87]

our casks of water had been exhausted, and my father said: "We will fill it again." But, to our dismay, we found the water was now as salt as in the region of the Lofoden Islands off the coast of Norway. This necessitated our being extremely careful of the remaining cask.

I found myself wanting to sleep much of the time; whether it was the effect of the exciting experience of sailing in unknown waters, or the relaxation from the awful excitement incident to our adventure in a storm at sea, or due to want of food, I could not say.

I frequently lay down on the bunker of our little sloop, and looked far up into the blue dome of the sky; and, notwithstanding the sun was

[p. 88]

shining far away in the east, I always saw a single star overhead. For several days, when I looked for this star, it was always there directly above us.

It was now, according to our reckoning, about the first of August. The sun was high in the heavens, and was so bright that I could no longer see the one lone star that attracted my attention a few days earlier.

One day about this time, my father startled me by calling my attention to a novel sight far in front of us, almost at the horizon. "It is a mock sun," exclaimed my father. "I have read of them; it is called a reflection or mirage. It will soon pass away."

But this dull-red, false sun, as we supposed it to be, did not pass away for several hours; and while we were

[p. 89]

Click to enlarge
"It could hardly be said to resemble the sun except in its circular shape."

[p. 90] [p. 91]

unconscious of its emitting any rays of light, still there was no time thereafter when we could not sweep the horizon in front and locate the illumination of the so-called false sun, during a period of at least twelve hours out of every twenty-four.

Clouds and mists would at times almost, but never entirely, hide its location. Gradually it seemed to climb higher in the horizon of the uncertain purply sky as we advanced.

It could hardly be said to resemble the sun, except in its circular shape, and when not obscured by clouds or the ocean mists, it had a hazy-red, bronzed appearance, which would change to a white light like a luminous cloud, as if reflecting some greater light beyond.

[p. 92]

We finally agreed in our discussion of this smoky furnace-colored sun, that, whatever the cause of the phenomenon, it was not a reflection of our sun, but a planet of some sort--a reality. [*1]

[p. 93]

One day soon after this, I felt exceedingly drowsy, and fell into a sound sleep. But it seemed that I was almost immediately aroused by my father's vigorous shaking of me

[p. 94]

by the shoulder and saying: "Olaf, awaken; there is land in sight!"

I sprang to my feet, and oh! joy unspeakable! There, far in the distance, yet directly in our path, were lands jutting boldly into the sea. The shore-line stretched far away to the right of us, as far as the eye could see, and all along the sandy beach were waves breaking into choppy foam, receding, then going forward again, ever chanting in monotonous thunder tones the song of the deep. The banks were covered with trees and vegetation.

I cannot express my feeling of exultation at this discovery. My father stood motionless, with his hand on the tiller, looking straight ahead, pouring out his heart in thankful prayer

[p. 95]

and thanksgiving to the gods Odin and Thor.

In the meantime, a net which we found in the stowage had been cast, and we caught a few fish that materially added to our dwindling stock of provisions.

The compass, which we had fastened back in its place, in fear of another storm, was still pointing due north, and moving on its pivot, just as it had at Stockholm. The dipping of the needle had ceased. What could this mean? Then, too, our many days of sailing had certainly carried us far past the North Pole. And yet the needle continued to point north. We were sorely perplexed, for surely our direction was now south. [*1]

[p. 96]

We sailed for three days along the

shoreline, then came to the mouth of a fjord or river of immense size. It seemed more like a great bay, and into this we turned our fishing-craft, the direction being slightly northeast of south. By the assistance of a fretful wind that came to our aid about twelve hours out of every twenty-four, we continued to make our way

[p. 97]

inland, into what afterward proved to be a mighty river, and which we learned was called by the inhabitants Hiddekel.

We continued our journey for ten days thereafter, and found we had fortunately attained a distance inland where ocean tides no longer affected the water, which had become fresh.

The discovery came none to soon, for our remaining cask of water was

[p. 98]

well-nigh exhausted. We lost no time in replenishing our casks, and continued to sail farther up the river when the wind was favorable.

Along the banks great forests miles in extent could be seen stretching away on the shore-line. The trees were of enormous size. We landed after anchoring near a sandy beach, and waded ashore, and were rewarded by finding a quantity of nuts that were very palatable and satisfying to hunger, and a welcome change from the monotony of our stock of provisions.

It was about the first of September, over five months, we calculated, since our leave-taking from Stockholm. Suddenly we were frightened almost out of our wits by hearing in the far

[p. 99]

distance the singing of people. Very soon thereafter we discovered a huge ship gliding down the river directly toward us. Those aboard were singing in one mighty chorus that, echoing from bank to bank, sounded like a thousand voices, filling the whole universe with quivering melody. The accompaniment was played on stringed instruments not unlike our harps.

It was a larger ship than any we bad ever seen, and was differently constructed. [*1]

[p. 100]

At this particular time our sloop was becalmed, and not far from the shore. The bank of the river, covered with mammoth trees, rose up several hundred feet in beautiful fashion. We seemed to be on the edge of some primeval forest that doubtless stretched far inland.

The immense craft paused, and almost immediately a boat was lowered and six men of gigantic stature rowed to our little fishing-sloop. They spoke to us in a strange language. We knew from their manner, however,

[p. 101]

Click to enlarge
"They spoke to us in a strange language."

[p. 102] [p. 103]

that they were not unfriendly. They talked a great deal among themselves, and one of them laughed immoderately, as though in finding us a queer discovery had been made. One of them spied our compass, and it seemed to interest them more than any other part of our sloop.

Finally, the leader motioned as if to ask whether we were willing to leave our craft to go on board their ship. "What say you, my son?" asked my father. "They cannot do any more than kill us."

"They seem to be kindly disposed," I replied, "although what terrible giants! They must be the select six of the kingdom's crack regiment. Just look at their great size."

"We may as well go willingly as be

[p. 104]

taken by force," said my father, smiling, "for they are certainly able to capture us." Thereupon he made known, by signs, that we were ready to accompany them.

Within a few minutes we were on board the ship, and half an hour later our little fishing-craft had been lifted bodily out of the water by a strange sort of hook and tackle, and set on board as a curiosity.

There were several hundred people on board this, to us, mammoth ship, which we discovered was called "The Naz," meaning, as we afterward learned, "Pleasure," or to give a more proper interpretation, "Pleasure Excursion" ship.

If my father and I were curiously

[p. 105]

observed by the ship's occupants, this strange race of giants offered us an equal amount of wonderment.

There was not a single man aboard who would not have measured fully twelve feet in height. They all wore full beards, not particularly long, but seemingly short-cropped. They had mild and beautiful faces, exceedingly fair, with ruddy complexions. The hair and beard of some were black, others sandy, and still others yellow. The captain, as we designated the dignitary in command of the great vessel, was fully a head taller than any of his companions. The women averaged from ten to eleven feet in height. Their features were especially regular and refined, while their

[p. 106]

complexion was of a most delicate tint heightened by a healthful glow. [*1]

Both men and women seemed to possess that particular ease of manner which we deem a sign of good breeding, and, notwithstanding their huge statures, there was nothing about them suggesting awkwardness. As I was a lad in only my nineteenth

[p. 107]

year, I was doubtless looked upon as a true Tom Thumb. My father's six feet three did not lift the top of his head above the waist line of these people.

Each one seemed to vie with the others in extending courtesies and showing kindness to us, but all laughed heartily, I remember, when they had to improvise chairs for my father and myself to sit at table. They were richly attired in a costume peculiar to themselves, and very attractive. The men were clothed in handsomely embroidered tunics of silk and satin and belted at the waist. They wore knee-breeches and stockings of a fine texture, while their feet were encased in sandals adorned with gold buckles. We early discovered

[p. 108]

that gold was one of the most common metals known, and that it was used extensively in decoration.

Strange as it may seem, neither my father nor myself felt the least bit of solicitude for our safety. "We have come into our own," my father said to me. "This is the fulfillment of the tradition told me by my father and my father's father, and still back for many generations of our race. This is, assuredly, the land beyond the North Wind."

We seemed to make such an impression on the party that we were given specially into the charge of one of the men, Jules Galdea, and his wife, for the purpose of being educated in their language; and we, on

[p. 109]

our part, were just as eager to learn as they were to instruct.

At the captain's command, the vessel was swung cleverly about, and began retracing its course up the river. The machinery, while noiseless, was very powerful.

The banks and trees on either side seemed to rush by. The ship's speed, at times, surpassed that of any railroad train on which I have ever ridden, even here in America. It was wonderful.

In the meantime we had lost sight of the sun's rays, but we found a radiance "within" emanating from the dull-red sun which had already attracted our attention, now giving out a white light seemingly from a cloud-bank

[p. 110]

far away in front of us. It dispensed a greater light, I should say, than two full moons on the clearest night.

In twelve hours this cloud of whiteness would pass out of sight as if eclipsed, and the twelve hours following corresponded with our night. We early learned that these strange people were worshipers of this great cloud of night. It was "The Smoky God" of the "Inner World."

The ship was equipped with a mode of illumination which I now presume was electricity, but neither my father nor myself were sufficiently skilled in mechanics to understand whence came the power to operate the ship, or to maintain the soft beautiful lights that answered the same purpose

[p. 111]

of our present methods of lighting the streets of our cities, our houses and places of business.

It must be remembered, the time of which I write was the autumn of 1829, and we of the "outside" surface of the earth knew nothing then, so to speak, of electricity.

The electrically surcharged condition of the air was a constant vitalizer. I never felt better in my life than during the two years my father and I sojourned on the inside of the earth.

To resume my narrative of events: The ship on which we were sailing came to a stop two days after we had been taken on board. My father said as nearly as he could judge, we were directly under Stockholm or London.

[p. 112]

[paragraph continues] The city we had reached was called "Jehu," signifying a seaport town. The houses were large and beautifully constructed, and quite uniform in appearance, yet without sameness. The principal occupation of the people appeared to be agriculture; the hillsides were covered with vineyards, while the valleys were devoted to the growing of grain.

I never saw such a display of gold. It was everywhere. The door-casings were inlaid and the tables were veneered with sheetings of gold. Domes of the public buildings were of gold. It was used most generously in the finishings of the great temples of music.

Vegetation grew in lavish exuberance, and fruit of all kinds possessed

[p. 113]

the most delicate flavor. Clusters of grapes four and five feet in length, each grape as large as an orange, and apples larger than a man's head typified the wonderful growth of all things on the "inside" of the earth.

The great redwood trees of California would be considered mere underbrush compared with the giant forest trees extending for miles and miles in all directions. In many directions along the foothills of the mountains vast herds of cattle were seen during the last day of our travel on the river.

We heard much of a city called "Eden," but were kept at "Jehu" for an entire year. By the end of that time we had learned to speak fairly well the language of this strange race of people. Our instructors, Jules

[p. 114]

[paragraph continues] Galdea and his wife, exhibited a patience that was truly commendable.

One day an envoy from the Ruler at "Eden" came to see us, and for two whole days my father and myself were put through a series of surprising questions. They wished to know from whence we came, what sort of people dwelt "without," what God we worshiped, our religious beliefs, the mode of living in our strange land, and a thousand other things.

The compass which we had brought with us attracted especial attention. My father and I commented between ourselves on the fact that the compass still pointed north, although we now knew that we had sailed over the curve or edge of the earth's aperture, and were far along southward on the

[p. 115]

[paragraph continues] "inside" surface of the earth's crust, which, according to my father's estimate and my own, is about three hundred miles in thickness from the "inside" to the "outside" surface. Relatively speaking, it is no thicker than an egg-shell, so that there is almost as much surface on the "inside" as on the "outside" of the earth.

The great luminous cloud or ball of dull-red fire--fiery-red in the mornings and evenings, and during the day giving off a beautiful white light, "The Smoky God,"--is seemingly suspended in the center of the great vacuum "within" the earth, and held to its place by the immutable law of gravitation, or a repellant atmospheric force, as the case may be. I refer to the known power that draws or repels

[p. 116]

with equal force in all directions.

The base of this electrical cloud or central luminary, the seat of the gods, is dark and non-transparent, save for innumerable small openings, seemingly in the bottom of the great support or altar of the Deity, upon which "The Smoky God" rests; and, the lights shining through these many openings twinkle at night in all their splendor, and seem to be stars, as natural as the stars we saw shining when in our home at Stockholm, excepting that they appear larger. "The Smoky God," therefore, with each daily revolution of the earth, appears to come up in the east and go down in the west, the same as does our sun on the external surface. In reality, the people "within" believe that

[p. 117]

[paragraph continues] "The Smoky God" is the throne of their Jehovah, and is stationary. The effect of night and day is, therefore, produced by the earth's daily rotation.

I have since discovered that the language of the people of the Inner World is much like the Sanskrit.

After we had given an account of ourselves to the emissaries from the central seat of government of the inner continent, and my father had, in his crude way, drawn maps, at their request, of the "outside" surface of the earth, showing the divisions of land and water, and giving the name of each of the continents, large islands and the oceans, we were taken overland to the city of "Eden," in a conveyance different from anything

[p. 118]

we have in Europe or America. This vehicle was doubtless some electrical contrivance. It was noiseless, and ran on a single iron rail in perfect balance. The trip was made at a very high rate of speed. We were carried up hills and down dales, across valleys and again along the sides of steep mountains, without any apparent attempt having been made to level the earth as we do for railroad tracks. The car seats were huge yet comfortable affairs, and very high above the floor of the car. On the top of each car were high geared fly wheels lying on their sides, which were so automatically adjusted that, as the speed of the car increased, the high speed of these fly wheels geometrically increased.

[p. 119]

[paragraph continues] Jules Galdea explained to us that these revolving fan-like wheels on top of the cars destroyed atmospheric pressure, or what is generally understood by the term gravitation, and with this force thus destroyed or rendered nugatory the car is as safe from falling to one side or the other from the single rail track as if it were in a vacuum; the fly wheels in their rapid revolutions destroying effectually the so-called power of gravitation, or the force of atmospheric pressure or whatever potent influence it may be that causes all unsupported things to fall downward to the earth's surface or to the nearest point of resistance.

The surprise of my father and myself was indescribable when, amid the regal magnificence of a spacious hall,

[p. 120]

we were finally brought before the Great High Priest, ruler over all the land. He was richly robed, and much taller than those about him, and could not have been less than fourteen or fifteen feet in height. The immense room in which we were received seemed finished in solid slabs of gold thickly studded with jewels of amazing brilliancy.

The city of "Eden" is located in what seems to be a beautiful valley, yet, in fact, it is on the loftiest mountain plateau of the Inner . Continent, several thousand feet higher than any portion of the surrounding country. It is the most beautiful place I have ever beheld in all my travels. In this elevated garden all manner of fruits, vines, shrubs, trees,

[p. 121]

Click to enlarge
"We were brought before the Great High Priest."

[p. 122] [p. 123]

and flowers grow in riotous profusion.

In this garden four rivers have their source in a mighty artesian fountain. They divide and flow in four directions. This place is called by the inhabitants the "navel of the earth," or the beginning, "the cradle of the human race." The names of the rivers are the Euphrates, the Pison, the Gihon, and the Hiddekel. [*1]

The unexpected awaited us in this palace of beauty, in the finding of our little fishing-craft. It had been brought before the High Priest in perfect shape, just as it had been

[p. 124]

taken from the waters that day when it was loaded on board the ship by the people who discovered us on the river more than a year before.

We were given an audience of over two hours with this great dignitary, who seemed kindly disposed and considerate. He showed himself eagerly interested, asking us numerous questions, and invariably regarding things about which his emissaries had failed to inquire.

At the conclusion of the interview he inquired our pleasure, asking us whether we wished to remain in his country or if we preferred to return to the "outer" world, providing it were possible to make a successful return trip, across the frozen belt barriers that encircle both the northern

[p. 125]

and southern openings of the earth.

My father replied: "It would please me and my son to visit your country and see your people, your colleges and palaces of music and art, your great fields, your wonderful forests of timber; and after we have had this pleasurable privilege, we should like to try to return to our home on the `outside' surface of the earth. This son is my only child, and my good wife will be weary awaiting our return."

"I fear you can never return," replied the Chief High Priest, "because the way is a most hazardous one. However, you shall visit the different countries with Jules Galdea as your escort, and be accorded every courtesy and kindness. Whenever you

[p. 126]

are ready to attempt a return voyage, I assure you that your boat which is here on exhibition shall be put in the waters of the river Heddekel at its mouth, and we will bid you Jehovah-speed."

Thus terminated our only interview with the High Priest or Ruler of the continent.

Footnotes

^83:1 In vol. I, page 196, Nansen writes: "It is a peculiar phenomenon,--this dead water. We had at present a better opportunity of studying it than we desired. It occurs where a surface layer of fresh water rests upon the salt water of the sea, and this fresh water is carried along with the ship gliding on the heavier sea beneath it as if on a fixed foundation. The difference between the two strata was in this case so great that while we had drinking water on the surface, the water we got from the bottom cock of the engine-room was far too salt to be used for the boiler."

^85:1 In volume II, pages 18 and 19, Nansen writes about the inclination of the needle. Speaking of Johnson, his aide: "One day--it was November 24th--he came in to supper a little after six o'clock, quite alarmed, and said: 'There has just been a singular inclination of the needle in twenty-four degrees. And remarkably enough, its northern extremity pointed to the east.'"

We again find in Peary's first voyage--page 67,--the following: "It had been observed that from the moment they had entered Lancaster Sound, the motion of the compass needle was very sluggish, and both this and its deviation increased as they progressed to the westward, and continued to do so in descending this [p. 86] inlet. Having reached latitude 73 degrees, they witnessed for the first time the curious phenomenon of the directive power of the needle becoming so weak as to be completely overcome by the attraction of the ship, so that the needle might now be said to point to the north pole of the ship."

^92:1 Nansen, on page 394, says: "Today another noteworthy thing happened, which was that about midday we saw the sun, or to be more correct, an image of the sun, for it was only a mirage. A peculiar impression was produced by the sight of that glowing fire lit just above the outermost edge of the ice. According to the enthusiastic descriptions given by many Arctic travelers of the first appearance of this god of life e after the long winter night, the impression ought to be one of jubilant excitement; but it was not so in my case. We had not expected to see it [p. 93] for some days yet, so that my feeling was rather one of pain, of disappointment, that we must have drifted farther south than we thought. So it was with pleasure I soon discovered that it could not be the sun itself. The mirage was at first a flattened-out, glowing red streak of fire on the horizon; later there were two streaks, the one above the other, with a dark space between; and from the maintop I could see four, or even five, such horizontal lines directly over one another, all of equal length, as if one could only imagine a square, dull-red sun, with horizontal dark streaks across it."

^95:1 Peary's first voyage, pages 69 and 95 [p. 96] 70, says: "On, reaching Sir Byam Martin's Island, the nearest to Melville Island, the latitude of the place of observation was 75 degrees-09'-23", and the longitude 103 degrees-44'-37"; the dip of the magnetic needle 88 degrees-25'-58" west in the longitude of 91 degrees-48', where the last observations on the shore had been made, to 165 degrees-50'-09", east, at their present station, so that [p. 97] we had," says Peary, "in sailing over the space included between these two meridians, crossed immediately northward of the magnetic pole, and had undoubtedly passed over one of those spots upon the globe where the needle would have been found to vary 180 degrees, or in other words, where the North Pole would have pointed to the south."

^99:1 Asiatic Mythology,--page 240, "Paradise Found"--from translation by Sayce, in a book called "Records of the Past," we were told of a "dwelling" which "the gods created for" the first human beings,--a dwelling [p. 100] in which they "became great" and "increased in numbers," and the location of which is described in words exactly corresponding to those of Iranian, Indian, Chinese, Eddaic and Aztecan literature; namely, "in the center of the earth."--Warren.

^106:1 "According to all procurable data, that spot at the era of man's appearance upon the stage was in the now lost 'Miocene continent,' which then surrounded the Arctic Pole. That in that true, original Eden some of the early generations of men attained to a stature and longevity unequaled in any countries known to postdiluvian history is by no means scientifically incredible."--Wm. F. Warren, "Paradise Found," p. 284.

^123:1 "And the Lord God planted a garden, and out of the ground made the Lord God to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight and good for food."--The Book of Genesis.

     
The Smoky God, by Willis George Emerson, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 127]

  

PART FOUR

  

IN THE UNDER WORLD

WE learned that the males do not marry before they are from seventy-five to one hundred years old, and that the age at which women enter wedlock is only a little less, and that both men and women frequently live to be from six to eight hundred years old, and in some instances much older. [*1]

[p. 128]

During the following year we visited many villages and towns, prominent among them being the cities of Nigi, Delfi, Hectea, and my father was called upon no less than a half-dozen times to go over the maps which had been made from the rough sketches he had originally given of the divisions of land and water on the "outside" surface of the earth.

I remember hearing my father remark that the giant race of people in the land of "The Smoky God" had

[p. 129]

almost as accurate an idea of the geography of the "outside" surface of the earth as had the average college professor in Stockholm.

In our travels we came to a forest of gigantic trees, near the city of Delfi. Had the Bible said there were trees towering over three hundred feet in height, and more than thirty feet in diameter, growing in the Garden of Eden, the Ingersolls, the Tom Paines and Voltaires would doubtless have pronounced the statement a myth. Yet this is the description of the California sequoia gigantea; but these California giants pale into insignificance when compared with the forest Goliaths found in the "within" continent, where abound mighty trees from eight hundred to one thousand

[p. 130]

feet in height, and from one hundred to one hundred and twenty feet in diameter; countless in numbers and forming forests extending hundreds of miles back from the sea.

The people are exceedingly musical, and learned to a remarkable degree in their arts and sciences, especially geometry and astronomy. Their cities are equipped with vast palaces of music, where not infrequently as many as twenty-five thousand lusty voices of this giant race swell forth in mighty choruses of the most sublime symphonies.

The children are not supposed to attend institutions of learning before they are twenty years old. Then their school life begins and continues for thirty years, ten of which are

[p. 131]

uniformly devoted by both sexes to the study of music.

Their principal vocations are architecture, agriculture, horticulture, the raising of vast herds of cattle, and the building of conveyances peculiar to that country, for travel on land and water. By some device which I cannot explain, they hold communion with one another between the most distant parts of their country, on air currents.

All buildings are erected with special regard to strength, durability, beauty and symmetry, and with a style of architecture vastly more attractive to the eye than any I have ever observed elsewhere.

About three-fourths of the "inner" surface of the earth is land and

[p. 132]

about one-fourth water. There are numerous rivers of tremendous size, some flowing in a northerly direction and others southerly. Some of these rivers are thirty miles in width, and it is out of these vast waterways, at the extreme northern and southern parts of the "inside" surface of the earth, in regions where low temperatures are experienced, that freshwater icebergs are formed. They are then pushed out to sea like huge tongues of ice, by the abnormal freshets of turbulent waters that, twice every year, sweep everything before them.

We saw innumerable specimens of bird-life no larger than those encountered in the forests of Europe or America. It is well known that during

[p. 133]

the last few years whole species of birds have quit the earth. A writer in a recent article on this subject says: [*1]

Is it not possible that these disappearing bird species quit their habitation without, and find an asylum in the "within world"?

Whether inland among the mountains, or along the seashore, we found bird life prolific. When they spread their great wings some of the birds appeared to measure thirty feet from

[p. 134]

tip to tip. They are of great variety and many colors. We were permitted to climb up on the edge of a rock and examine a nest of eggs. There were five in the nest, each of which was at least two feet in length and fifteen inches in diameter.

After we had been in the city of Hectea about a week, Professor Galdea took us to an inlet, where we saw thousands of tortoises along the sandy shore. I hesitate to state the size of these great creatures. They were from twenty-five to thirty feet in length, from fifteen to twenty feet in width -and fully seven feet in height. When one of them projected its head it had the appearance of some hideous sea monster.

The strange conditions "within"

[p. 135]

Click to enlarge
"There must have been five hundred of these thunder-throated monsters."

[p. 136] [p. 137]

are favorable not only for vast meadows of luxuriant grasses, forests of giant trees, and all manner of vegetable life, but wonderful animal life as well.

One day we saw a great herd of elephants. There must have been five hundred of these thunder-throated monsters, with their restlessly waving trunks. They were tearing huge boughs from the trees and trampling smaller growth into dust like so much hazel-brush. They would average over 100 feet in length and from 75 to 85 in height.

It seemed, as I gazed upon this wonderful herd of giant elephants, that I was again living in the public library at Stockholm, where I had spent much time studying the wonders

[p. 138]

of the Miocene age. I was filled with mute astonishment, and my father was speechless with awe. He held my arm with a protecting grip, as if fearful harm would overtake us. We were two atoms in this great forest, and, fortunately, unobserved by this vast herd of elephants as they drifted on and away, following a leader as does a herd of sheep. They browsed from growing herbage which they encountered as they traveled, and now and again shook the firmament with their deep bellowing. [*1]

[p. 139]

There is a hazy mist that goes up from the land each evening, and it invariably rains once every twenty-four hours. This great moisture and the invigorating electrical light and warmth account perhaps for the luxuriant vegetation, while the highly charged electrical air and the evenness of climatic conditions may have much to do with the giant growth and longevity of all animal life.

In places the level valleys stretched away for many miles in every direction. "The Smoky God," in its clear white light, looked calmly down. There was an intoxication in the electrically surcharged air that fanned

[p. 140]

the cheek as softly as a vanishing whisper. Nature chanted a lullaby in the faint murmur of winds whose breath was sweet with the fragrance of bud and blossom.

After having spent considerably more than a year in visiting several of the many cities of the "within" world and a great deal of intervening country, and more than two years had passed from the time we had been picked up by the great excursion ship on the river, we decided to cast our fortunes once more upon the sea, and endeavor to regain the "outside" surface of the earth.

We made known our wishes, and they were reluctantly but promptly followed. Our hosts gave my father, at his request, various maps showing

[p. 141]

the entire "inside" surface of the earth, its cities, oceans, seas, rivers, gulfs and bays. They also generously offered to give us all the bags of gold nuggets--some of them as large as a goose's egg--that we were willing to attempt to take with us in our little fishing-boat.

In due time we returned to Jehu, at which place we spent one month in fixing up and overhauling our little fishing sloop. After all was in readiness, the same ship "Naz" that originally discovered us, took us on board and sailed to the mouth of the river Hiddekel.

After our giant brothers had launched our little craft for us, they were most cordially regretful at parting, and evinced much solicitude for

[p. 142]

our safety. My father swore by the Gods Odin and Thor that he would surely return again within a year or two and pay them another visit. And thus we bade them adieu. We made ready and hoisted our sail, but there was little breeze. We were becalmed within an hour after our giant friends had left us and started on their return trip.

The winds were constantly blowing south, that is, they were blowing from the northern opening of the earth toward that which we knew to be south, but which, according to our compass's pointing finger, was directly north.

For three days we tried to sail, and to beat against the wind, but to no avail. Whereupon my father said: "My son, to return by the same route

[p. 143]

as we came in is impossible at this time of year. I wonder why we did not think of this before. We have been here almost two and a half years; therefore, this is the season when the sun is beginning to shine in at the southern opening of the earth. The long cold night is on in the Spitzbergen country."

"What shall we do?" I inquired.

"There is only one thing we can do," my father replied, "and that is to go south." Accordingly, he turned the craft about, gave it full reef, and started by the compass north but, in fact, directly south. The wind was strong, and we seemed to have struck a current that was running with remarkable swiftness in the same direction.

[p. 144]

In just forty days we arrived at Delfi, a city we had visited in company with our guides Jules Galdea and his wife, near the mouth of the Gihon river. Here we stopped for two days, and were most hospitably entertained by the same people who had welcomed us on our former visit. We laid in some additional provisions and again set sail, following the needle due north.

On our outward trip we came through a narrow channel which appeared to be a separating body of water between two considerable bodies of land. There was a beautiful beach to our right, and we decided to reconnoiter. Casting anchor, we waded ashore to rest up for a day before continuing the outward hazardous

[p. 145]

undertaking. We built a fire and threw on some sticks of dry driftwood. While my father was walking along the shore, I prepared a tempting repast from supplies we had provided.

There was a mild, luminous light which my father said resulted from the sun shining in from the south aperture of the earth. That night we slept soundly, and awakened the next morning as refreshed as if we had been in our own beds at Stockholm.

After breakfast we started out on an inland tour of discovery, but had not gone far when we sighted some birds which we recognized at once as belonging to the penguin family. They are flightless birds, but excellent swimmers and tremendous in size,

[p. 146]

with white breast, short wings, black head, and long peaked bills. They stand fully nine feet high. They looked at us with little surprise, and presently waddled, rather than walked, toward the water, and swam away in a northerly direction. [*1]

The events that occurred during the following hundred or more days beggar description. We were on an open and iceless sea. The month we reckoned to be November or December, and we knew the so-called South

[p. 147]

[paragraph continues] Pole was turned toward the sun. Therefore, when passing out and away from the internal electrical light of "The Smoky God" and its genial warmth, we would be met by the light and warmth of the sun, shining in through the south opening of the earth. We were not mistaken. [*1]

There were times when our little craft, driven by wind that was  and persistent, shot through the waters like an arrow. Indeed,

[p. 148]

had we encountered a hidden rock or obstacle, our little vessel would have been crushed into kindling-wood.

At last we were conscious that the atmosphere was growing decidedly colder, and, a few days later, icebergs were sighted far to the left. My father argued, and correctly, that the winds which filled our sails came from the warm climate "within." The time of the year was certainly most auspicious for us to make our dash for the "outside" world and attempt to scud our fishing sloop through open channels of the frozen zone which surrounds the polar regions.

We were soon amid the ice-packs, and how our little craft got through the narrow channels and escaped being crushed I know not. The compass

[p. 149]

behaved in the same drunken and unreliable fashion in passing over the southern curve or edge of the earth's shell as it had done on our inbound trip at the northern entrance. It gyrated, dipped and seemed like a thing possessed. [*1]

[p. 150]

One day as I was lazily looking over the sloop's side into the clear waters, my father shouted: "Breakers ahead!" Looking up, I saw through a lifting mist a white object that towered several hundred feet high, completely shutting off our advance. We lowered sail immediately, and none too soon. In a moment we found ourselves wedged between two monstrous icebergs. Each was crowding and grinding against its fellow mountain of ice. They were like two gods of war contending for supremacy. We were greatly alarmed. Indeed, we were between the lines of a battle royal; the sonorous thunder of the grinding ice was like the continued volleys of artillery. Blocks of ice larger than a house were frequently

[p. 151]

Click to enlarge
"My father shouted: 'Breakers ahead!'"

[p. 152] [p. 153]

lifted up a hundred feet by the mighty force of lateral pressure; they would shudder and rock to and fro for a few seconds, then come crashing down with a deafening roar, and disappear in the foaming waters. Thus, for more than two hours, the contest of the icy giants continued.

It seemed as if the end had come. The ice pressure was terrific, and while we were not caught in the dangerous part of the jam, and were safe for the time being, yet the heaving and rending of tons of ice as it fell splashing here and there into the watery depths filled us with shaking fear.

Finally, to our great joy, the grinding of the ice ceased, and within a few hours the great mass slowly divided,

[p. 154]

and, as if an act of Providence had been performed, right before us lay an open channel. Should we venture with our little craft into this opening? If the pressure came on again, our little sloop as well as ourselves would be crushed into nothingness. We decided to take the chance, and, accordingly, hoisted our sail to a favoring breeze, and soon started out like a race-horse, running the gauntlet of this unknown narrow channel of open water.

Footnotes

^127:1 Josephus says: "God prolonged the life of the patriarchs that preceded the deluge, both on account of their virtues and to give them the opportunity of perfecting the sciences [p. 128] of geometry and astronomy, which they had discovered; which they could not have done if they had not lived 600 years, because it is only after the lapse of 600 years that the great year is accomplished."--Flammarion, Astronomical Myths, Paris p. 26.

^133:1 "Almost every year sees the final extinction of one or more bird species. Out of fourteen varieties of birds found a century since on a single island--the West Indian island of St. Thomas--eight have now to be numbered among the missing."

^138:1 "Moreover, there were a great number of elephants in the island: and there was provision for animals of every kind. Also whatever fragrant things there are in the earth, whether roots or herbage, or woods, [p. 139] or distilling drops of flowers or fruits, grew and thrived in that land."--The Cratyluo of Plato.

^146:1 "The nights are never so dark at the Poles as in other regions, for the moon and stars seem to possess twice as much light and effulgence. In addition, there is a continuous light, the varied shades and play of which are amongst the strangest phenomena of nature."--Rambrosson's Astronomy.

^147:1 "The fact that gives the phenomenon of the polar aurora its greatest importance is that the earth becomes self-luminous; that, besides the light which as a planet is received from the central body, it shows a capability of sustaining a luminous process proper to itself ."--Humboldt.

^149:1 Captain Sabine, on page 105 in "Voyages in the Arctic Regions," says: "The geographical determination of the direction and intensity of the magnetic forces at different points of the earth's surface has been regarded as an object worthy of especial research. To examine in different parts of the globe, the declination, inclination and intensity of the magnetic force, and their periodical and secular variations, and mutual relations and dependencies could be duly investigated only in fixed magnetical observatories."

     
The Smoky God, by Willis George Emerson, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 155]

  

PART FIVE

  

AMONG THE ICE PACKS

FOR the next forty-five days our time was employed in dodging icebergs and hunting channels; indeed, had we not been favored with a strong south wind and a small boat, I doubt if this story could have ever been given to the world.

At last, there came a morning when my father said: "My son, I think we are to see home. We are almost through the ice. See! the open water lies before us."

However, there were a few icebergs

[p. 156]

that had floated far northward into the open water still ahead of us on either side, stretching away for many miles. Directly in front of us, and by the compass, which had now righted itself, due north, there was an open sea.

"What a wonderful story we have to tell to the people of Stockholm," continued my father, while a look of pardonable elation lighted up his honest face. "And think of the gold nuggets stowed away in the hold!"

I spoke kind words of praise to my father, not alone for his fortitude and endurance, but also for his courageous daring as a discoverer, and for having made the voyage that now promised a successful end. I was grateful, too, that he had gathered

[p. 157]

the wealth of gold we were carrying home.

While congratulating ourselves on the goodly supply of provisions and water we still had on hand, and on the dangers we had escaped, we were startled by hearing a most terrific explosion, caused by the tearing apart of a huge mountain of ice. It was a deafening roar like the firing of a thousand cannon. We were sailing at the time with great speed, and happened to be near a monstrous iceberg which to all appearances was as immovable as a rockbound island. It seemed, however, that the iceberg had split and was breaking apart, whereupon the balance of the monster along which we were sailing was destroyed, and it began dipping from us. My

[p. 158]

father quickly anticipated the danger before I realized its awful possibilities. The iceberg extended down into the water many hundreds of feet, and, as it tipped over, the portion coming up out of the water caught our fishing-craft like a lever on a fulcrum, and threw it into the air as if it had been a foot-ball.

Our boat fell back on the iceberg, that by this time had changed the side next to us for the top. My father was still in the boat, having become entangled in the rigging, while I was thrown some twenty feet away.

I quickly scrambled to my feet and shouted to my father, who answered: "All is well." Just then a realization dawned upon me. Horror upon horror! The blood froze in my veins.

[p. 159]

The iceberg was still in motion, and its great weight and force in toppling over would cause it to submerge temporarily. I fully realized what a sucking maelstrom it would produce amid the worlds of water on every side. They would rush into the depression in all their fury, like white-fanged wolves eager for human prey.

In this supreme moment of mental anguish, I remember glancing at our boat, which was lying on its side, and wondering if it could possibly right itself, and if my father could escape. Was this the end of our struggles and adventures? Was this death? All these questions flashed through my mind in the fraction of a second, and a moment later I was engaged in a life and death struggle. The ponderous

[p. 160]

monolith of ice sank below the surface, and the frigid waters gurgled around me in frenzied anger. I was in a saucer, with the waters pouring in on every side. A moment more and I lost consciousness.

When I partially recovered my senses, and roused from the swoon of a half-drowned man, I found myself wet, stiff, and almost frozen, lying on the iceberg. But there was no sign of my father or of our little fishing sloop. The monster berg had recovered itself, and, with its new balance, lifted its head perhaps fifty feet above the waves. The top of this island of ice was a plateau perhaps half an acre in extent.

I loved my father well, and was grief-stricken at the awfulness of his

[p. 161]

death. I railed at fate, that I, too, had not been permitted to sleep with him in the depths of the ocean. Finally, I climbed to my feet and looked about me. The purple-domed sky above, the shoreless green ocean beneath, and only an occasional iceberg discernible! My heart sank in hopeless despair. I cautiously picked my way across the berg toward the other side, hoping that our fishing craft had righted itself.

Dared I think it possible that my father still lived? It was but a ray of hope that flamed up in my heart. But the anticipation warmed my blood in my veins and started it rushing like some rare stimulant through every fiber of my body.

I crept close to the precipitous side

[p. 162]

of the iceberg, and peered far down, hoping, still hoping. Then I made a circle of the berg, scanning every foot of the way, and thus I kept going around and around. One part of my brain was certainly becoming maniacal, while the other part, I believe, and do to this day, was perfectly rational.

I was conscious of having made the circuit a dozen times, and while one part of my intelligence knew, in all reason, there was not a vestige of hope, yet some strange fascinating aberration bewitched and compelled me still to beguile myself with expectation. The other part of my brain seemed to tell me that while there was no possibility of my father being alive, yet, if I quit making the circuitous

[p. 163]

pilgrimage, if I paused for a single moment, it would be acknowledgment of defeat, and, should I do this, I felt that I should go mad. Thus, hour after hour I walked around and around, afraid to stop and rest, yet physically powerless to continue much longer. Oh! horror of horrors! to be cast away in this wide expanse of waters without food or drink, and only a treacherous iceberg for an abiding place. My heart sank within me, and all semblance of hope was fading into black despair.

Then the hand of the Deliverer was extended, and the death-like stillness of a solitude rapidly becoming unbearable was suddenly broken by the firing of a signal-gun. I looked up in startled amazement, when, I saw, less

[p. 164]

than a half-mile away, a whaling-vessel bearing down toward me with her sail full set.

Evidently my continued activity on the iceberg had attracted their attention. On drawing near, they put out a boat, and, descending cautiously to the water's edge, I was rescued, and a little later lifted on board the whaling-ship.

I found it was a Scotch whaler, "The Arlington." She had cleared from Dundee in September, and started immediately for the Antarctic, in search of whales. The captain, Angus MacPherson, seemed kindly disposed, but in matters of discipline, as I soon learned, possessed of an iron will. When I attempted to tell him that I had come from the "inside" of

[p. 165]

Click to enlarge
"Less than a half mile away was a whaling vessel."

[p. 166] [p. 167]

the earth, the captain and mate looked at each other, shook their heads, and insisted on my being put in a bunk under strict surveillance of the ship's physician.

I was very weak for want of food, and had not slept for many hours. However, after a few days' rest, I got up one morning and dressed myself without asking permission of the physician or anyone else, and told them that I was as sane as anyone.

The captain sent for me and again questioned me concerning where I had come from, and how I came to be alone on an iceberg in the far off Antarctic Ocean. I replied that I had just come from the "inside" of the earth, and proceeded to tell him how my father and myself had gone in by

[p. 168]

way of Spitzbergen, and come out by way of the South Pole country, whereupon I was put in irons. I afterward heard the captain tell the mate that I was as crazy as a March hare, and that I must remain in confinement until I was rational enough to give a truthful account of myself.

Finally, after much pleading and many promises, I was released from irons. I then and there decided to invent some story that would satisfy the captain, and never again refer to my trip to the land of "The Smoky God," at least until I was safe among friends.

Within a fortnight I was permitted to go about and take my place as one of the seamen. A little later the captain asked me for an explanation. I

[p. 169]

Click to enlarge
"Whereupon I was put in irons."

[p. 170] [p. 171]

told him that my experience had been so horrible that I was fearful of my memory, and begged him to permit me to leave the question unanswered until some time in the future. "I think you are recovering considerably," he said, "but you are not sane yet by a good deal." "Permit me to do such work as you may assign," I replied, "and if it does not compensate you sufficiently, I will pay you immediately after I reach Stockholm--to the last penny." Thus the matter rested.

On finally reaching Stockholm, as I have already related, I found that my good mother had gone to her reward more than a year before. I have also told how, later, the treachery of a relative landed me in a mad-house,

[p. 172]

where I remained for twenty-eight years--seemingly unending years--and, still later, after my release, how I returned to the life of a fisherman, following it sedulously for twenty-seven years, then how I came to America, and finally to Los Angeles, California. But all this can be of little interest to the reader. Indeed, it seems to me the climax of my wonderful travels and strange adventures was reached when the Scotch sailing-vessel took me from an iceberg on the Antarctic Ocean.

     
The Smoky God, by Willis George Emerson, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 173]

  

PART SIX

  

CONCLUSION

IN concluding this history of my adventures, I wish to state that I firmly believe science is yet in its infancy concerning the cosmology of the earth. There is so much that is unaccounted for by the world's accepted knowledge of to-day, and will ever remain so until the land of "The Smoky God" is known and recognized by our geographers.

It is the land from whence came the great logs of cedar that have been found by explorers in open waters far over the northern edge of

[p. 174]

the earth's crust, and also the bodies of mammoths whose bones are found in vast beds on the Siberian coast.

Northern explorers have done much. Sir John Franklin, De Haven Grinnell, Sir John Murray, Kane, Melville, Hall, Nansen, Schwatka, Greely, Peary, Ross, Gerlache, Bernacchi, Andree, Amsden, Amundson and others have all been striving to storm the frozen citadel of mystery.

I firmly believe that Andree and his two brave companions, Strindberg and Fraenckell, who sailed away in the balloon "Oreon" from the northwest coast of Spitzbergen on that Sunday afternoon of July 11, 1897, are now in the "within" world, and doubtless are being entertained,

[p. 175]

as my father and myself were entertained by the kind-hearted giant race inhabiting the inner Atlantic Continent.

Having, in my humble way, devoted years to these problems, I am well acquainted with the accepted definitions of gravity, as well as the cause of the magnetic needle's attraction, and I am prepared to say that it is my firm belief that the magnetic needle is influenced solely by electric currents which completely envelop the earth like a garment, and that these electric currents in an endless circuit pass out of the southern end of the earth's cylindrical opening, diffusing and spreading themselves over all the "outside" surface, and rushing madly on in their course

[p. 176]

toward the North Pole. And while these currents seemingly dash off into space at the earth's curve or edge, yet they drop again to the "inside" surface and continue their way southward along the inside of the earth's crust, toward the opening of the so-called South Pole. [*1]

As to gravity, no one knows what it is, because it has not been determined

[p. 177]

whether it is atmospheric pressure that causes the apple to fall, or whether, 150 miles below the surface of the earth, supposedly one-half way through the earth's crust, there exists some powerful loadstone attraction that draws it. Therefore, whether the-apple, when it leaves the limb of the tree, is drawn or impelled downward to the nearest point of resistance, is unknown to the students of physics.

Sir James Ross claimed to have discovered the magnetic pole at about seventy-four degrees latitude. This is wrong--the magnetic pole is exactly one-half the distance through the earth's crust. Thus, if the earth's crust is three hundred miles in thickness, which is the distance I

[p. 178]

estimate it to be, then the magnetic pole is undoubtedly one hundred and fifty miles below the surface of the earth, it matters not where the test is made. And at this particular point one hundred and fifty miles below the surface, gravity ceases, becomes neutralized; and when we pass beyond that point on toward the "inside" surface of the earth, a reverse attraction geometrically increases in power, until the other one hundred and fifty miles of distance is traversed, which would bring us out on the "inside" of the earth.

Thus, if a hole were bored down through the earth's crust at London, Paris, New York, Chicago, or Los-Angeles, a distance of three hundred miles, it would connect the two surfaces.

[p. 179]

[paragraph continues] While the inertia and momentum of a weight dropped in from the "outside" surface would carry it far past the magnetic center, yet, before reaching the "inside" surface of the earth it would gradually diminish in speed, after passing the halfway point, finally pause and immediately fall back toward the "outside" surface, and continue thus to oscillate, like the swinging of a pendulum with the power removed, until it would finally rest at the magnetic center, or at that particular point exactly one-half the distance between the "outside" surface and the "inside" surface of the earth.

The gyration of the earth in its daily act of whirling around in its spiral rotation--at a rate greater

[p. 180]

than one thousand miles every hour, or about seventeen miles per second--makes of it a vast electro-generating body, a huge machine, a mighty prototype of the puny-man-made dynamo, which, at best, is but a feeble imitation of nature's original.

The valleys of this inner Atlantis Continent, bordering the upper waters of the farthest north are in season covered with the most magnificent and luxuriant flowers. Not hundreds and thousands, but millions, of acres, from which the pollen or blossoms are carried far away in almost every direction by the earth's spiral gyrations and the agitation of the wind resulting therefrom, and it is these blossoms or pollen from the vast floral meadows "within" that

[p. 181]

produce the colored snows of the Arctic regions that have so mystified the northern explorers. [*1]

Beyond question, this new land

[p. 182]

[paragraph continues] "within" is the home, the cradle, of the human race, and viewed from the standpoint of the discoveries made by us, must of necessity have a most important bearing on all physical, paleontological, archaeological, philological and mythological theories of antiquity.

The same idea of going back to the land of mystery--to the very beginning--to the origin of man--is found in Egyptian traditions of the earlier terrestrial regions of the gods, heroes and men, from the historical fragments of Manetho, fully verified by the historical records taken from the more recent excavations of Pompeii as well as the traditions of the North American Indians.

_____

[p. 183]

It is now one hour past midnight--the new year of 1908 is here, and this is the third day thereof, and having at last finished the record of my strange travels and adventures I wish given to the world, I am ready, and even longing, for the peaceful rest which I am sure will follow life's trials and vicissitudes. I am old in years, and ripe both with adventures and sorrows, yet rich with the few friends I have cemented to me in my struggles to lead a just and upright life. Like a story that is well-nigh told, my life is ebbing away. The presentiment is strong within me that I shall not live to see the rising of another sun. Thus do I conclude my message.

OLAF JANSEN.

Footnotes

^176:1 "Mr. Lemstrom concluded that an electric discharge which could only be seen by means of the spectroscope was taking place on the surface of the ground all around him, and that from a distance it would appear as a faint display of Aurora, the phenomena of pale and flaming light which is some times seen on the top of the Spitzbergen Mountains."--The Arctic Manual, page 739.

^181:1 Kane, vol. I, page 44, says: "We passed the 'crimson cliffs' of Sir John Ross in the forenoon of August 5th. The patches of red snow from which they derive their name could be seen clearly at the distance of ten miles from the coast."

La Chambre, in an account of Andree's balloon expedition, on page 144, says: "On the isle of Amsterdam the snow is tinted with red for a considerable distance, and the savants are collecting it to examine it microscopically. It presents, in fact, certain peculiarities; it is thought that it contains very small plants. Scoreby, the famous whaler, had already remarked this."

     
The Smoky God, by Willis George Emerson, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 184]

  

PART SEVEN

  

AUTHOR'S AFTERWORD

I FOUND much difficulty in deciphering and editing the manuscripts of Olaf Jansen. However, I have taken the liberty of reconstructing only a very few expressions, and in doing this have in no way changed the spirit or meaning. Otherwise, the original text has neither been added to nor taken from.

It is impossible for me to express my opinion as to the value or reliability of the wonderful statements made by Olaf Jansen. The description here given of the strange lands

[p. 185]

and people visited by him, location of cities, the names and directions of rivers, and other information herein combined, conform in every way to the rough drawings given into my custody by this ancient Norseman, which drawings together with the manuscript it is my intention at some later date to give to the Smithsonian Institution, to preserve for the benefit of those interested in the mysteries of the "Farthest North "--the frozen circle of silence. It is certain there are many things in Vedic literature, in "Josephus," the "Odyssey," the "Iliad," Terrien de Lacouperie's "Early History of Chinese Civilization," Flammarion's "Astronomical Myths, "Lenormant's "Beginnings of History," Hesiod's "Theogony,"

[p. 186]

Sir John de Maundeville's writings, and Sayce's "Records of the Past," that, to say the least, are strangely in harmony with the seemingly incredible text found in the yellow manuscript of the old Norseman, Olaf Jansen, and now for the first time given to the world.

 

 

 

THE END

 

 

    
The Smoky God, by Willis George Emerson, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[]

The following advertisements are transcribed from the original book. They are included for completness.

By WILLIS GEORGE EMERSON

  

BUELL HAMPTON

A TALE OF LOVE, OF SURPRISES,

OF A MYSTERY

"Buell Hampton " is a good story in every particular. Nothing better has been done in its line.--The Mirror (St. Louis).

One of the leading books of the year. Every page breathes; is alive with people who do things and say bright and witty things.--Chicago Journal.

As a distinctly American novel, "Buell Hampton" has, for abundance of thrilling incident and pure interestingness, no superior.--Albany Times-Union.

Many a year has passed since so strong, so bright, and so clever a novel as "Buell Hampton" has made its appearance. There are no dull patches in it. Every page is filled with dewy freshness.--Opie Read.

From the very beginning the reader is impressed with its plot and striking incidents. Buell Hampton is a character we have never met in books. The romance is absorbingly interesting. There are plenty of surprises in the book, and once begun the reader will not be satisfied until lie has finished the story.--Philadelphia Telegraph.

Popular edition, cloth. Price, 75 cents

FORBES & COMPANY, PUBLISHERS

CHICAGO

[]

By WILLIS GEORGE EMERSON

  

THE BUILDERS

Strikingly interesting.--Cincinnati Enquirer.

Has scored a great success.--Los Angeles Graphic.

A broad, powerful, successful novel.--New York Herald.

There is no story of the West like it.--Boston Globe.

A really notable story of the West.--Philadelphia Press.

In reading "The Builders" one reaches the heights of tragedy and melodrama.--San Francisco Bulletin.

Not only readable, but downright interesting, for it possesses a romantic quality that lures on the reader, page after page.--Chicago Evening Post.

"The Builders " is a book for men who glory in accomplishments, for women who delight in detail, and for lovers who revel in sympathetic understanding.--Los Angeles Examiner.

Price, $1.50

FORBES & COMPANY, PUBLISHERS

CHICAGO

[]

BOOKS BY

  

NIXON WATERMAN

Nixon Waterman needs no introduction to the American public. One of our most natural and musical singers, his verses have been quoted in every newspaper in the land and have gone straight to the heart of the great army of "just common folks." He is always an optimist. The world is better--both happier and better--for such verses as these of Nixon Waterman.--The Chicago Record-Herald.

  

IN MERRY MOOD

A BOOK OF CHEERFUL RHYMES

Genuine poems, aglow with high and pure sentiment and sparkling with fetching humor.--The Congregationalist (Boston).

Nixon Waterman's verses touch the heart; they are the kind people love, and the kind that will live. He teaches the philosophy of garnering sunshine and his religion is the gospel of brotherly love and kindness.--The Worcester Gazette.

12mo, cloth, gilt top, 208 pp., $1.25

  

A BOOK OF VERSES

It will be impossible for those who love verse to read "A Book of Verses" without enjoyment, and more than one who ordinarily prefers to limit himself to prose will be beguiled by such numbers as these of Mr. Waterman.--The Chicago Tribune.

To have such a wholesome book on hand where the whole family can get at it is a wise provision on the part of any home-maker.--Boston Globe.

12mo, cloth, gilt top, 226 pp., $1.25

FORBES & COMPANY, PUBLISHERS

CHICAGO

[]

BOOKS BY

  

NIXON WATERMAN

  

BOY WANTED

A BOOK OF CHEERFUL COUNSEL

A book that will interest boys of all ages, and also their parents and teachers. The author has avoided the triteness common in books of advice and prepared a volume which any boy will read with pleasure.

"Boy Wanted" is an unusual achievement.--San Francisco Call.

I have never seen a better book for boys than "Boy Wanted."--Dr. E. A. Winship in Journal of Education.

His views are wholesome, homely, and optimistic, and appeal to every-day folks.--Woman's Home Companion.

Illustrated, beautifully bound, cloth, 8 vo.
 Price, $1.25

  

SONNETS OF A BUDDING BARD

A book of original, sparkling wit. There are fifty-two illustrations in three colors by John A. Williams that are worth the price of the book alone.--St. Louis Times.

It is rich.--Denver Times.

A more delightful book of poetry it would be hard to find. There is many a hearty laugh in its pages.--Indianapolis News.

Attractively bound, picture cover.
 Price, 75 cents

FORBES & COMPANY, PUBLISHERS

CHICAGO

 

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: sob.txt =====


     
Science of Breath, by Yogi Ramacharaka, pseud. William Atkinson, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

  

Science of Breath

  

A Complete Manual of

  

THE ORIENTAL BREATHING PHILOSOPHY

  

OF

  

Physical, Mental, Psychic and Spiritual Development

  

By YOGI RAMACHARAKA

  

YOGI PUBLICATION SOCIETY

  

CHICAGO, U. S. A.

  

[1904]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, October 2008. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

      
Science of Breath, by Yogi Ramacharaka, pseud. William Atkinson, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

  

INDEX

         	Chapter   I

      	 

     
     	Salaam

      	<page 5>

     
     	Chapter   II

      	 

     
     	"Breath Is Life"

      	<page 8>

     
     	Chapter   III

      	 

     
     	The Exoteric Theory of Breath

      	<page 12>

     
     	Chapter   IV

      	 

     
     	The Esoteric Theory of Breath

      	<page 18>

     
     	Chapter   V

      	 

     
     	The Nervous System

      	<page 23>

     
     	Chapter   VI

      	 

     
     	Nostril Breathing vs. Mouth Breathing

      	<page 27>

     
     	Chapter   VII

      	 

     
     	The Four Methods of Respiration

      	<page 32>

     
     	Chapter   VIII

      	 

     
     	How to Acquire the Yogi Complete Breath

      	<page 39>

     
     	Chapter   IX

      	 

     
     	Physiological Effect of the Complete Breath

      	<page 43>

     
     	Chapter   X

      	 

     
     	A Few Bits of Yogi Lore

      	<page 48>

     
     	Chapter   XI

      	 

     
     	The Seven Yogi Developing Exercises

      	<page 52>

     
     	Chapter   XII

      	 

     
     	Seven Minor Yogi Exercises

      	<page 57>

     
     	Chapter   XIII

      	 

     
     	Vibration and Yogi Rhythmic Breathing

      	<page 60>

     
     	Chapter   XIV

      	 

     
     	Phenomena of Yogi Psychic Breathing

      	<page 65>

     
     	Chapter   XV

      	 

     
     	More Phenomena of Yogi Psychic Breathing

      	<page 73>

     
     	Chapter   XVI

      	 

     
     	Yogi Spiritual Breathing

      	<page 83>

     
   
      
Science of Breath, by Yogi Ramacharaka, pseud. William Atkinson, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 5]

  

Chapter I

  

SALAAM

The western student is apt to be somewhat confused in his ideas regarding the Yogis and their philosophy and practice. Travelers to India have written great tales about the hordes of fakirs, mendicants and mountebanks who infest the great roads of India and the streets of its cities, and who impudently claim the title "Yogi." The Western student is scarcely to be blamed for thinking of the typical Yogi as an emaciated, fanatical, dirty, ignorant Hindu who either sits in a fixed posture until his body becomes ossified, or else holds his arm up in the air until it becomes stiff and withered and forever after remains in that position, or perhaps clenches his fist and holds it tight until his fingernails grow through the palms of his hands. That these people exist is true, but their claim to the title "Yogi" seems as absurd to the true Yogi as does the claim to the title "Doctor" on the part of the man who pares one's corns seem to the eminent surgeon, or as does the title of "Professor," as assumed by the street corner vendor of worm medicine, seem to the President of Harvard or Yale.

There have been for ages past in India and other Oriental countries men who devoted their time and attention to the development of Man, physically, mentally and spiritually. The experience of generations of earnest seekers has been handed down for centuries from teacher to pupil, and gradually a definite Yogi science was built up. To these investigations and teachings was finally applied the term "Yogi," from the Sanscrit word "Yug," meaning "to join," From

[p. 6]

the same source comes the English word "yoke," with a similar meaning. Its use in connection with these teachings is difficult to trace, different authorities, giving different explanations, but probably the most ingenious is that which holds that it is intended as the Hindu equivalent for the idea conveyed by the English phrase, "getting into harness," or "yoking up," as the Yogi undoubtedly "gets into harness" in his work of controlling the body and mind by the Will.

Yoga is divided into several branches, ranging from that which teaches the control of the body, to that which teaches the attainment of the highest spiritual development. In the work we will not go into the higher phases of the subject, except when the "Science of Breath" touches upon the same. The "Science of Breath" touches Yoga at many points, and although chiefly concerned with the development and control of the physical, has also its psychic side, and even enters the field of spiritual development.

In India there are great schools of Yoga, comprising thousands of the leading minds of that great country. The Yoga philosophy is the rule of life for many people. The pure Yogi teachings, however, are given only to the few, the masses being satisfied with the crumbs which fall from the tables of the educated classes, the Oriental custom in this respect being opposed to that of the Western world. But Western ideas are beginning to have their effect even in the Orient, and teachings which were once given only to the few are now freely offered to any who are ready to receive them. The East and the West are growing closer together, and both profiting by the close contact, each influencing the other.

The Hindu Yogis have always paid great attention

[p. 7]

to the Science of Breath, for reasons which will be apparent to the student who reads this book. Many Western writers have touched upon this phase of the Yogi teachings, but we believe that it has been reserved for the writer of this work to give the Western student, in concise form and simple language, the underlying principles of the Yogi Science of Breath, together with many of the favorite Yogi breathing exercises and methods. We have given the Western idea as well as the Oriental, showing how one dovetails into the other. We have used the ordinary English terms, almost entirely, avoiding the Sanscrit terms, so confusing to the average Western reader.

The first part of the book is devoted to the physical phase of the Science of Breath; then the psychic and mental sides are considered, and finally the spiritual side is touched upon.

We may be pardoned if we express ourselves as pleased with our success in condensing so much Yogi lore into so few pages, and by the use of words and terms which may be understood by anyone. Our only fear is that its very simplicity may cause some to pass it by as unworthy of attention, while they pass on their way searching for something "deep," mysterious and non-understandable. However, the Western mind is eminently practical, and we know that it is only a question of a short time before it will recognize the practicability of this work.

We greet our students, with our most profound saalam, and bid them be seated for their first lesson in the Yogi Science of Breath.

      
Science of Breath, by Yogi Ramacharaka, pseud. William Atkinson, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 8]

  

Chapter II

  

"BREATH IS LIFE"

Life is absolutely dependent upon the act of breathing. "Breath is Life."

Differ as they may upon details of theory and terminology, the  and the Occidental agree upon these fundamental principles.

To breathe is to live, and without breath there is no life. Not only are the higher animals dependent upon breath for life and health, but even the lower forms of animal life must breathe to live, and plant life is likewise dependent upon the air for continued existence. The infant draws in a long, deep breath, retains it for a moment to extract from it its life-giving properties, and then exhales it in a long wail, and lo! its life upon earth has begun. The old man gives a faint gasp, ceases to breathe, and life is over. From the first faint breath of the infant to the last gasp of the dying man, it is one long story of continued breathing. Life is but a series of breaths.

Breathing may be considered the most important of all of the functions of the body, for, indeed, all the other functions depend upon it. Man may exist some time without eating; a shorter time without drinking; but without breathing his existence may be measured by a few minutes.

And not only is Man dependent upon Breath for life, but he is largely dependent upon correct habits of breathing for continued vitality and freedom from disease. An intelligent control of our breathing power will lengthen our days upon earth by giving us increased vitality and powers of resistance, and, on the

[p. 9]

other hand, unintelligent and careless breathing will tend to shorten our days, by decreasing our vitality and laying us open to disease.

Man in his normal state had no need of instruction in breathing. Like the lower animal and the child, he breathed naturally and properly, as nature intended him to do, but civilization has changed him in this and other respects. He has contracted improper methods and attitudes of walking, standing and sitting, which have robbed him of his birthright of natural and correct breathing. He has paid a high price for civilization. The savage, to-day, breathes naturally, unless he has been contaminated by the habits of civilized man.

The percentage of civilized men who breathe correctly is quite small, and the result is shown in contracted chests and stooping shoulders, and the terrible increase in diseases of the respiratory organs, including that dread monster, Consumption, "the white scourge." Eminent authorities have stated that one generation of correct breathers would regenerate the race, and disease would be so rare as to be looked upon as a curiosity. Whether looked at from the standpoint of the Oriental or Occidental, the connection between correct breathing and health is readily seen and explained.

The Occidental teachings show that the physical health depends very materially upon correct breathing. The Oriental teachers not only admit that their Occidental brothers are right, but say that in addition to the physical benefit derived from correct habits of breathing, Man's mental power, happiness, self-control, clear-sightedness, morals, and even his spiritual growth may be increased by an understanding of the

[p. 10]

"Science of Breath." Whole schools of Oriental Philosophy have been founded upon this science, and this knowledge when grasped by the Western races, and by them put to the practical use which is their strong point, will work wonders among them. The theory of the East, wedded to the practice of the West, will produce worthy offspring.

This work will take up the Yogi "Science of Breath," which includes not only all that is known to the Western physiologist and hygienist, but the occult side of the subject as well. It not only points out the way to physical health along the lines of what Western scientists have termed "deep breathing," etc., but also goes into the less known phases of the subject, and shows how the Hindu Yogi controls his body, increasing his mental capacity, and develops the spiritual side of his nature by the "Science of Breath."

The Yogi practices exercises by which he attains control of his body, and is enabled to send to any organ or part an increased flow of vital force or "prana," thereby strengthening and invigorating the part or organ. He knows all that his Western scientific brother knows about the physiological effect of correct breathing, but he also knows that the air contains more than oxygen and hydrogen and nitrogen, and that  more is accomplished than the mere oxygenating of the blood. He knows something about "prana," of which his Western brother is ignorant, and he is fully aware of the nature and manner of handling that great principle of energy, and is fully informed as to its effect upon the human body and mind. He knows that by rhythmical breathing one may bring himself into harmonious vibration with

[p. 11]

nature, and aid in the unfoldment of his latent powers. He knows that by controlled breathing he may not only cure disease in himself and others, but also practically do away with fear and worry and the baser emotions.

To teach these things is the object of this work. We will give in a few chapters concise explanation and instructions, which might be extended into volumes. We hope to awaken the minds of the Western world to the value of the Yogi "Science of Breath."

      
Science of Breath, by Yogi Ramacharaka, pseud. William Atkinson, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 12]

  

Chapter III

  

THE EXOTERIC THEORY OF BREATH

In this chapter we will give you briefly the theories of the Western scientific world regarding the functions of the respiratory organs, and the part in the human economy played by the breath. In subsequent chapters we will give the additional theories and ascertained facts of the Oriental school of thought and research. The Oriental accepts the theories and facts of his Western brothers (which have been known to him for centuries) and adds thereto much that the latter do not now accept, but which they will in due time "discover" and which, after renaming, they will present to the world as a great truth.

Before taking up the Western idea, it will perhaps be better to give a hasty general idea of the Organs of Respiration.

The Organs of Respiration consist of the lungs and the air passages leading to them. The lungs are two in number, and occupy the pleural chamber of the thorax, one on each side of the median line, being separated from each other by the heart, the greater blood vessels and the larger air tubes. Each lung is free in all directions, except at the root, which consists chiefly of the bronchi, arteries and veins connecting the lungs with the trachea and heart. The lungs are spongy and porous, and their tissues are very elastic. They are covered with a delicately constructed but strong sac, known as the pleural sac, one wall of which closely adheres to the lung, and the other to the inner wall of the chest, and which secretes a fluid which allows the inner surfaces of

[p. 13]

the walls to glide easily upon each other in the act of breathing.

The Air Passages consist of the interior of the nose, pharynx, larynx, windpipe or trachea, and the bronchial tubes. When we breathe, we draw in the air through the nose, in which it is warmed by contact with the mucous membrane, which is richly supplied with blood, and after it has passed through the  and larynx it passes into the trachea or windpipe, which subdivides into numerous tubes called the bronchial tubes (bronchia), which in turn subdivide into and terminate in minute subdivisions in all the small air spaces in the lungs, of which the lungs contain millions. A writer has stated that if the air cells of the lungs were spread out over an unbroken surface, they would cover an area of fourteen thousand square feet.

The air is drawn into the lungs by the action of the diaphragm, a great, strong, flat, sheet-like muscle, stretched across the chest, separating the chest-box from the abdomen. The diaphragm's action is almost as automatic as that of the heart, although it may be transformed into a semi-voluntary muscle by an effort of the will. When it expands, it increases the size of the chest and lungs, and the air rushes into the vacuum thus created. When it relaxes the chest and lungs contract and the air is expelled from the lungs.

Now, before considering what happens to the air in the lungs, let us look a little into the matter of the circulation of the blood. The blood, as you know, is driven by the heart, through the arteries, into the capillaries, thus reaching every part of the body, which it vitalizes, nourishes and strengthens. It then

[p. 14]

returns by means of the capillaries by another route, the veins, to the heart, from whence it is drawn to the lungs.

The blood starts on its arterial journey, bright red and rich, laden with life-giving qualities and properties. It returns by the venous route, poor, blue and dull, being laden down with the waste matter of the system. It goes out like a fresh stream from the mountains; it returns as a stream of sewer water. This foul stream goes to the right auricle of the heart. When this auricle becomes filled, it contracts and forces the stream of blood through an opening in the right ventricle of the heart, which in turn sends it on to the lungs, where it is distributed by millions of hair-like blood vessels to the air cells of the lungs, of which we have spoken. Now, let us take up the story of the lungs at this point.

The foul stream of blood is now distributed among the millions of tiny air cells in the lungs. A breath of air is inhaled and the oxygen of the air comes in contact with the impure blood through the thin walls of the hair-like blood vessels of the lungs, which walls are thick enough to hold the blood, but thin enough to admit the oxygen to penetrate them. When the oxygen comes in contact with the blood, a form of combustion takes place, and the blood takes up oxygen and releases carbonic acid gas generated from the waste products and poisonous matter which has been gathered up by the blood from all parts of the system. The blood thus purified and oxygenated is carried back to the heart, again rich, red and bright, and laden with life-giving properties and qualities. Upon reaching the left auricle of the heart, it is forced into the left ventricle, from whence it is again

[p. 15]

forced out through the arteries on its mission of life to all parts of the system. It is estimated that in a single day of twenty-four hours, 35,000 pints of blood traverse the capillaries of the lungs, the blood corpuscles passing in single file and being exposed to the oxygen of the air on both of their surfaces. When one considers the minute details of the process alluded to, he is lost in wonder and admiration at Nature's infinite care and intelligence.

It will be seen that unless fresh air in sufficient quantities reaches the lungs, the foul stream of venous blood cannot be purified, and consequently not only is the body thus robbed of nourishment, but the waste products which should have been destroyed are returned to the circulation and poison the system, and death ensues. Impure air acts in the same way, only in a lessened degree. It will also be seen that if one does not breathe in a sufficient quantity of air, the work of the blood cannot go on properly, and the result is that the body is insufficiently nourished and disease ensues, or a state of imperfect health is experienced. The blood of one who breathes improperly is, of course, of a bluish, dark color, lacking the rich redness of pure arterial blood. This often shows itself in a poor complexion. Proper breathing, and a consequent good circulation, results in a clear, bright complexion.

A little reflection will show the vital importance of correct breathing. If the blood is not fully purified by the regenerative process of the lungs, it returns to the arteries in an abnormal state, insufficiently purified and imperfectly cleansed of the impurities which it took up on its return journey. These impurities if returned to the system will certainly manifest in

[p. 16]

some form of disease, either in a form of blood disease or some disease resulting from impaired functioning of some insufficiently nourished organ or tissue.

The blood, when properly exposed to the air in the lungs, not only has its impurities consumed, and parts with its noxious carbonic acid gas, but it also takes up and absorbs a certain quantity of oxygen which it carries to all parts of the body, where it is needed in order that Nature may perform her processes properly. When the oxygen comes in contact with the blood, it unites with the haemoglobin of the blood and is carried to every cell, tissue, muscle and organ, which it invigorates and strengthens, replacing the wornout cells and tissue by new materials which Nature converts to her use. Arterial blood, properly exposed to the air, contains about 25 per cent of free oxygen.

Not only is every part vitalized by the oxygen, but the act of digestion depends materially upon a certain amount of oxygenation of the food, and this can be accomplished only by the oxygen in the blood coming in contact with the food and producing a certain form of combustion. It is therefore necessary that a proper supply of oxygen be taken through the lungs. This accounts for the fact that weak lungs and poor digestion are so often found together. To grasp the full significance of this statement, one must remember that the entire body receives nourishment from the food assimilated, and that imperfect assimilation always means an imperfectly nourished body. Even the lungs themselves depend upon the same source for nourishment, and if through imperfect breathing the assimilation becomes imperfect, and the lungs in turn become weakened, they are rendered

[p. 17]

still less able to perform their work properly, and so in turn the body becomes further weakened. Every particle of food and drink must be oxygenated before it can yield us the proper nourishment, and before the waste products of the system can be reduced to the proper condition to be eliminated from the system. Lack of sufficient oxygen means imperfect nutrition, imperfect elimination and imperfect health. Verily, "breath is life."

The combustion arising from the change in the waste products generates heat and equalizes the temperature of the body. Good breathers are not apt to "take cold," and they generally have plenty of good warm blood which enables them to resist the changes in the other temperature.

In addition to the above-mentioned important processes, the act of breathing gives exercise to the internal organs and muscles, which feature is generally overlooked by the Western writers on the subject, but which the Yogis fully appreciate.

In imperfect or shallow breathing, only a portion of the lung cells are brought into play, and a great: portion of the lung capacity is lost, the system suffering in proportion to the amount of under-oxygenation. The lower animals, in their native state, breathe naturally, and primitive man undoubtedly did the same. The abnormal manner of living adopted by civilized man--the shadow that follows upon civilization--has robbed us of our natural habit of breathing, and the race has greatly suffered thereby. Man's only physical salvation is to "get back to Nature."

      
Science of Breath, by Yogi Ramacharaka, pseud. William Atkinson, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 18]

  

Chapter IV

  

The Esoteric Theory of Breath

The Science of Breath, like many other teachings, has its esoteric or inner phase, as well as its exoteric or external. The physiological phase may be termed the outer or exoteric side of the subject, and the phase which we will now consider may be termed its esoteric or inner side. Occultists, in all ages and lands, have always taught, usually secretly to a few followers, that there was to be found in the air a substance or principle from which all activity, vitality and life was derived. They differed in their terms and names for this force, as well as in the details of the theory, but the main principle is to be found in all occult teachings and philosophies, and has for centuries formed a portion of the teachings of the Oriental Yogis.

In order to avoid misconceptions arising from the various theories regarding this great principle, which theories are usually attached to some name given the principle, we, in this work, will speak of the principle as "Prana," this word being the Sancrit term meaning "Absolute Energy." Many occult authorities teach that the principle which the Hindus term "Prana" is the universal principle of energy or force, and that all energy or force is derived from that principle, or, rather, is a particular form of manifestation of that principle. These theories do not concern us in the consideration of the subject matter of this work, and we will therefore confine ourselves to an understanding of prana as the principle of energy exhibited in all living things, which distinguishes them from a

[p. 19]

lifeless thing. We may consider it as the active principle of life--Vital Force, if you please. It is found in all forms of life, from the amoeba to man--from the most elementary form of plant life to the highest form of animal life. Prana is all pervading. It is found in all things having life, and as the occult philosophy teaches that life is in all things--in every atom--the apparent lifelessness of some things being only a lesser degree of manifestation, we may understand their teachings that prana is everywhere, in everything. Prana must not be confounded with the Ego--that bit of Divine Spirit in every soul, around which clusters matter and energy. Prana is merely a form of energy used by the Ego in its material manifestation. When the Ego leaves the body, the prana, being no longer under its control, responds only to the orders of the individual atoms, or groups of atoms, forming the body, and as the body disintegrates and is resolved to its original elements, each atom takes with it sufficient prana to enable it to form new combinations, the unused prana returning to the great universal storehouse from which it came. With the Ego in control, cohesion exists and the atoms are held together by the Will of the Ego.

Prana is the name by which we designate a universal principle, which principle is the essence of all motion, force or energy, whether manifested in gravitation, electricity, the revolution of the planets, and all forms of life, from the highest to the lowest. It may be called the soul of Force and Energy in all their forms, and that principle which, operating in a certain way, causes that form of activity which accompanies Life.

This great principle is in all forms of matter, and

[p. 20]

yet it is not matter. It is in the air, but it is not the air nor one of its chemical constituents. Animal and plant life breathe it in with the air, and yet if the air contained it not they would die even though they might be filled with air. It is taken up by the system along with the oxygen, and yet is not the oxygen. The Hebrew writer of the book of Genesis knew the difference between the atmospheric air and the mysterious and potent principle contained within it. He speaks of neshemet ruach chayim, which, translated, means "the breath of the spirit of life." In the Hebrew neshemet means the ordinary breath of  air, and chayim means life or lives, while the word ruach means the "spirit of life," which occultists claim is the same principle which we speak of as Prana.

Prana is in the atmospheric air, but it is also elsewhere, and it penetrates where the air cannot reach. The oxygen in the air plays an important part in sustaining animal life, and the carbon plays a similar part with plant life, but Prana has its own distinct part to play in the manifestation of life, aside from the physiological functions.

We are constantly inhaling the air charged with prana, and are as constantly extracting the latter from the air and appropriating it to our uses. Prana is found in its freest state in the atmospheric air, which when fresh is fairly charged with it, and we draw it to us more easily from the air than from any other source. In ordinary breathing we absorb and extract a normal supply of prana, but by controlled and regulated breathing (generally known as Yogi breathing) we are enabled to extract a greater supply, which is stored away in the brain and nerve

[p. 21]

centers, to be used when necessary. We may store away prana, just as the storage battery stores away electricity. The many powers attributed to advanced occultists is due largely to their knowledge of this fact and their intelligent use of this stored-up energy. The Yogis know that by certain forms of breathing they establish certain relations with the supply of prana and may draw on the same for what they require. Not only do they strengthen all parts of their body in this way, but the brain itself may receive increased energy from the same source, and latent faculties be developed and psychic powers attained. One who has mastered the science of storing away prana, either consciously or unconsciously, often radiates vitality and strength which is felt by those coming in contact with him, and such a person may impart this strength to others, and give them increased vitality and health. What is called "magnetic healing" is performed in this way, although many practitioners are not aware of the source of their power.

Western scientists have been dimly aware of this great principle with which the air is charged, but finding that they could find no chemical trace of it, or make it register on any of their instruments, they have generally treated the Oriental theory with disdain. They could not explain this principle, and so denied it. They seem, however, to recognize that the air in certain places possesses a greater amount of "something" and sick people are directed by their physicians to seek such places in hopes of regaining lost health.

The oxygen in the air is appropriated by the blood and is made use of by the circulatory system. The prana in the air is appropriated by the nervous system

[p. 22] 

and is used in its work. And as the oxygenated blood is carried to all parts of the system, building up and replenishing, so is the prana carried to all parts of the nervous system, adding strength and vitality. If we think of prana as being the active principle of what we call "vitality," we will be able to form a much clearer idea of what an important part it plays in our lives. Just as in the oxygen in the blood used up by the wants of the system, so the supply of prana taken up by the nervous system is exhausted by our thinking, willing, acting, etc., and in consequence constant replenishing is necessary. Every thought, every act, every effort of the will, every motion of a muscle, uses up a certain amount of what we call nerve force, which is really a form of prana. To move a muscle the brain sends out an impulse over the nerves, and the muscle contracts, and so much prana is expended. When it is remembered that the greater portion of prana acquired by man comes to him from the air inhaled, the importance of proper breathing is readily understood.

      
Science of Breath, by Yogi Ramacharaka, pseud. William Atkinson, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

  

Chapter V

  

The Nervous System

[p. 23]

It will be noticed that the Western scientific theories regarding the breath confine themselves to the effects of the absorption of oxygen, and its use through the circulatory system, while the Yogi theory also takes into consideration the absorption of Prana, and its manifestation through the channels of the Nervous System. Before proceeding further, it may be as well to take a hasty glance at the Nervous System.

The Nervous System of man is divided into two great systems, viz., the Cerebro-Spinal System and the Sympathetic System. The Cerebro-Spinal System consists of all that part of the Nervous System contained within the cranial cavity and the spinal canal, viz., the brain and the spinal cord, together with the nerves which branch off from the same. This system presides over the functions of animal life known as volition, sensation, etc. The Sympathetic System includes all that part of the Nervous System located principally in the thoracic, abdominal and pelvic cavities, and which is distributed to the internal organs. It has control over the involuntary processes, such as growth, nutrition, etc.

The Cerebro-Spinal System attends to all the seeing, hearing, tasting, smelling, feeling, etc. It sets things in motion; it is used by the Ego to think--to manifest consciousness. It is the instrument with which the Ego communicates with the outside world. This system may be likened to a telephone system, with the brain as the central office, and the spinal

[p. 24] 

column and nerves as cable and wires respectively.

The brain is a great mass of nerve tissue, and consists of three parts, viz., the Cerebrum or brain proper, which occupies the upper, front, middle and back portion of the skull; the Cerebellum, or "little brain," which fills the lower and back portion of the skull; and the Medulla Oblongata, which is the broadened commencement of the spinal cord, lying before and in front of the Cerebellum.

The Cerebrum is the organ of that part of the mind which manifests itself in intellectual action. The Cerebellum regulates the movements of the voluntary muscles. The Medulla Oblongata is the upper enlarged end of the spinal cord, and from it and the Cerebrum branch forth the Cranial Nerves which reach to various parts of the head, to the organs of special sense, and to some of the thoracic and abdominal organs, and to the organs of respiration.

The Spinal Cord, or spinal marrow, fills the spinal canal in the vertebral column, or "backbone." It is a long mass of nerve tissue, branching off at the several vertebrae to nerves communicating with all parts of the body. The Spinal Cord is like a large telephone cable, and the emerging nerves are like the private wires connecting therewith.

The Sympathetic Nervous System consists of a double chain of Ganglia on the side of the Spinal column, and scattered ganglia in the head, neck, chest and abdomen. (A ganglion is a mass of  matter including nerve cells.) These ganglia are connected with each other by filaments, and are also connected with the Cerebro Spinal System by motor and sensory nerves. From these ganglia numerous fibers branch out to the organs of the body, blood vessels, etc. At

[p. 25]

various points, the nerves meet together and form what are known as plexuses. The Sympathetic System practically controls the involuntary processes, such as circulation, respiration and digestion.

The power of force transmitted from the brain to all parts of the body by means of the nerves, is known to Western science as "nerve force," although the Yogi knows it to be a manifestation of Prana. In character and rapidity it resembles the electric current. It will be seen that without this "nerve force" the heart cannot beat; the blood cannot circulate; the lungs cannot breathe; the various organs cannot function; in fact the machinery of the body comes to a stop without it. Nay more, even the brain cannot think without Prana be present. When these facts are considered, the importance of the absorption of Prana must be evident to all, and the Science of Breath assumes an importance even greater than that accorded it by Western science.

The Yogi teachings go further than does Western science, in one important feature of the Nervous System. We allude to what Western science terms the "Solar Plexus," and which it considers as merely one of a series of certain matted nets of sympathetic nerves with their ganglia found in various parts of the body. Yogi science teaches that this Solar Plexus is really a most important part of the Nervous System, and that it is a form of brain, playing one of the principal parts in the human economy. Western science seems to be moving gradually towards a recognition of this fact which has been known to the Yogis of the East for centuries, and some recent Western writers have termed the Solar Plexus the "Abdominal Brain." The Solar Plexus is situated in the Epigastric region, just

[p. 26] 

back of the "pit of the stomach" on either side of the spinal column. It is composed of white and gray brain matter, similar to that composing the other brains of man. It has control of the main internal organs of man, and plays a much more important part than is generally recognized. We will not go into the Yogi theory regarding the Solar Plexus, further than to say that they know it as the great central store-house of Prana. Men have been known to be instantly killed by a severe blow over the Solar Plexus, and prize fighters recognize its vulnerability and frequently temporarily paralyze their opponents by a blow over this region.

The name "Solar" is well bestowed on this "brain," as it radiates strength and energy to all parts of the body, even the upper brains depending largely upon it as a storehouse of Prana. Sooner or later Western science will fully recognize the real function of the Solar Plexus, and will accord to it a far more important place than it now occupies in their text-books and teachings.

      
Science of Breath, by Yogi Ramacharaka, pseud. William Atkinson, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 27]

  

Chapter VI

  

NOSTRIL-BREATHING

  

Vs.

  

MOUTH-BREATHING

One of the first lessons in the Yogi Science of Breath, is to learn how to breathe through the nostrils, and to overcome the common practice of mouth-breathing.

The breathing mechanism of Man is so constructed that he may breathe either through the mouth or nasal tubes, but it is a matter of vital importance to him which method he follows, as one brings health and strength and the other disease and weakness.

It should not be necessary to state to the student that the proper method of breathing is to take the breath through the nostrils, but alas! the ignorance among civilized people regarding this simple matter is astounding. We find people in all walks of life habitually breathing through their mouths, and allowing their children to follow their horrible and disgusting example.

Many of the diseases to which civilized man is subject are undoubtedly caused by this common habit of mouth-breathing. Children permitted to breathe in this way grow up with impaired vitality and weakened constitutions, and in manhood and womanhood break down and become chronic invalids. The mother of the savage race does better, being evidently guided by her intuition. She seems to instinctively recognize that the nostrils are the proper channels for the conveyal of air to the lungs, and she trains her infant to close its little lips and breathe through the nose. She

[p. 28] 

tips its head forward when it is asleep, which attitude closes the lips and makes nostril-breathing imperative. If our civilized mothers were to adopt the same plan, it would work a great good for the race.

Many contagious diseases are contracted by the disgusting habit of mouth-breathing, and many cases of cold and catarrhal affections are also attributable to the same cause. Many persons who, for the sake of appearances, keep their mouth closed during the day, persist in mouth-breathing at night and often contract disease in this way. Carefully conducted scientific experiments have shown that soldiers and sailors who sleep with their mouths open are much more liable to contract contagious diseases than those who breathe properly through the nostrils. An instance is related in which small-pox became epidemic on a man of-war in foreign parts, and every death which resulted was that of some sailor or marine who was a mouth-breather, not a single nostril-breather succumbing.

The organs of respiration have their only protective apparatus, filter, or oust-catcher, in the nostrils. When the breath is taken through the mouth, there is nothing from mouth to lungs to strain the air, or to catch the dust and other foreign matter in the air. From mouth to lungs the dirt or impure substance has a clear track, and the entire respiratory system is unprotected. And, moreover, such incorrect breathing admits cold air to the organs, thereby injuring them. Inflammation of the respiratory organs often results from the inhalation of cold air through the mouth. The man who breathes through the mouth at night, always awakens with a parched feeling in the mouth and a dryness in the throat. He is violating one of nature's laws, and is sowing the seeds of disease.

[p. 29]

 more, remember that the mouth affords no protection to the respiratory organs, and cold air, dust and impurities and germs readily enter by that door. On the other hand, the nostrils and nasal passages show evidence of the careful design of nature in this respect. The nostrils are two narrow, tortuous channels, containing numerous bristly hairs which serve the purpose of a filter or sieve to strain the air of its impurities, etc., which are expelled when the breath is exhaled. Not only do the nostrils serve this important purpose, but they also perform an important function in warming the air inhaled. The long narrow winding nostrils are filled with warm mucous membrane, which coming in contact with the inhaled air warms it so that it can do no damage to the delicate organs of the throat, or to the lungs.

No animal, excepting man, sleeps with the mouth open or breathes through the mouth, and in fact it is believed that it is only civilized man who so perverts nature's functions, as the savage and barbarian races almost invariably breathe correctly. It is probable that this unnatural habit among civilized men has been acquired through unnatural methods of living, enervating luxuries and excessive warmth.

The refining, filtering and straining apparatus of the nostrils renders the air fit to reach the delicate organs of the throat and the lungs, and the air is not fit to so reach these organs until it has passed through nature's refining process. The impurities which are stopped and retained by the sieves and mucous membrane of the nostrils, are thrown out again by the expelled breath, in exhalation, and in case they have accumulated too rapidly or have managed to escape through the sieves and have penetrated forbidden

[p. 30]

regions, nature protects us by producing a sneeze which violently ejects the intruder.

The air, when it enters the lungs is as different from the outside air, as is distilled water different from the water of the cistern. The intricate purifying organization of the nostrils, arresting and holding the impure particles in the air, is as important as is the action of the mouth in stopping cherry-stones and fish-bones and preventing them from being carried on to the stomach. Man should no more breathe through his mouth than he would attempt to take food through his nose.

Another feature of mouth-breathing is that the nasal passages, being thus comparatively unused, consequently fail to keep themselves clean and clear, and become clogged up and unclean, and are apt to contract local diseases. Like abandoned roads that soon become filled with weeds and rubbish, unused nostrils become filled with impurities and foul matter.

One who habitually breathes through the nostrils is not likely to be troubled with clogged or stuffy nostrils, but for the benefit of those who have been more or less addicted to the unnatural mouth-breathing, and who wish to acquire the natural and rational methods, it may perhaps be well to add a few words regarding the way to keep their nostrils clean and free from impurities.

A favorite Oriental method is to snuff a little water up the nostrils allowing it to run down the passage into the throat, from thence it may be ejected through the mouth. Some Hindu yogis immerse the face in a bowl of water, and by a sort of suction draw in quite a quantity of water, but this latter method requires considerable practice, and the first mentioned method

[p. 31]

is equally efficacious, and much more easily performed. Another good plan is to open the window and breathe freely, closing one nostril with the finger or thumb, sniffing up the air through the open nostril. Then repeat the process on the other nostril. Repeat several times, changing nostrils. This method will usually clear the nostrils of obstructions.

In case the trouble is caused by catarrh it is well to apply a little vaseline or camphor ice or similar preparation. Or sniff up a little witch-hazel extract once in a while, and you will notice a marked improvement. A little care and attention will result in the nostrils becoming clean and remaining so.

We have given considerable space to this subject of nostril-breathing, not only because of its great importance in its reference to health, but because nostril-breathing is a prerequisite to the practice of the breathing exercises to be given later in this book, and. because nostril-breathing is one of the basic principles underlying the Yogi Science of Breath.

We urge upon the student the necessity of acquiring this method of breathing if he has not, and caution him against dismissing this phase of the subject as unimportant.

      
Science of Breath, by Yogi Ramacharaka, pseud. William Atkinson, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 32]

  

Chapter VII

  

THE FOUR METHODS OF RESPIRATION

In the consideration of the question of respiration, we must begin by considering the mechanical arrangements whereby the respiratory movements are effected. The mechanics of respiration manifest through (1) the elastic movements of the lungs, and (2) the activities of the sides and bottom of the thoracic cavity in which the lungs are contained. The thorax is that portion of the trunk between the neck and the abdomen, the cavity of which (known as the thoracic cavity) is occupied mainly by the lungs and heart. It is bounded by the spinal column, the ribs with their cartilages, and the breastbone, and below by the diaphragm. It is generally spoken of as "the chest." It has been compared to a completely shut, conical box, the small end of which is turned upward, the back of the box being formed by the spinal column, the front by the breastbone and the sides by the ribs.

The ribs are twenty-four in number, twelve on each side, and emerge from each side of the spinal column.  upper seven pairs are known as "true ribs," being fastened to the  direct, while the lower five pairs are called (false ribs) or "floating ribs," because they are not so fastened, the upper two of them being fastened to the breastbone direct, while the lower five having no cartilages, their forward ends being free.

The ribs are moved in respiration by two superficial muscular layers, known as the intercostal muscles. The diaphragm, the muscular partition before alluded to, separates the chest box from the abdominal cavity. In the act of inhalation the muscles expand the

[p. 33]

lungs so that a vacuum is created and the air rushes in in accordance with the well known law of physics. Everything depends upon the muscles concerned in the process of respiration, which we may as, for convenience, term the "respiratory muscles." Without the aid of these muscles the lungs cannot expand, and upon the proper use and control of these muscles the Science of Breath largely depends. The proper control of these muscles will result in the ability to attain the maximum degree of lung expansion, and the greatest amount of the life giving properties of the air into the system.

The Yogis classify Respiration into four general methods, viz.:

(1) High Breathing.

(2) Mid Breathing.

(3) Low Breathing.

(4) Yogi Complete Breathing.

We will give a general idea of the first three methods, and a more extended treatment of the fourth method, upon which the Yogi Science of Breath is largely based.

(1) HIGH BREATHING

This form of breathing is known to the Western world as Clavicular Breathing, or Collarbone Breathing. One breathing in this way elevates the ribs and raises the collarbone and shoulders, at the. same time drawing in the abdomen and pushing its contents up against the diaphragm, which in turn is raised.

The upper part of the chest and lungs, which is the smallest, is used, and consequently but a minimum amount of air enters the lungs. In addition to this, the diaphragm being raised, there can be no expansion in that direction. A study of the anatomy of the chest

[p. 34]

will convince any student that in this way a maximum amount of effort is used to obtain a minimum amount of benefit.

High Breathing is probably the worst form of breathing known to man and requires the greatest expenditure of energy with the smallest amount of benefit. It is an energy-wasting, poor-returns plan. It is quite common among the Western races, many women being addicted to it, and even singers, clergyman, lawyers and others, who should know better, using it ignorantly.

Many diseases of the vocal organs and organs of respiration may be directly traced to this barbarous method of breathing, and the straining of delicate organs caused by this method, often results in the harsh, disagreeable voices heard on all sides. Many persons who breathe in this way become addicted to the disgusting practice of "mouth-breathing" described in a preceding chapter.

If the student has any doubts about what has been said regarding this form of breathing, let him try the experiment of expelling all the air from his lungs, then standing , with hands at sides, let him raise the shoulders and collar-bone and inhale. He will find that the amount of air inhaled far below normal. Then let him inhale a full breath, after dropping the shoulders and collar-bone, and he will receive an object lesson in breathing which he will be apt to remember much longer than he would any words, printed or spoken.

(2) MID BREATHING

This method of respiration is known to Western students as Rib Breathing, or Inter-Costal Breathing,

[p. 35]

and while less objectional than High Breathing, is far inferior to either Low Breathing or to the Yogi Complete Breath. In Mid Breathing the diaphragm is pushed upward, and the abdomen drawn in. The ribs are raised somewhat, and the chest is partially expanded. It is quite common among men who have made no study of the subject. As there are two better methods known, we give it only passing notice, and that principally to call your attention to its shortcomings.

(3) LOW BREATHING

This form of respiration is far better than either of the two preceding forms, and of recent years many Western writers have extolled its merits, and have exploited it under the names of "Abdominal Breathing," "Deep Breathing,"  Breathing," etc., etc., and much good has been accomplished by the attention of the public having been directed to the subject, and many having been induced to substitute it for the inferior and injurious methods above alluded to. Many "systems of breathing" have been built around Low Breathing, and students have paid high prices to learn the new (?) systems. But, as we have said, much good has resulted, and after all the students who paid high prices to learn revamped old systems undoubtedly got their money's worth if they were induced to discard the old methods of High Breathing and Low Breathing.

Although many Western authorities write and speak of this method as the best known form of breathing, the Yogis know it to be but a part of a system which they have used for centuries and which they know as "The Complete Breath." It must be admitted, however, that one must be acquainted with the

[p. 36] 

principles of Low Breathing before he can grasp the idea of Complete Breathing.

Let us again consider the diaphragm. What is it? We have seen that it is the great partition muscle, which separates the chest and its contents from the abdomen and its contents. When at rest it presents a concave surface to the abdomen. That is, the diaphragm as viewed from the abdomen would seem like the sky as viewed from the earth--the interior of an arched surface. Consequently the side of the diaphragm toward the chest organs is like a protruding rounded surface--like a hill. When the diaphragm is brought into use the hill formation is lowered and the diaphragm presses upon the abdominal organs and forces out the abdomen.

In Low Breathing, the lungs are given freer play than in the methods already mentioned, and consequently more air is inhaled. This fact has led the majority of Western writers to speak and write of Low Breathing (which they call Abdominal Breathing) as the highest and best method known to science.. But the Oriental Yogi has long known of a better method, and some few Western writers have also recognized this fact. The trouble with all methods of breathing, other than "Yogi Complete Breathing" is that in none of these methods do the lungs become filled with air--at the best only a portion of the lung space is filled, even in Low Breathing. High Breathing fills only the upper portion of the lungs. Mid Breathing fills only the middle and a portion of the upper parts. Low Breathing fills only the lower and middle parts. It is evident that any method that lulls the entire lung space must be far preferable to those filling only certain parts. Any method which

[p. 37]

will fill the entire lung space must be of the greatest value to Man in the way of allowing him to absorb the greatest quantity of oxygen and to store away the greatest amount of prana. The Complete Breath is known to the Yogis to be the best method of respiration known to science.

THE YOGI COMPLETE BREATH

Yogi Complete Breathing includes all the good points of High Breathing, Mid Breathing and Low Breathing, with the objectionable features of each eliminated. It brings into play the entire respiratory apparatus, every part of the lungs, every air-cell, every respiratory muscle. The entire respiratory organism responds to this method of breathing, and the maximum amount of benefit is derived from the minimum expenditure of energy. The chest cavity, is increased to its normal limits in all directions and every part of the machinery performs its natural work and functions.

One of the most important features of this method of breathing, is the fact that the respiratory muscles are fully  into play, whereas in the other forms of breathing only a portion of these muscles are so used. In Complete Breathing, among other muscles, those controlling the ribs are actively used, which increases the space in which the lungs may expand, and also gives the proper support to the organs when needed, Nature availing herself of the perfection of the principle of leverage in this process. Certain muscles hold the lower ribs firmly in position, while other muscles bend them outward.

Then again, in this method, the diaphragm is under perfect control and is able to perform its functions

[p. 38]

properly, and in such manner as to yield the maximum degree of service.

In the rib-action, above alluded to, the lower ribs are controlled by the diaphragm which draws them slightly downward, while other muscles hold them in place and the intercostal muscles force them outward, which combined action increases the mid-chest cavity to its maximum. In addition to this muscular action, the upper ribs are also lifted and forced outward by the intercostal muscles which increase the capacity of the upper chest to its fullest extent.

If you have studied the special features of the four given methods of breathing, you will at once see that the Complete Breath comprises all the advantageous features of the three other methods, plus the reciprocal advantages accruing from the combined action of the high-chest, mid-chest, and  regions, and the normal  thus obtained.

In our next chapter, we will take up the Complete Breath in practice, and will give full directions for the acquirement of this superior method of breathing, with exercises, etc.

      
Science of Breath, by Yogi Ramacharaka, pseud. William Atkinson, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 39]

  

Chapter VIII

  

HOW TO ACQUIRE

  

THE YOGI COMPLETE BREATH

The Yogi Complete Breath is the fundamental breath of the entire Yogi Science of Breath, and the student must fully acquaint himself with it, and master it perfectly before he can hope to obtain results from the other forms of breath mentioned and given in this book. He should not be content with half-learning it, but should go to work in earnest until it becomes his natural method of breathing. This will require work, time and patience, but without these things nothing is ever accomplished. There is no royal road to the Science of Breath, and the student must be prepared to practice and study in earnest if he expects to receive results. The  obtained by a complete mastery of the Science of Breath are great, and no one who has attained them would willingly go back to the old methods, and he will tell his friends that he considers himself amply repaid for all his work. We say these things now, that you may fully understand the  and importance of mastering this fundamental method of Yogi Breathing, instead of passing it by and trying some of the attractive looking variations given later on in this book. Again, we say to you: Start right, and right results will follow; but neglect your foundations and your entire building will topple over sooner or later.

Perhaps the better way to teach you how to develop the Yogi Complete Breath, would be to give you simple directions regarding the breath itself, and then follow up the same with general remarks concerning

[p. 40]

it, and then later on giving exercises for developing the chest, muscles and lungs which have been allowed to remain in an undeveloped condition by imperfect methods of breathing. Right here we wish to say that this Complete Breath is not a forced or abnormal thing, but on the contrary is a going back to first principles--a return to Nature. The healthy adult savage and the healthy infant of civilization both breathe in this manner, but civilized man has adopted unnatural methods of living, clothing, etc., and has lost his birthright. And we wish to remind the reader that the Complete Breath does not necessarily call for the complete filling of the lungs at every inhalation. One may inhale the average amount of air, using the Complete Breathing Method and distributing the air inhaled, be the quantity large  small, to all parts of the lungs. But one should inhale a series of full Complete Breaths several times a day, whenever opportunity offers, in order to keep the system in good order and condition.

The following simple exercise will give you a clear idea of what the Complete Breath is:

(1) Stand or sit erect. Breathing through the nostrils, inhale steadily, first filling the lower part of the lungs, which is accomplished by bringing into play the diaphragm, which decending exerts a gentle pressure on the abdominal organs, pushing forward the front walls of the abdomen. Then fill the middle part of the lungs, pushing out the lower ribs breastbone and chest. Then fill the higher portion of the lungs, protruding the upper chest, thus lifting the chest, including the upper six or seven pairs of ribs. In the final movement, the lower part of the abdomen will be slightly drawn in, which movement gives the

[p. 41].

lungs a support and also helps to fill the highest part of the lungs.

At first reading it may appear that this breath consists of three distinct movements. This, however, is not the correct idea. The inhalation is continuous, the entire chest cavity from the lowered diaphragm to the highest point of the chest in the region of the collar-bone, being expanded with a uniform movement. Avoid a jerky series of inhalations, and strive to attain a steady continuous action. Practice will soon overcome the tendency to divide the inhalation into three movements, and will result in a uniform continuous breath. You will be able to complete the inhalation in a couple of seconds after a little practice.

(2) Retain the breath a few seconds.

(3) Exhale quite slowly, holding the chest in a firm position, and drawing the abdomen in a little and lifting it upward slowly as the air leaves the lungs. Where the air is entirely exhaled, relax the chest and abdomen. A little practice will render this part of the exercise easy, and the movement once acquired will be afterward  almost automatically.

It will be seen that by this method of breathing all parts of the respiratory apparatus is brought into action, and all parts of the lungs, including the most remote air cells, are exercised. The chest cavity is expanded in all directions. You will also notice that the Complete Breath is really a combination of Low, Mid and High Breaths, succeeding each other rapidly in the order given, in such a manner as to form one uniform, continuous, complete breath.

You will find it quite a help to you if you will

[p. 42]

practice this breath before a large mirror, placing the hands lightly over the abdomen so that you may feel the movements. At the end of the inhalation, it is well to occasionally slightly elevate the shoulders, thus raising the collarbone and allowing the air to pass freely into the smaller upper lobe of the right lung, which place is sometimes the breeding place of tuberculosis.

At the beginning of practice, you may have more or less trouble in acquiring the Complete Breath, but a little practice will make perfect, and when you have once acquired it you will never willingly return to the old methods.

      
Science of Breath, by Yogi Ramacharaka, pseud. William Atkinson, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 43]

  

Chapter IX

  

PHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECT OF THE COMPLETE

  

BREATH

Scarcely too much can be said of the advantages attending the practice of the Complete Breath. And yet the student who has carefully read the foregoing pages should scarcely need to have pointed out to him such advantages.

The practice of the Complete Breath will make any man or woman immune to Consumption and other pulmonary troubles, and will do away with all liability to contract "colds," as well as bronchial and similar weaknesses. Consumption is due principally to lowered vitality attributable to an insufficient amount of air being inhaled. The impairment of vitality renders the system open to attacks from disease germs. Imperfect breathing allows a considerable part of the lungs to remain inactive, and such portions offer an inviting field for bacilli, which invading the weakened tissue soon produce havoc. Good healthy lung tissue will resist the germs, and the only way to have good healthy lung tissue is to use the lungs properly.

Consumptives are nearly all narrow-chested. What does this mean? Simply that these people were addicted to improper habits of breathing, and consequently their chests failed to develop and expand. The man who practices the Complete Breath will have a full broad chest and the narrow-chested man may develop his chest to normal proportions if he will but adopt this mode of breathing. Such people must develop their chest cavities if they value their

[p. 44]

lives. Colds may often be prevented by practicing a little vigorous Complete Breathing whenever you feel that you are being unduly exposed. When chilled, breathe vigorously a few minutes, and you will feel a glow all over your body. Most colds can be cured by Complete Breathing and partial fasting for a day.

The quality of the blood depends largely upon its proper oxygenation in the lungs, and if it is under-oxygenated it becomes poor in quality and laden with all sorts of impurities, and the system suffers from lack of nourishment, and often becomes actually poisoned by the waste products remaining uneliminated in the blood. As the entire body, every organ and every part, is dependent upon the blood for nourishment, impure blood must have a serious effect upon the entire system. The remedy is plain--practice the Yogi Complete Breath.

The stomach and other organs of nutrition suffer much from improper breathing. Not only are they ill nourished by reason of the lack of oxygen, but as the food must absorb oxygen from the blood and become oxygenated before it can be digested and assimilated, it is readily seen how digestion and assimilation is impaired by incorrect breathing. And when assimilation is not normal, the system receives less and less nourishment, the appetite fails, bodily vigor decreases, and energy diminishes, and the man withers and declines. All from the lack of proper breathing.

Even the nervous system suffers from improper breathing, inasmuch as the brain, the spinal cord, the nerve centers, and the nerves themselves, when improperly nourished by means of  blood, become poor and inefficient instruments for generating, storing.

[p. 45]

and transmitting the nerve currents. And improperly nourished they will become if sufficient oxygen is not absorbed through the lungs. There is another aspect of the case whereby the nerve currents themselves, or rather the force from which the nerve currents spring, becomes lessened from want of proper breathing, but this belongs to another phase of the subject which is treated of in other chapters of this book, and our purpose here is to direct your attention to the fact that the mechanism of the nervous system is rendered inefficient as an instrument for conveying nerve force, as the indirect result of a lack of proper breathing.

The effect of the reproductive organs upon the general health is too well known to be discussed at length here, but we may be permitted to say that with the reproductive organs in a weakened condition the entire system feels the reflex action and suffers sympathetically. The Complete Breath produces a rhythm which is Nature's own plan for keeping this important part of the system in normal condition, and, from the first, it will be noticed that the reproductive functions are strengthened and vitalized, thus, by sympathetic reflex action, giving tone to the whole system. By this, we do not mean that the lower sex impulses will be aroused; far from it. The Yogis are advocates of continence and chastity, and have learned to control the animal passions. But sexual control does not mean sexual weakness, and the Yogi teachings are that the man or woman whose reproductive organism is normal and healthy, will have a stronger will with which to control himself or herself. The Yogi believes that much of the perversion of this wonderful part of the system comes from a

[p. 46]

lack of normal health, and results from a morbid rather than a normal condition of these organs. A little careful consideration of this question will prove that the Yogi teachings are right. This is not the place to discuss the subject fully, but the Yogis know that sex-energy may be conserved and used for the development of the body and mind of the individual, instead of being dissipated in unnatural excesses as is the wont of so many uninformed people. By special request we will give in this book one of the favorite Yogi exercises for this purpose. But whether or not the student wishes to adopt the Yogi theories of continence and clean-living, he or she will find that the Complete Breath will do more to restore health to this part of the system than anything else ever tried. Remember, now, we mean normal health, not undue development. The sensualist will find that normal means a lessening of desire rather than an increase; the weakened man or woman will find a toning up and a relief from the weakness which has heretofore depressed him or her. We do not wish to be misunderstood or misquoted on this subject. The Yogis' ideal is a body strong in all its parts, under the control of a masterful and developed Will, animated by high ideals.

In the practice of the Complete Breath, during inhalation, the diaphragm contracts and exerts a gentle pressure upon the liver, stomach and other organs, which in connection with the rhythm of the lungs acts as a gentle massage of these organs and stimulates their actions, and encourages normal functioning. Each inhalation aids in this internal exercise, and assists in causing a normal circulation to the organs of nutrition and . In High or Mid Breathing

[p. 47]

the organs lose the benefit accruing from this internal massage.

The Western world is paying much attention to Physical Culture just now, which is a good thing. But in their enthusiasm they must not forget that the exercise of the external muscles is not everything. The internal organs also need exercise, and Nature's plan for this exercise is proper breathing. The diaphragm is Nature's principal instrument for this internal exercise. Its motion vibrates the important organs of nutrition and elimination, and massages and kneads them at each inhalation and exhalation, forcing blood into them, and then squeezing it out, and imparting a general tone to the organs. Any organ or part of the body which is not exercised gradually atrophies and refuses to function properly, and lack of the internal exercise afforded by the diaphragmatic action leads to diseased organs. The Complete Breath gives the proper motion to the diaphragm, as well as exercising the middle and upper chest. It is indeed "complete" in its action.

From the standpoint of Western physiology alone, without reference to the Oriental philosophies and science, this Yogi system of Complete Breathing is of vital importance to every man, woman and child who wishes to acquire health and keep it. Its very simplicity keeps thousands from seriously considering it, while they spend fortunes in seeking health through complicated and expensive "systems." Health knocks at their door and they answer not. Verily the stone which the builders reject is the real cornerstone of the Temple of Health.

      
Science of Breath, by Yogi Ramacharaka, pseud. William Atkinson, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 48]

  

Chapter X

  

A FEW BITS OF YOGI LORE

We give below three forms of breath, quite popular among the Yogis. The first is the well-known Yogi Cleansing Breath, to which is attributed much of the great lung endurance found among the Yogis. They usually finish up a breathing exercise with this Cleansing Breath, and we have followed this plan in this book. We also give the Yogi Nerve Vitalizing Exercise, which has been handed down among them for ages, and which has never been improved on by Western teachers of Physical Culture, although some of them have "borrowed" it from teachers of Yoga. We also give the Yogi Vocal Breath, which accounts largely for the melodious, vibrant voices of the better class of the Oriental Yogis. We feel that if this book contained nothing more than these three exercises, it would be invaluable to the Western student. Take these exercises as a gift from your Eastern brothers and put them into practice.

THE YOGI CLEANSING BREATH

The Yogis have a favorite form of breathing which they practice when they feel the necessity of ventilating and cleansing the lungs. They conclude many of their other breathing exercises with this breath, and we have followed this practice in this book. This Cleansing Breath ventilates and cleanses the lungs, stimulates the cells and gives a general tone to the respiratory organs, and is conducive to their general healthy condition. Besides this effect, it is found to greatly refresh the entire system. Speakers, singers,

[p. 49]

etc., will find this breath especially restful, after having tired the respiratory organs.

(1) Inhale a complete breath.

(2) Retain the air a few seconds.

(3) Pucker up the lips as if for a whistle (but do not swell out the cheeks), then exhale a little air through the opening, with considerable vigor. Then stop for a moment, retaining the air, and then exhale a little more air. Repeat until the air is completely exhaled. Remember that considerable vigor is to be used in exhaling the air through the opening in the lips.

This breath will be found quite refreshing when one is tired and generally "used up." A trial will convince the student of its merits. This exercise should be practiced until it can be performed naturally and easily, as it is used to finish up a number of other exercises given in this book, and it should be thoroughly understood.

THE YOGI NERVE VITALIZING BREATH

This is an exercise well known to the Yogis, who. consider it one of the strongest nerve stimulants and invigorants

known to man. Its purpose is to stimulate the Nervous System, develop nerve force, energy and vitality. This exercise brings a stimulating pressure to bear on important nerve centers, which in turn stimulate and energize the entire nervous system, and send an increased flow of nerve force to all parts of the body.

(1) Stand erect.

(2) Inhale a Complete Breath, and retain same.

(3) Extend the arms straight in front of you, letting them be somewhat limp and relaxed, with only sufficient nerve force to hold them out.

[p. 50]

(4) Slowly draw the hands back toward the shoulders, gradually contracting the muscles and putting force into them, so that when they reach the shoulders the fists will be so tightly clenched that a tremulous motion is felt.

(5) Then, keeping the muscles tense, push the fists slowly out, and then draw them back rapidly (still tense) several times.

(6) Exhale vigorously through the mouth.

(7) Practice the Cleansing Breath.

The efficiency of this exercise depends greatly upon the speed of the drawing back of the fists, and the tension of the muscles, and, of course, upon the full lungs. This exercise must be tried to be appreciated. It is without equal as a "bracer," as our Western friends put it.

THE YOGI VOCAL BREATH

The Yogis have a form of breathing to develop the voice. They are noted for their wonderful voices, which are strong, smooth and clear, and have a wonderful trumpet-like carrying power. They have practiced this particular form of breathing exercise which has resulted in rendering their voices soft, beautiful and flexible, imparting to it that indescribable, peculiar floating quality, combined with great power. The exercise given below will in time impart the above-mentioned qualities, or the Yogi Voice, to the student who practices it faithfully. It is to be understood, of course, that this form of breath is to be used only as an occasional exercise, and not as a regular form of breathing.

(1) Inhale a Complete Breath very slowly, but steadily, through the nostrils, taking as much time as possible in the inhalation. 

[p. 51]

(2) Retain for a few seconds.

(3) Expel the air vigorously in one great breath, through the wide opened mouth.

(4) Rest the lungs by the Cleansing Breath.

Without going deeply into the Yogi theories of sound-production in speaking and singing, we wish to say that experience has taught them that the timbre, quality and power of a voice depends not alone upon the vocal organs in the throat, but that the facial muscles, etc., have much to do with the matter. Some men with large chests produce but a poor tone, while others with comparatively small chests produce tones of amazing strength and quality. Here is an interesting experiment worth trying: Stand before a glass and pucker up your mouth and whistle, and note the shape of your mouth and the general expression of your face. Then sing or speak as you do naturally, and see the difference. Then start to whistle again for a few seconds, and then, without changing the position of your lips or face, sing a few notes and notice what a vibrant resonant, clear and beautiful tone is produced.

      
Science of Breath, by Yogi Ramacharaka, pseud. William Atkinson, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 52]

  

Chapter XI

  

THE SEVEN YOGI DEVELOPING EXERCISES

The following are the seven favorite exercises of the Yogis for developing the lungs, muscles, ligaments, air cells, etc. They are quite simple, but marvelously effective. Do not let the simplicity of these exercises make you lose interest, for they are the result of careful experiments and practice on the part of the Yogis, and are the essence of numerous intricate and complicated exercises, the non-essential portions being eliminated and the essential features retained.

(1) THE RETAINED BREATH

This is a very important exercise which tends to strengthen and develop the respiratory muscles as well as the lungs, and its frequent practice will also tend to expand the chest. The Yogis have found that an occasional holding of the breath, after the lungs have been filled with the Complete Breath, is very beneficial, not only to the respiratory organs but to the organs of nutrition, the nervous system and the blood itself. They have found that an occasional holding of the breath tends to purify the air which has remained in the lungs from former inhalations, and to more fully oxygenate the blood. They also know that the breath so retained gathers up all the waste matter, and when the breath is expelled it carries with it the effete matter of the system, and cleanses the lungs just as a purgative does the bowels. The Yogis recommend this exercise for various disorders of the stomach, liver and blood, and also find that it frequently relieves bad breath, which often

[p. 53]

arises from poorly ventilated lungs. We recommend students to pay considerable attention to this exercise, as it has great merits. The following directions will give you a clear idea of the exercise:

(1) Stand erect.

(2) Inhale a Complete Breath.

(3) Retain the air as long as you can comfortably.

(4) Exhale vigorously through the open mouth.

(5) Practice the Cleansing Breath.

At first you will be able to retain the breath only a short time, but a little practice will also show a great improvement. Time yourself with a watch if you want to note your progress.

(2) LUNG CELL STIMULATION

This exercise is designed to stimulate the air cells in the lungs, but beginners must not overdo it, and in no case should it be indulged in too vigorously. Some may find a slight dizziness resulting from the first few trials, in which case let them walk around a little and discontinue the exercise for a while.

(1) Stand erect, with hands at sides.

(2) Breathe in very slowly and gradually.

(3) While inhaling, gently tap the chest with the finger tips, constantly changing position.

(4) When the lungs are filled, retain the breath and pat the chest with the palms of the hands.

(5) Practice the Cleansing Breath.

This exercise is very bracing and stimulating to the whole body, and is a well-known Yogi practice. Many of the air cells of the lungs become inactive by reason of incomplete breathing, and often become almost atrophied. One who has practiced imperfect breathing for years will find it not so easy to stimulate all these ill-used air cells into activity all at once

[p. 54]

by the Complete Breath, but this exercise will do much toward bringing about the desired results, and is worth study and practice.

(3) RIB STRETCHING

We have explained that the ribs are fastened by cartilages, which admit of considerable expansion. In proper breathing, the ribs play an important part, and it is well to occasionally give them a little special exercise in order to preserve their elasticity. Standing or sitting in unnatural positions, to which many of the Western people are addicted, is apt to render the ribs more or less stiff and inelastic, and this exercise will do much to overcome same.

(1) Stand erect.

(2) Place the hands one on each side of the body, as high up under the armpits as convenient, the thumbs reaching toward the back, the palms on the side of the chest and the fingers to the front over the breast.

(3) Inhale a Complete Breath.

(4) Retain the air for a short time.

(5) Then gently squeeze the sides, at the same time slowly exhaling.

(6) Practice the Cleansing Breath.

Use moderation in this exercise and do not overdo it.

(4) CHEST EXPANSION

The chest is quite apt to be contracted from bending over one's work, etc. This exercise is very good for the purpose of restoring natural conditions and gaining chest expansion.

(1) Stand erect.

(2) Inhale a Complete Breath

[p. 55]

 

(3) Retain the air.

(4) Extend both arms forward and bring the two, clenched fists together on a level with the shoulder.

(5) Then swing back the fists vigorously until the arms stand out straight sideways from the shoulders.

(6) Then bring back to Position 4, and swing to Position 5. Repeat several times.

(7) Exhale vigorously through the opened mouth.

(8) Practice the Cleansing Breath.

Use moderation and do not overdo this exercise.

(5) WALKING EXERCISE

(1) Walk with head up, chin drawn slightly in, shoulders back, and with measured tread.

(2) Inhale a Complete Breath, counting (mentally) 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, one count to each step, making the inhalation extend over the eight counts.

(3) Exhale slowly through the nostrils, counting as before-1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8--one count to a step.

(4) Rest between breaths, continuing walking and counting, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, one count to a step.

(5) Repeat until you begin to feel tired. Then rest for a while, and resume at pleasure. Repeat several times a day.

Some Yogis vary this exercise by retaining the breath during a 1, 2, 3, 4, count, and then exhale in an eight-step count. Practice whichever plan seems most agreeable to you.

(6) MORNING EXERCISE

(1) Stand erect in a military attitude, head up, eyes front, shoulders back, knees stiff, hands at sides.

[p. 56]

(2) Raise body slowly on toes, inhaling a Complete Breath, steadily and slowly.

(3) Retain the breath for a few seconds, maintaining the same position.

(4) Slowly sink to first position, at the same time slowly exhaling the air through the nostrils.

(5) Practice Cleansing Breath.

(6) Repeat several times, varying by using right leg alone, then left leg alone.

(7) STIMULATING CIRCULATION

(1) Stand erect.

(2) Inhale a Complete Breath and retain.

(3) Bend forward slightly and grasp a stick or cane steadily and firmly, and gradually exerting your entire strength upon the grasp.

(4) Relax the grasp, return to first position, and slowly exhale.

(5) Repeat several times.

(6) Finish with the Cleansing Breath.

This exercise may be performed without the use of a stick or cane, by grasping an imaginary cane, using the will to exert the pressure. The exercise is a favorite Yogi plan of stimulating the circulation by driving the arterial blood to the extremities, and drawing back the venous blood to the heart and lungs that it may take up the oxygen which has been inhaled with the air. In cases of poor circulation there is not enough blood in the lungs to absorb the increased amount of oxygen inhaled, and the system does not get the full benefit of the improved breathing. In such cases, particularly, it is well to practice the exercise, occasionally with the regular Complete Breathing exercise.

      
Science of Breath, by Yogi Ramacharaka, pseud. William Atkinson, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 57]

  

Chapter XII

  

SEVEN MINOR YOGI EXERCISES

This chapter is composed of seven minor Yogi Breathing Exercises, bearing no special names, but each distinct and separate from the others and having a different purpose in view. Each student will find several of these exercises best adapted to the special requirements of his particular case. Although we have styled these exercises "minor exercises," they are quite valuable and useful, or they would not appear in this book. They give one a condensed course in "Physical Culture" and "Lung Development," and might readily be "padded out" and elaborated into a small book on these subjects. They have, of course, an additional value, as Yogi Breathing forms a part of each exercise. Do not pass them by because they are marked "minor." Some one or more of these exercises may be just what you need. Try them and decide for yourself.

EXERCISE I

(1) Stand erect with hands at sides.

(2) Inhale Complete Breath.

(3) Raise the arms slowly, keeping them rigid until the hands touch over head.

(4) Retain the breath a few minutes with hands over head.

(5) Lower hands slowly to sides, exhaling slowly at same time.

(6) Practice Cleansing Breath.

EXERCISE II

(1) Stand erect, with arms straight in front of you.

[p. 58]

(2) Inhale Complete Breath and retain.

(3) Swing arms back as far as they will go; then back to first position; then repeat several times, retaining the breath all the while.

(4) Exhale vigorously through mouth.

(5) Practice Cleansing Breath.

EXERCISE III

(1) Stand erect with arms straight in front of you.

(2) Inhale Complete Breath.

(3) Swing arms around in a circle, backward, a few times. Then reverse a few times, retaining the breath all the while. You may vary this by rotating them alternately like the sails of a windmill.

(4) Exhale the breath vigorously through the mouth.

(5) Practice Cleansing Breath.

EXERCISE IV

(1) Lie on the floor with your face downward and palms of hands flat upon the floor by your sides.

(2) Inhale Complete Breath and retain.

(3) Stiffen the body and raise yourself up by the strength of your arms until you rest on your hands and toes.

(4) Then lower yourself to original position. Repeat several times.

(5) Exhale vigorously through your mouth.

(6) Practice Cleansing Breath.

EXERCISE V

(1) Stand erect with your palms against the wall.

(2) Inhale Complete Breath and retain.

(3) Lower the chest to the wall, resting your weight on your hands.

[p. 59]

(4) Then raise yourself back with the arm muscles alone, keeping the body stiff.

(5) Exhale vigorously through the mouth.

(6) Practice Cleansing Breath.

EXERCISE VI

(1) Stand erect with arms "akimbo," that is, with hands resting around the waist and elbows standing out.

(2) Inhale Complete Breath and retain.

(3) Keep legs and hips stiff and bend well forward, as if bowing, at the same time exhaling slowly.

(4) Return to first position and take another Complete Breath.

(5) Then bend backward, exhaling slowly.

(6) Return to first position and take a Complete Breath.

(7) Then bend sideways, exhaling slowly. (Vary by bending to right and then to left.)

(8) Practice Cleansing Breath.

EXERCISE VII

(1) Stand erect, or sit erect, with straight spinal column.

(2) Inhale a Complete Breath, but instead of inhaling a continuous steady stream, take a series of short, quick "sniffs," as if you were smelling aromatic salts or ammonia and did not wish to get too strong a "whiff." Do not exhale any of these little breaths, but add one to the other until the entire lung space is filled.

(3) Retain for a few seconds.

(4) Exhale through the nostrils in a long, restful, sighing breath.

(5) Practice Cleansing Breath.

      
Science of Breath, by Yogi Ramacharaka, pseud. William Atkinson, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 60]

  

Chapter XIII

  

VIBRATION AND YOGI RHYTHMIC

  

BREATHING

All is in vibration. From the tiniest atom to the greatest sun, everything is in a state of vibration. There is nothing in absolute rest in nature. A single atom deprived of vibration would wreck the universe. In incessant vibration the universal work is performed. Matter is being constantly played upon by energy and countless forms and numberless varieties result, and yet even the forms and varieties are not permanent. They begin to change the moment they are created, and from them are born innumerable forms, which in turn change and give rise to newer forms, and so on and on, in infinite succession. Nothing is permanent in the world of forms, and yet the great Reality is unchangeable. Forms are but appearances--they come, they go, but the Reality is eternal and unchangeable.

The atoms of the human body are in constant vibration. Unceasing changes are . In a few months there is almost a complete change in the matter composing the body, and scarcely a single atom now composing your body will be found in it a few months hence. Vibration, constant vibration. Change, constant change.

In all vibration is to be found a certain rhythm. Rhythm pervades the universe. The swing of the planets around the sun; the rise and fall of the sea; the beating of the heart; the ebb and flow of the tide; all follow rhythmic laws. The rays of the sun reach us; the rain descends upon us, in obedience to the

[p. 61]

same law. All growth is but an exhibition of this law. All motion is a manifestation of the law of rhythm.

Our bodies are as much subject to rhythmic laws as is the planet in its revolution around the sun. Much of the esoteric side of the Yogi Science of Breath is based upon this known principle of nature. By falling in with the rhythm of the body, the Yogi manages to absorb a great amount of Prana, which he disposes of to bring about results desired by him. We will speak of this at greater length later on.

The body which you occupy is like a small inlet running in to the land from the sea. Although apparently subject only to its own laws, it is really subject to the ebb and flow of the tides of the ocean. The great sea of life is swelling and receding, rising and falling, and we are responding to its vibrations and rhythm. In a normal condition we receive the vibration and rhythm of the great ocean of life, and respond to it, but at times the mouth of the inlet seems choked up  debris, and we fail to receive the impulse from Mother Ocean, and  manifests within us.

You have heard how a note on a violin, if sounded repeatedly and in rhythm, will start into motion vibrations which will in time destroy a bridge. The same result is true when a regiment of soldiers crosses a bridge, the order being always given to "break step" on such an occasion, lest the vibration bring down both bridge and regiment. These manifestations of the effect of rhythmic motion will give you an idea of the effect on the body of rhythmic breathing. The whole system catches the vibration and becomes in harmony with the will, which causes the rhythmic

[p. 62]

motion of the lungs, and while in such complete harmony will respond readily to orders from the will. With the body thus attuned, the Yogi finds no difficulty in increasing the circulation in any part of the body by an order from the will, and in the same way he can direct an increased current of nerve force to any part or organ, strengthening and stimulating it.

In the same way the Yogi by rhythmic breathing "catches the swing," as it were, and is able to absorb and control a greatly increased amount of prana, which is then at the disposal of his will. He can and does use it as a vehicle for sending forth thoughts to others and for attracting to him all those whose thoughts are keyed in the same vibration. The phenomena of telepathy, thought transference, mental healing, mesmerism, etc., which subjects are creating such an interest in the Western world at the present time, but which have been known to the Yogis for centuries, can be greatly increased and augmented if the person sending forth the thoughts will do so after rhythmic breathing. Rhythmic breathing will increase the value of mental healing, magnetic healing, etc., several hundred per cent.

In rhythmic breathing the main thing to be acquired is the mental idea of rhythm. To those who know anything of music, the idea of measured counting is familiar. To others, the rhythmic step of the soldier: "Left, right; left, right; left, right; one, two, three, four; one, two, three, four," will convey the idea.

The Yogi bases his rhythmic time upon a unit corresponding with the beat of his heart. The heart beat varies in different persons, but the heart beat unit of each person is the proper rhythmic standard for that

 

[p. 63]

particular individual in his rhythmic breathing. Ascertain your normal heart beat by placing your fingers over your pulse, and then count: "1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6; 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6," etc., until the rhythm becomes firmly fixed in your mind. A little practice will fix the rhythm, so that you will be able to easily reproduce it. The beginner usually inhales in about six pulse units, but he will be able to greatly increase this by practice.

The Yogi rule for rhythmic breathing is that the units of inhalation and exhalation should be the same, while the units for retention and between breaths should be one-half the number of those of inhalation and exhalation.

The following exercise in Rhythmic Breathing should be thoroughly mastered, as it forms the basis of numerous other exercises, to which reference will be made later.

(1) Sit erect, in an easy posture, being sure to hold the chest, neck and head as nearly in a straight line as possible, with shoulders slightly thrown back and hands resting easily on the lap. In this position the weight of the body is largely supported by the ribs and the position may be easily maintained. The Yogi has found that one cannot get the best effect of rhythmic breathing with the chest drawn in and the abdomen protruding.

(2) Inhale slowly a Complete Breath, counting six pulse units.

(3) Retain, counting three pulse units.

(4) Exhale slowly through the nostrils, counting six pulse units.

(5) Count three pulse beats between breaths.

(6) Repeat a number of times, but avoid fatiguing yourself at the start.

[p. 64]

(7) When you are ready to close the exercise, practice cleansing breath, which will rest you and cleanse the lungs.

After a little practice you will be able to increase the duration of the inhalations and exhalations, until about fifteen pulse units are consumed. In this increase, remember that the units for retention and between breaths is one-half the units for inhalation and exhalation.

Do not overdo yourself in your effort to increase the duration of the breath, but pay as much attention as possible to acquiring the "rhythm," as that is more important than the length of the breath. Practice and try until you get the measured "swing" of the movement, and until you can almost "feel" the rhythm of the vibratory motion throughout your whole body. It will require a little practice and perseverance, but your pleasure at your improvement will make the task an easy one. The Yogi is a most patient and persevering man, and his great attainments are due largely to the possession of those qualities.

      
Science of Breath, by Yogi Ramacharaka, pseud. William Atkinson, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 65]

  

Chapter. XIV

  

PHENOMENA OF YOGI PSYCHIC BREATHING

With the exception of the instructions in the Yogi Rhythmic Breathing, the majority of the exercises heretofore given in this book relate to the physical plane of effort, which, while highly important in itself, is also regarded by the Yogis as in the nature of affording a substantial basis for efforts on the psychic and spiritual plane. Do not, however, discard or think lightly of the physical phase of the subject, for remember that it needs a sound body to support a sound mind, and also that the body is the temple of the Ego, the lamp in which burns the light of the Spirit. Everything is good in its place, and everything has its place. The developed man is the "all-around man," who recognizes body, mind and spirit and renders to each its due. Neglect of either is a mistake which must be rectified sooner or later; a debt which must be repaid with interest.

We will now take up the Psychic phase of the Yogi Science of Breath in the shape of a series of exercises, each exercise carrying with it its explanation.

You will notice that in each exercise rhythmic breathing is accompanied with the instructions to "carry the thought" of certain desired results. This mental attitude gives the Will a cleared track upon which to exercise its force. We cannot, in this work, go into the subject of the power of the Will, and must assume that you have some knowledge of the subject. If you have no acquaintance with the subject, you will find that the actual practice of the exercises themselves will give you a much clearer knowledge

[p. 66]

than any amount of theoretical teaching, for as the old Hindu proverb says, "He who tastes a grain of mustard seed knows more of its flavor than he who sees an elephant load of it."

(1) GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR YOGI PSYCHIC

BREATHING

The basis of all Yogi Psychic Breathing is the Yogi Rhythmic Breath, instruction regarding which we gave in our last chapter. In the following exercises, in order to avoid useless repetition, we will say merely, Breath Rhythmically," and then give the instruction for the exercise of the psychic force, or directed Will power working in connection with the rhythmic breath vibrations. After a little practice you will find that you will not need to count after the first rhythmic breath, as the mind will grasp the idea of time and rhythm and you will be able to breathe rhythmically at pleasure, almost automatically. This will leave the mind clear for the sending of the psychic vibrations under the  of the Will. (See the following first exercise for directions in using the Will.)

(2) PRANA DISTRIBUTING

Lying flat on the floor or bed,  relaxed, with hands resting lightly over the Solar Plexus (over the pit of the stomach, where the ribs begin to separate), breathe rhythmically. After the rhythm is fully established will that each inhalation will draw in an increased supply of prana or vital energy from the Universal supply, which will be taken up by the nervous system and stored in the Solar Plexus. At each exhalation will that the prana or vital energy is being distributed all over the  to every organ and part;

[p. 67]

to every muscle, cell and atom; to nerve, artery and vein; from top of your head to the soles of your feet; invigorating, strengthening and stimulating every nerve recharging every nerve center; sending energy, force and strength all over the system. While exercising the will, try to form a mental picture of the inrushing prana, coming in through the lungs and being taken up at once by the Solar Plexus, then with exhaling effort, being sent to all parts of the system, down to the finger tips and down to the toes. It is not necessary to use the Will with an effort. Simply commanding that which you wish to produce and then making the mental picture of it is all that is necessary. Calm command with the mental picture is far better than forcible willing, which only dissipates force needlessly. The above exercise is most helpful and greatly refreshes and strengthens the nervous system and produces a restful feeling all over the body. It is especially beneficial in cases where one is tired or feels a lack of energy.

(3) INHIBITING PAIN

Lying down or sitting erect, breath rhythmically, holding the thought that you are inhaling prana. Then when you exhale, send the prana to the painful part to re-establish the circulation and nerve current. Then inhale more prana for the purpose of driving out the painful condition; then exhale, holding the thought that you are driving out the pain. Alternate the two above mental commands, and with one exhalation stimulate the part and with the next drive out the pain. Keep this up for seven breaths, then practice the Cleansing Breath and rest a while. Then try it again until relief comes, which will be before long.

[p. 68]

Many pains will be found to be relieved before seven breaths are finished. If the hand is placed over the painful part, you may get quicker results. Send the current of prana down the arm and into the painful part.

(4) DIRECTING THE CIRCULATION

Lying down or sitting erect, breathe rhythmically, and with the exhalations direct the circulation to any part you wish, which may be suffering from imperfect circulation. This is effective in cases of cold feet or in cases of headache, the blood being sent downward in both cases, in the first case warming the feet, and in the latter, relieving the brain from too great pressure. In the case of headache, try the Pain Inhibiting first, then follow with sending the blood downward. You will often feel a warm feeling in the legs as the circulation moves downward. The circulation is largely under the control of the will and rhythmic breathing renders the task easier.

(5) SELF-HEALING

Lying in a relaxed condition, breathe rhythmically, and command that a good supply of prana be inhaled. With the exhalation, send the prana to the affected part for the purpose of stimulating it. Vary this occasionally by exhaling, with the mental command that the diseased condition be forced out and disappear. Use the hands in this exercise, passing them down the body from the head to the affected part. In using the hands in healing yourself or others always hold the mental image that the prana is flowing down the arm and through the finger tips into the body, thus reaching the affected part and healing it. Of course we can give only general directions in

[p. 69]

this book without taking up the several forms of disease in detail, but a little practice of the above exercise, varying it slightly to fit the conditions of the case, will produce wonderful results. Some Yogis follow the plan of placing both hands on the affected part, and then breathing rhythmically, holding the mental image that they are fairly pumping prana into the diseased organ and part, stimulating it and driving out diseased conditions, as pumping into a pail of dirty water will drive out the latter and fill the bucket with fresh water. This last plan is very effective if the mental image of the pump is clearly held, the inhalation representing the lifting of the pump handle and the exhalation the actual pumping.

(6) HEALING OTHERS

We cannot take up the question of the psychic treatment of disease by prana in detail in this book, as such would be foreign to its purpose. But we can and will give you simple, plain instructions whereby you may be enabled to do much good in relieving others. The main principle to remember is that by rhythmic breathing and controlled thought you are enabled to absorb a considerable amount of prana, and are also able to pass it into the body of another person, stimulating weakened parts and organs and imparting health and driving out diseased conditions. You must first learn to form such a clear mental image of the desired condition that you will be able to actually feel the influx of prana, and the force running down your arms and out of your finger tips into the body of the patient. Breathe rhythmically a few times until the rhythm is fairly established, then place your hands upon the affected part of the body of the patient,

[p. 70]

letting them rest lightly over the part. Then follow the "pumping" process described in the preceding  (Self-Healing) and fill the patient full of prana until the diseased condition is driven out. Every once in a while raise the hands and "flick" the fingers as if you were throwing off the diseased condition. It is well to do this occasionally and also to wash the hands after treatment, as otherwise you may take on a trace of the diseased condition of the patient. Also practice the Cleansing Breath several times after the treatment. During the treatment let the prana pour into the patient in one continuous stream, allowing yourself to be merely the pumping machinery connecting the patient with the universal supply of prana, and allowing it to flow freely through you. You need not work the hands vigorously, but simply enough that the prana freely reaches the affected parts. The rhythmic breathing must be practiced frequently during the treatment, so as to keep the rhythm normal and to afford the prana a free passage. It is better to place the hands on the bare skin, but where this is not advisable or possible place them over the clothing. Vary above methods occasionally during the treatment by stroking the body gently and softly with the finger tips, the fingers being kept slightly separated. This is  soothing to the patient. In cases of long standing you may find it helpful to give the mental command in words, such as "get out, get out," or "be strong, be strong," as the case may be, the words helping you to exercise the will more forcibly and to the point. Vary these instructions to suit the needs of the case, and use your own judgement and inventive faculty. We have given you the general principles and you can apply them in hundreds of different ways.

[p. 71]

The above apparently simple instruction, if carefully studied and applied, will enable one to accomplish all that the leading "magnetic healers" are able to, although their "systems" are more or less cumbersome and complicated. They are using prana ignorantly and calling it "magnetism." If they would combine rhythmic breathing with their "magnetic" treatment they would double their efficiency.

(7) DISTANT HEALING

Prana colored by the thought of the sender may be projected to persons at a distance, who are willing to receive it, and healing work done in this way. This is the secret of the "absent healing," of which the Western world has heard so much of late years. The thought of the healer sends forth and colors the prana of the sender, and it flashes across space and finds lodgment in the psychic mechanism of the patient. It is unseen, and like the Marconi waves, it passes through intervening obstacles and seeks the person attuned to receive it. In order to treat persons at a distance, you must form a mental image of them until you can feel yourself to be en rapport with them. This is a psychic process dependent upon the mental imagery of the healer. You can feel the sense of rapport when it is established, it manifesting in a sense of nearness. That is about as plain as we can describe it. It may be acquired by a little practice, and some will get it at the first trial. When rapport is established, say mentally to the distant patient, "I am sending you a supply of vital  or power, which will invigorate you and heal you." Then picture the prana as leaving your mind with each exhalation of rhythmic breath, and traveling across space instantaneously

[p. 72]

and reaching the patient and healing him. It is not necessary to fix certain hours for treatment, although you may do so if you wish. The respective condition of the patient, as he is expecting and opening himself up to your psychic force, attunes him to receive your vibrations whenever you may send them. If you agree upon hours, let him place himself in a relaxed attitude and receptive condition. The above is the great underlying principle of the "absent treatment" of the Western world. You may do these things as well as the most noted healers, with a little practice.

      
Science of Breath, by Yogi Ramacharaka, pseud. William Atkinson, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 73]

  

Chapter XV

  

MORE PHENOMENA

  

OF YOGI PSYCHIC BREATHING

(1) THOUGHT PROJECTION

Thoughts may be projected by following the last mentioned method (Distant Healing) and others will feel the effect of thought so sent forth, it being remembered always that no evil thought can ever injure another person whose thoughts are good. Good thoughts are always positive to bad ones, and bad ones always negative to good ones. One can, however,  the interest and attention of another by sending him thought waves in this way, charging the prana with the message he wishes to convey. If you desire another's love and sympathy, and possess love and sympathy for him, you can send him thoughts of this kind with effect, providing your motives are pure. Never, however, attempt to influence another to his hurt, or from impure or selfish motives, as such thoughts only recoil upon the sender with redoubled force, and injure him, while the innocent party is not affected. Psychic force when legitimately used is all right, but beware of "black magic" or improper and unholy uses of it, as such attempts are like playing with a dynamo, and the person attempting such things will be surely punished by the result of the act itself. However, no person of impure motives ever acquires a great degree of psychic power, and a pure heart and mind is an invulnerable shield against improper psychic power. Keep yourself pure and nothing can hurt you.

[p. 74]

(2) FORMING AN AURA

If you are ever in the company of persons of a low order of mind, and you feel the depressing influence of their thought, breathe  a few times, thus generating an additional supply of prana, and then by means of the mental image method surround yourself with an egg-shape thought aura, which will protect you from the gross thought and  influences of others.

(3) RECHARGING YOURSELF

If you feel that your vital energy is at a low ebb, and that you need to store up a new supply quickly, the best plan is to place the feet close together (side by side, of course) and to lock the fingers of both hands in any way that seems the most comfortable. This closes the circuit, as it were, and prevents any escape of prana through the extremities. Then breathe rhythmically a few times, and you will feel the effect of the recharging.

(4) RECHARGING OTHERS

If some friend is deficient in vitality you may aid him by sitting in front of him, your toes touching his, and his hands in yours. Then both breathe rhythmically, you forming the mental image of sending prana into his system, and he holding the mental image of receiving the prana. Persons of weak vitality or passive will should be careful with whom they try this experiment, as the prana of a person of evil desires will be colored with the thoughts of that person, and may give him a temporary influence over the weaker person. The latter, however, may easily remove such influence by closing the circuit (as before mentioned) 

[p. 75]

and breathing a few rhythmic breaths,  with the Cleansing Breath.

(5) CHARGING WATER

Water may be charged with prana, by breathing rhythmically, and holding the glass of water by the bottom, in the left hand, and then gathering the fingers of the right hand together and shaking them gently over the water, as if you were shaking drops of water off of your finger tips into the glass. The mental image of the prana being passed into the water must also be held. Water thus charged is found stimulating to weak or sick persons, particularly if a healing thought accompanies the mental image of the transfer of the prana. The caution given in the last exercise applies also to this one, although the danger exists only in a greatly lessened degree.

(6) ACQUIRING MENTAL QUALITIES

Not only can the body be controlled by the mind under direction of the will, but the mind itself can be trained and cultivated by the exercise of the controlling will. This, which the Western world knows as "Mental Science," etc., has proved to the West portions of that truth which the Yogi has known for ages. The mere calm demand of the Will will accomplish wonders in this direction, but if the mental exercise is accompanied by rhythmic breathing, the effect is greatly increased. Desirable qualities may be acquired by holding the proper mental image of what is desired during rhythmic breathing. Poise and Self Control, desirable qualities; increased power, etc., may be acquired in this way. Undesirable qualities may be eliminated by cultivating the opposite qualities. Any or all the "Mental Science" exercises, "treatments" and

[p. 76]

"affirmations" may be used with the Yogi Rhythmic Breath. The following is a good general exercise for the acquirement and development of desirable mental qualities:

Lie in a passive attitude, or sit erect. Picture to yourself the qualities you desire to cultivate, seeing yourself as possessed of the qualities, and demanding that your mind develop the quality. Breathe rhythmically, holding the mental picture firmly. Carry the mental picture with you as much as possible, and endeavor to live up to the ideal you have set up in your mind. You will find yourself gradually growing up to your ideal. The rhythm of the breathing assists the mind in forming new combinations, and the student who has followed the Western system will find the Yogi Rhythmic (Breath) a wonderful ally in his "Mental " works.

(7) ACQUIRING PHYSICAL QUALITIES

Physical qualities may be acquired by the same methods as above mentioned in connection with mental qualities. We do not mean, of course, that short men can be made tall, or that amputated limbs may be replaced, or similar miracles. But the expression of the countenance may be changed; courage and general physical characteristics improved by the control of the Will, accompanied by rhythmic breathing. As a man thinks so does he look, act, walk, sit, etc. Improved thinking will mean improved looks and actions. To develop any part of the body, direct the attention to it, while breathing rhythmically, holding the mental picture that you are sending an increased amount of prana, or nerve force, to the part, and thus increasing its vitality and developing

[p. 77]

it. This plan applies equally well to any part of the body which you wish to develop. Many Western athletes use a modification of this plan in their exercises. The student who has followed our instructions so far will readily understand how to apply the Yogi principles in the above work. The general rule of exercise is the same as in the preceding exercise (acquiring Mental Qualities) . We have touched upon the subject of the care of physical ailments in preceding pages.

(8) CONTROLLING THE EMOTIONS

The undesirable emotions, such as Fear, Worry, Anxiety, Hate, Anger, Jealousy, Envy, Melancholy, Excitement, Grief, etc., are amenable to the control of the Will, and the Will is enabled to operate more easily in such cases if rhythmic breathing is practiced while the student is "willing." The following exercise has been found most effective by the Yogi students, although the advanced Yogi has but little need of it, as he has long since gotten rid of these undesirable mental qualities by growing spiritually beyond them. The Yogi student, however, finds the exercise a great help to him while he is growing.

Breathe rhythmically, concentrating the attention upon the Solar Plexus, and sending to it the mental command "Get Out." Send the mental command firmly, just as you begin to exhale, and form the mental picture of the undesirable emotions being carried away with the exhaled breath. Repeat seven times, and finish with the Cleansing Breath, and then see how good you feel. The mental command must be given "in earnest," as trifling will not do the work.

[p. 78]

(9) TRANSMUTATION OF THE REPRODUCTIVE

ENERGY

The Yogis possess great knowledge regarding the use and abuse of the reproductive principle in both sexes. Some hints of this esoteric knowledge have filtered out and have been used by Western writers on the subject, and much good has been accomplished in this way. In this little book we cannot do more than touch upon the subject, and omitting all except a bare mention of theory, we will give a practical breathing exercise whereby the student will be enabled to transmute the reproductive energy into vitality for the entire system, instead of dissipating and wasting it in lustful indulgences in or out of the marriage relations. The reproductive energy is creative energy, and may be taken up by the system and transmuted into strength and vitality, thus serving the purpose of regeneration instead of generation. If the young men of the Western world understood these underlying principles they would be saved much misery and unhappiness in after years, and would be stronger mentally, morally and physically.

This transmutation of the reproductive energy gives great vitality to those practicing it. They will be filled with great vital force, which will radiate from them and will manifest in what has been called "personal magnetism." The energy thus transmuted may be turned into new channels and used to great advantage. Nature has condensed one of its most powerful manifestations of prana into reproductive energy, as its purpose is to create. The greatest amount of vital force is concentrated in the smallest area. The reproductive organism is the most powerful storage battery in animal life, and its force can be drawn

[p. 79]

upward and used, as well as expended in the ordinary functions of reproduction, or wasted in riotous lust. The majority of our students know something of the theories of regeneration, and we can do little more than to state the above facts, without attempting to prove them.

The Yogi exercise for transmuting reproductive energy is simple. It is coupled with rhythmic breathing, and can be easily performed. It may be practiced at any time, but is specially recommended when one feels the instinct most strongly, at which time the reproductive energy is manifesting and may be most easily transmuted for regenerative purposes. The exercise is as follows:

Keep the mind fixed on the idea of Energy, and away from ordinary sexual thoughts or imaginings. If these thoughts come into the mind do not be discouraged, but regard them as manifestations of a force which you intend using for the purposes of strengthening the body and mind. Lie passively or sit erect, and fix your mind on the idea of drawing the reproductive energy upward to the Solar Plexus, where it will be transmuted and stored away as a reserve force of vital energy. Then breathe rhythmically, forming the mental image of drawing up the reproductive energy with each inhalation. With each inhalation make a command of the Will that the energy be drawn upward from the reproductive organization to the Solar Plexus. If the rhythm is fairly established and the mental image is clear, you will be conscious of the upward passage of the energy, and will feel its stimulating effect. If you desire an increase in mental force, you may draw it up to the brain instead of to the Solar Plexus, by giving the

[p. 80]

mental command and holding the mental image of the transmission to the brain.

The man or woman doing mental creative work, or bodily creative work, will be able to use this creative energy in their work by following the above exercise, drawing up the energy with the inhalation and sending it forth with the exhalation. In this last form of exercise, only such portions as are needed in the work will pass into the work being done, the balance remaining stored up in the Solar Plexus.

You will understand, of course, that it is not the reproductive fluids which are drawn up and used, but the etheric pranic energy which animates the latter, the soul of the reproductive organism, as it were. It is usual to allow the head to bend forward easily and naturally during the transmuting exercise.

(10) BRAIN STIMULATING

The Yogis have found the following exercise most useful in stimulating the action of the brain for the purpose of producing clear thinking and reasoning. It has a wonderful effect in clearing the brain and nervous system, and those engaged in mental work will find it most useful to them, both in the direction of enabling them to do better work and also as a means of refreshing the mind and clearing it after arduous mental labor.

Sit in an erect posture, keeping the spinal column straight, and the eyes well to the front, letting the hands rest on the upper part of the legs. Breathe rhythmically, but instead of breathing through both nostrils as in the ordinary exercises, press the left nostril close with the thumb, and inhale through the right nostril. Then remove the thumb, and close the right nostril with the finger, and then exhale through 

[p. 81]

the left nostril. Then, without changing the fingers, inhale through the left nostril, and changing fingers, exhale through the right. Then inhale through right and exhale through left, and so on, alternating nostrils as above mentioned, closing the unused nostril with the thumb or forefinger. This is one of the oldest forms of Yogi breathing, and is quite important and valuable, and is well worthy of acquirement. But it is quite amusing to the Yogis to know that to the Western world this method is often held out as being the "whole secret" of Yogi Breathing. To the minds of many Western readers, "Yogi Breathing" suggests nothing more than a picture of a Hindu, sitting erect, and alternating nostrils in the act of breathing. "Only this and nothing more." We trust that this little work will open the eyes of the Western world to the great possibilities of Yogi Breathing, and the numerous methods whereby it may be employed.

(11) THE GRAND YOGI PSYCHIC BREATH

The Yogis have a favorite form of psychic breathing which they practice occasionally, to which has been given a Sancrit term of which the above is a general equivalent. We have given it last, as it requires practice on the part of the student in the line of rhythmic breathing and mental imagery, which he has now acquired by means of the preceding exercises. The general principles of the Grand Breath may be summed up in the old Hindu saying: "Blessed is the Yogi who can breathe through his bones." This exercise will fill the entire system with prana, and the student will emerge from it with every bone, muscle, nerve, cell, tissue, organ and part energized

[p. 82]

and attuned by the prana and the rhythm of the breath. It is a general housecleaning of the system, and he who practices it carefully will feel as if he had been given a new body, freshly created, from the crown of his head to the tips of his toes. We will let the exercise speak for itself.

(1) Lie in a relaxed position, at perfect ease.

(2) Breathe rhythmically until the rhythm is perfectly established.

(3) Then, inhaling and exhaling,  the mental image of the breath being drawn upon through the bones of the legs, and then forced out through them; then through the bones of the arms; then through the top of the skull; then through the stomach; then through the reproductive region; then as if it were traveling upward and downward along the spinal column; and then as if the breath were being inhaled and exhaled through every pore of the skin, the whole body being filled with prana and life.

(4) Then (breathing rhythmically) send the current of prana to the Seven Vital Centers, in turn, as follows, using the mental picture as in previous exercises:

(a) To the forehead.

(b) To the back of the head.

(c) To the base of the brain.

(d) To the Solar Plexus.

(e) To the Sacral Region (lower part of the spine) .

(f) To the region of the navel.

(g) To the reproductive region.

Finish by sweeping the current of prana, to and fro from head to feet several times.

(5) Finish with Cleansing Breath.

     
Science of Breath, by Yogi Ramacharaka, pseud. William Atkinson, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 83]

  

Chapter XVI

  

YOGI SPIRITUAL BREATHING

The Yogis not only bring about desired mental qualities and properties by will-power coupled with rhythmic breathing, but they also develop spiritual faculties, or rather aid in their unfoldment, in the same way. The Oriental philosophies teach that man has many faculties which are at present in a dormant state, but which will become unfolded as the race progresses. They also teach that man, by the proper effort of the will, aided by favorable conditions, may aid in the unfoldment of these spiritual faculties, and develop them much sooner than in the ordinary process of evolution. In other words, one may even now develop spiritual powers of consciousness which will not become the common property of the race until after long ages of gradual development under the law of evolution. In all of the exercises directed toward this end, rhythmic breathing plays an important part. There is of course no mystic property in the breath itself which produces such wonderful results, but the rhythm produced by the Yogi breath is such as to bring the whole system, including the brain, under perfect control, and in perfect harmony, and by this means, the most perfect condition is obtained for the unfoldment of these latent faculties.

In this work we cannot go deeply into the philosophy of the East regarding spiritual development, because this subject would require volumes to cover it, and then again the subject is too abstruse to interest the average reader. There are also other reasons, well known to occultists, why this knowledge should

[p. 84]

not be spread broadcast at this time. Rest assured, dear student, that when the time comes for you to take the next step, the way will be opened out before you. "When the chela (student) is ready, the guru (master) appears." In this chapter we will give you directions for the development of two phases of spiritual consciousness, i.e., (1) the consciousness of the identity of the Soul and (2) the consciousness of the connection of the Soul with the Universal Life. Both of the exercises given below are simple, and consist of mental images firmly held, accompanied with rhythmic breathing. The student must not expect too much at the start, but must make haste slowly, and be content to develop as does the flower, from seed to blossom.

SOUL CONSCIOUSNESS

The real Self is not the body or even the mind of man. These things are but a part of his personality, the lesser self. The real Self is the Ego, whose manifestation is in individuality. The real Self is independent of the body, which it inhabits, and is even independent of the mechanism of the mind, which it uses as an instrument. The real Self is a drop from the Divine Ocean, and is eternal and indestructible. It cannot die or be annihilated, and no matter what becomes of the body, the real Self still exists. It is the Soul. Do not think of your Soul as a thing apart from you, for YOU are the Soul, and the body is the unreal and transitory part of you which is changing in material every day, and which you will some day discard. You may develop the faculties so that they will be conscious of the reality of the Soul, and its. independence of the body. The Yogi plan for such

[p. 85]

development is by meditation upon the real Self or Soul, accompanied by rhythmic breathing. The following exercise is the simplest form.

Exercise.--Place your body in a relaxed, reclining position. Breathe rhythmically, and meditate upon the real Self, thinking of yourself as an entity independent of the body, although inhabiting it and being able to leave it at will. Think of yourself, not as the body, but as a spirit, and of your body as but a shell, useful and comfortable, but not a part of the real You. Think of yourself as an independent being, using the body only as a convenience. While meditating, ignore the body entirely, and you will find that you will often become almost entirely unconscious of it, and will seem to be out of the body to which you may return when you are through with the exercise.

This is the gist of the Yogi meditative breathing methods, and if persisted in will give one a wonderful sense of the reality of the Soul, and will make him seem almost independent of the body. The sense of immortality will often come with this increased consciousness, and the person will begin to show signs of spiritual development which will be noticeable to himself and others. But he must not allow himself to live too much in the upper regions, or to despise his body, for he is here on this plane for a purpose, and he must not neglect his opportunity to gain the experiences necessary to round him out, nor must he fail to respect his body, which is the Temple of the Spirit.

THE UNIVERSAL CONSCIOUSNESS

The Spirit in man, which is the highest manifestation of his Soul, is a drop in the ocean of Spirit, apparently-

[p. 86]

separate and distinct, but yet really in touch with the ocean itself, and with every other drop in it. As man unfolds in spiritual consciousness he becomes more and more aware of his relation to the Universal Spirit, or Universal Mind as some term it. He feels at times as if he were almost at-one-ment with it, and then again he loses the sense of contact and relationship. The Yogis seek to attain this state of Universal Consciousness by meditation and rhythmic breathing, and many have thus attained the highest degree of spiritual attainment possible to man in this stage of his existence. The student of this work will not need the higher instruction regarding adept-ship at this time, as he has much to do and accomplish before he reaches that stage, but it may be well to initiate him into the elementary stages of the Yogi exercises for developing Universal Consciousness, and if he is in earnest he will discover means and methods whereby he may progress. The way is always opened to him who is ready to tread the path. The following exercise will be found to do much toward developing the Universal Consciousness in those who faithfully practice it.

Exercise.--Place your body in a reclining, relaxed position. Breathe rhythmically, and meditate upon your relationship with the Universal Mind of which you are but an atom. Think of yourself as being in touch with All, and at-one-ment with All. See All as One, and your Soul as a part of that One. Feel that you are receiving the vibrations from the great Universal Mind, and are partaking of its power and strength and wisdom. The two following lines of meditation may be followed.

(a) With each inhalation, think of yourself as

[p. 87]

drawing in to yourself the strength and power of the Universal Mind. When exhaling think of yourself as passing out to others that same power, at the same time being filled with love for every living thing, and desiring that it be a partaker of the same blessings which you are now receiving. Let the Universal Power circulate through you.

(b) Place your mind in a reverential state, and meditate upon the grandeur of the Universal Mind, and open yourself to the inflow of the Divine Wisdom, which will fill you with illuminating wisdom, and then let the same flow out from you to your brothers and sisters whom you love and would help.

This exercise leaves with those who have practiced it a new-found sense of strength, power and wisdom, and a feeling of spiritual exaltation and bliss. It must be practiced only in a serious, reverential mood, and must not be approached triflingly or lightly.

GENERAL DIRECTIONS

The exercises given in this chapter require the proper mental attitude and conditions, and the trifler and person of a non-serious nature, or one without a sense of spirituality and reverence, had better pass them by, as no results will be obtained by such persons, and besides it is a willful trifling with things of a high order, which course never benefits those who pursue it. These exercises are for the few who can understand them, and the others will feel no attraction to try them.

During meditation let the mind dwell upon the ideas given in the exercise, until it becomes clear to the mind and gradually manifests in real consciousness within you. The mind will gradually become

[p. 88]

passive and at rest, and the mental image will manifest clearly. Do not indulge in these exercises too often, and do not allow the blissful state produced to render you dissatisfied with the affairs of everyday life, as the latter are useful and necessary for you, and you must never shirk a lesson, however disagreeable to you it may be. Let the joy arising from the unfolding consciousness buoy you up and nerve you for the trials of life, and not make you dissatisfied and disgusted. All is good, and everything has its place. Many of the students who practice these exercises will in time wish to know more. Rest assured that when the time comes we will see that you do not seek in vain. Go on in courage and confidence, keeping your face toward the East, from whence comes the rising Sun.

Peace be unto you, and unto all men.

AUM.

 

 

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: sok.txt =====


     
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

SONGS OF KABIR

Translated by Rabindranath Tagore

Introduction by Evelyn Underhill

New York, The Macmillan Company

[1915]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, March, 2002, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

[p. 5]

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

INTRODUCTION

   THE poet Kabir, a selection from whose songs is here for the first time offered to English readers, is one of the most interesting personalities in the history of Indian mysticism. Born in or near Benares, of Mohammedan parents, and probably about the year 1440, be became in early life a disciple of the celebrated Hindu ascetic Ramananda. Ramananda had brought to Northern India the religious revival which Ramanuja, the great twelfth-century reformer of Brahmanism, had initiated in the South. This revival was in part a reaction against the increasing formalism of the orthodox cult, in part an assertion of the demands of the heart as against

[p. 6]

the intense intellectualism of the Vedanta philosophy, the exaggerated monism which that philosophy proclaimed. It took in Ramanuja's preaching the form of an ardent personal devotion to the God Vishnu, as representing the personal aspect of the Divine Nature: that mystical "religion of love" which everywhere makes its appearance at a certain level of spiritual culture, and which creeds and philosophies are powerless to kill.

   Though such a devotion is indigenous in Hinduism, and finds expression in many passages of the Bhagavad Gita, there was in its mediaeval revival a large element of syncretism. Ramananda, through whom its spirit is said to have reached Kabir, appears to have been a man of wide religious culture, and full of missionary enthusiasm. Living at the moment in which the impassioned poetry and deep philosophy

[p. 7]

of the great Persian mystics, Attar, Sadi, Jalalu'ddin Rumi, and Hafiz, were exercising a powerful influence on the religious thought of India, he dreamed of reconciling this intense and personal Mohammedan mysticism with the traditional theology of Brahmanism. Some have regarded both these great religious leaders as influenced also by Christian thought and life: but as this is a point upon which competent authorities hold widely divergent views, its discussion is not attempted here. We may safely assert, however, that in their teachings, two--perhaps three--apparently antagonistic streams of intense spiritual culture met, as Jewish and Hellenistic thought met in the early Christian Church: and it is one of the outstanding characteristics of Kabir's genius that he was able in his poems to fuse them into one.

[p. 8]

   A great religious reformer, the founder of a sect to which nearly a million northern Hindus still belong, it is yet supremely as a mystical poet that Kabir lives for us. His fate has been that of many revealers of Reality. A hater of religious exclusivism, and seeking above all things to initiate men into the liberty of the children of God, his followers have honoured his memory by re-erecting in a new place the barriers which he laboured to cast down. But his wonderful songs survive, the spontaneous expressions of his vision and his love; and it is by these, not by the didactic teachings associated with his name, that he makes his immortal appeal to the heart. In these poems a wide range of mystical emotion is brought into play: from the loftiest abstractions, the most otherworldly passion for the Infinite, to the most intimate and personal realization

[p. 9]

of God, expressed in homely metaphors and religious symbols drawn indifferently from Hindu and Mohammedan belief. It is impossible to say of their author that he was Brahman or Sufi, Vedantist or Vaishnavite. He is, as he says himself, "at once the child of Allah and of Ram." That Supreme Spirit Whom he knew and adored, and to Whose joyous friendship he sought to induct the souls of other men, transcended whilst He included all metaphysical categories, all credal definitions; yet each contributed something to the description of that Infinite and Simple Totality Who revealed Himself, according to their measure, to the faithful lovers of all creeds.

   Kabir's story is surrounded by contradictory legends, on none of which reliance can be placed. Some of these emanate from a Hindu, some from a

[p. 10]

Mohammedan source, and claim him by turns as a Sufi and a Brahman saint. His name, however, is practically a conclusive proof of Moslem ancestry: and the most probable tale is that which represents him as the actual or adopted child of a Mohammedan weaver of Benares, the city in which the chief events of his life took place.

   In fifteenth-century Benares the syncretistic tendencies of Bhakti religion had reached full development. Sufis and Brahmans appear to have met in disputation: the most spiritual members of both creeds frequenting the teachings of Ramananda, whose reputation was then at its height. The boy Kabir, in whom the religious passion was innate, saw in Ramananda his destined teacher; but knew how slight were the chances that a Hindu guru would accept a Mohammedan as disciple. He therefore hid upon the

[p. 11]

steps of the river Ganges, where Ramananda was accustomed to bathe; with the result that the master, coming down to the water, trod upon his body unexpectedly, and exclaimed in his astonishment, "Ram! Ram!"--the name of the incarnation under which he worshipped God. Kabir then declared that he had received the mantra of initiation from Ramananda's lips, and was by it admitted to discipleship. In spite of the protests of orthodox Brahmans and Mohammedans, both equally annoyed by this contempt of theological landmarks, he persisted in his claim; thus exhibiting in action that very principle of religious synthesis which Ramananda had sought to establish in thought. Ramananda appears to have accepted him, and though Mohammedan legends speak of the famous Sufi Pir, Takki of Jhansi, as Kabir's master in later life, the

[p. 12]

Hindu saint is the only human teacher to whom in his songs he acknowledges indebtedness.

   The little that we know of Kabir's life contradicts many current ideas concerning the Oriental mystic. Of the stages of discipline through which he passed, the manner in which his spiritual genius developed, we are completely ignorant. He seems to have remained for years the disciple of Ramananda, joining in the theological and philosophical arguments which his master held with all the great Mullahs and Brahmans of his day; and to this source we may perhaps trace his acquaintance with the terms of Hindu and Sufi philosophy. He may or may not have submitted to the traditional education of the Hindu or the Sufi contemplative: it is clear, at any rate, that he never adopted the life of the professional ascetic, or retired from the

[p. 13]

world in order to devote himself to bodily mortifications and the exclusive pursuit of the contemplative life. Side by side with his interior life of adoration, its artistic expression in music and words--for he was a skilled musician as well as a poet--he lived the sane and diligent life of the Oriental craftsman. All the legends agree on this point: that Kabir was a weaver, a simple and unlettered man, who earned his living at the loom. Like Paul the tentmaker, Boehme the cobbler, Bunyan the tinker, Tersteegen the ribbon-maker, he knew how to combine vision and industry; the work of his hands helped rather than hindered the impassioned meditation of his heart. Hating mere bodily austerities, he was no ascetic, but a married man, the father of a family--a circumstance which Hindu legends of the monastic type vainly attempt to

[p. 14]

conceal or explain--and it was from out of the heart of the common life that he sang his rapturous lyrics of divine love. Here his works corroborate the traditional story of his life. Again and again he extols the life of home, the value and reality of diurnal existence, with its opportunities for love and renunciation; pouring contempt--upon the professional sanctity of the Yogi, who "has a great beard and matted locks, and looks like a goat," and on all who think it necessary to flee a world pervaded by love, joy, and beauty--the proper theatre of man's quest--in order to find that One Reality Who has "spread His form of love throughout all the world."[1]

    It does not need much experience of ascetic literature to recognize the boldness and originality of this attitude in such a time and place. From the

 [1. Cf. Poems Nos. XXI, XL, XLIII, LXVI, LXXVI.]

 [p. 15]

point of view of orthodox sanctity, whether Hindu or Mohammedan, Kabir was plainly a heretic; and his frank dislike of all institutional religion, all external observance--which was as thorough and as intense as that of the Quakers themselves--completed, so far as ecclesiastical opinion was concerned, his reputation as a dangerous man. The "simple union" with Divine Reality which he perpetually extolled, as alike the duty and the joy of every soul, was independent both of ritual and of bodily austerities; the God whom he proclaimed was "neither in Kaaba nor in Kailash." Those who sought Him needed not to go far; for He awaited discovery everywhere, more accessible to "the washerwoman and the carpenter" than to the self--righteous holy man.[1] Therefore the whole apparatus of piety, Hindu and Moslem

 [1. Poems I, II, XLI.]

 [p. 16]

alike--the temple and mosque, idol and holy water, scriptures and priests--were denounced by this inconveniently clear-sighted poet as mere substitutes for reality; dead things intervening between the soul and its love--

	 
		The images are all lifeless, they cannot speak:
		     I know, for I have cried aloud to them.
		 The Purana and the Koran are mere words:
		     lifting up the curtain, I have seen.[1]
		
		   This sort of thing cannot be tolerated by any organized church; and it is not surprising that Kabir, having his head-quarters in Benares, the very centre of priestly influence, was subjected to considerable persecution. The well-known legend of the beautiful courtesan sent by Brahmans to tempt his virtue, and converted, like the Magdalen, by her sudden encounter with the initiate of a higher love, pre serves the memory of the fear and dislike

 [1. Poems XLII, LXV, LXVII.]

 [p. 17]

with which he was regarded by the ecclesiastical powers. Once at least, after the performance of a supposed miracle of healing, he was brought before the Emperor Sikandar Lodi, and charged with claiming the possession of divine powers. But Sikandar Lodi, a ruler of considerable culture, was tolerant of the eccentricities of saintly persons belonging to his own faith. Kabir, being of Mohammedan birth, was outside the authority of the Brahmans, and technically classed with the Sufis, to whom great theological latitude was allowed. Therefore, though he was banished in the interests of peace from Benares, his life was spared. This seems to have happened in 1495, when he was nearly sixty years of age; it is the last event in his career of which we have definite knowledge. Thenceforth he appears to have moved about amongst various

[p. 18]

cities of northern India, the centre of a group of disciples; continuing in exile that life of apostle and poet of love to which, as he declares in one of his songs, he was destined "from the beginning of time." In 1518, an old man, broken in health, and with hands so feeble that he could no longer make the music which he loved, he died at Maghar near Gorakhpur.

   A beautiful legend tells us that after his death his Mohammedan and Hindu disciples disputed the possession of his body; which the Mohammedans wished to bury, the Hindus to burn. As they argued together, Kabir appeared before them, and told them to lift the shroud and look at that which lay beneath. They did so, and found in the place of the corpse a heap of flowers; half of which were buried by the Mohammedans at Maghar, and half carried by the Hindus to the holy

[p. 19]

city of Benares to be burned--fitting conclusion to a life which had made fragrant the most beautiful doctrines of two great creeds.

 

II

   The poetry of mysticism might be defined on the one hand as a temperamental reaction to the vision of Reality: on the other, as a form of prophecy. As it is the special vocation of the mystical consciousness to mediate between two orders, going out in loving adoration towards God and coming home to tell the secrets of Eternity to other men; so the artistic self-expression of this consciousness has also a double character. It is love-poetry, but love-poetry which is often written with a missionary intention.

Kabir's songs are of this kind: out-births at once of rapture and of charity. Written in the popular Hindi, not in

[p. 20]

the literary tongue, they were deliberately addressed--like the vernacular poetry of Jacopone da Todi and Richard Rolle--to the people rather than to the professionally religious class; and all must be struck by the constant employment in them of imagery drawn from the common life, the universal experience. It is by the simplest metaphors, by constant appeals to needs, passions, relations which all men understand--the bridegroom and bride, the guru and disciple, the pilgrim, the farmer, the migrant bird--that he drives home his intense conviction of the reality of the soul's intercourse with the Transcendent. There are in his universe no fences between the "natural" and "supernatural" worlds; everything is a part of the creative Play of God, and therefore--even in its humblest details--capable of revealing the Player's mind.

[p. 21]

   This willing acceptance of the here-and-now as a means of representing supernal realities is a trait common to the greatest mystics. For them, when they have achieved at last the true theopathetic state, all aspects of the universe possess equal authority as sacramental declarations of the Presence of God; and their fearless employment of homely and physical symbols--often startling and even revolting to the unaccustomed taste--is in direct proportion to the exaltation of their spiritual life. The works of the great Sufis, and amongst the Christians of Jacopone da Todi, Ruysbroeck, Boehme, abound in illustrations of this law. Therefore we must not be surprised to find in Kabir's songs--his desperate attempts to communicate his ecstasy and persuade other men to share it--a constant juxtaposition of concrete and metaphysical

[p. 22]

language; swift alternations between the most intensely anthropomorphic, the most subtly philosophical, ways of apprehending man's communion with the Divine. The need for this alternation, and its entire naturalness for the mind which employs it, is rooted in his concept, or vision, of the Nature of God; and unless we make some attempt to grasp this, we shall not go far in our understanding of his poems.

   Kabir belongs to that small group of supreme mystics--amongst whom St. Augustine, Ruysbroeck, and the Sufi poet Jalalu'ddin Rumi are perhaps the chief--who have achieved that which we might call the synthetic vision of God. These have resolved the perpetual opposition between the personal and impersonal, the transcendent and immanent, static and dynamic aspects of the Divine Nature; between the Absolute of philosophy and the "sure

[p. 23]

true Friend" of devotional religion. They have done this, not by taking these apparently incompatible concepts one after the other; but by ascending to a height of spiritual intuition at which they are, as Ruysbroeck said, "melted and merged in the Unity," and perceived as the completing opposites of a perfect Whole. This proceeding entails for them--and both Kabir and Ruysbroeck expressly acknowledge it--a universe of three orders: Becoming, Being, and that which is "More than Being," i.e., God.[1] God is here felt to be not the final abstraction, but the one actuality. He inspires, supports, indeed inhabits, both the durational, conditioned, finite world of Becoming and the unconditioned, non-successional, infinite world of Being; yet utterly transcends them both. He is the omnipresent

 [1. Nos. VII and XLIX.]

 [p. 24]

Reality, the "All-pervading" within Whom "the worlds are being told like beads." In His personal aspect He is the "beloved Fakir," teaching and companioning each soul. Considered as Immanent Spirit, He is "the Mind within the mind." But all these are at best partial aspects of His nature, mutually corrective: as the Persons in the Christian doctrine of the Trinity--to which this theological diagram bears a striking resemblance--represent different and compensating experiences of the Divine Unity within which they are resumed. As Ruysbroeck discerned a plane of reality upon which "we can speak no more of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, but only of One Being, the very substance of the Divine Persons"; so Kabir says that "beyond both the limited and the limitless is He, the Pure Being."[1]

 [1. No. VII.]

 [p. 25]

   Brahma, then, is the Ineffable Fact compared with which "the distinction of the Conditioned from the Unconditioned is but a word": at once the utterly transcendent One of Absolutist philosophy, and the personal Lover of the individual soul--"common to all and special to each," as one Christian mystic has it. The need felt by Kabir for both these ways of describing Reality is a proof of the richness and balance of his spiritual experience; which neither cosmic nor anthropomorphic symbols, taken alone, could express. More absolute than the Absolute, more personal than the human mind, Brahma therefore exceeds whilst He includes all the concepts of philosophy, all the passionate intuitions of the heart. He is the Great Affirmation, the font of energy, the source of life and love, the unique satisfaction of desire. His creative word is the Om

 [p. 26]

or "Everlasting Yea." The negative philosophy which strips from the Divine Nature all Its attributes and defining Him only by that which He is not--reduces Him to an "Emptiness," is abhorrent to this most vital of poets.--Brahma, he says, "may never be found in abstractions." He is the One Love who Pervades the world., discerned in His fullness only by the eyes of love; and those who know Him thus share, though they may never tell, the joyous and ineffable secret of the universe.[1]

    Now Kabir, achieving this synthesis between the personal and cosmic aspects of the Divine Nature, eludes the three great dangers which threaten mystical religion.

   First, he escapes the excessive emotionalism, the tendency to an exclusively anthropomorphic devotion,

 [1. Nos. VII, XXVI, LXXVI, XC.]

 [p. 27]

which results from an unrestricted cult of Divine Personality, especially under an incarnational form; seen in India in the exaggerations of Krishna worship, in Europe in the sentimental extravagances of certain Christian saints.

   Next, he is protected from the soul-destroying conclusions of pure monism, inevitable if its logical implications are pressed home: that is, the identity of substance between God and the soul, with its corollary of the total absorption of that soul in the Being of God as the goal of the spiritual life. For the thorough-going monist the soul, in so far as it is real, is substantially identical with God; and the true object of existence is the making patent of this latent identity, the realization which finds expression in the Vedantist formula "That art thou." But Kabir says that Brahma and the creature are

[p. 28]

"ever distinct, yet ever united"; that the wise man knows the spiritual as well as the material world to "be no more than His footstool."[1] The soul's union with Him is a love union, a mutual inhabitation; that essentially dualistic relation which all mystical religion expresses, not a self-mergence which leaves no place for personality. This eternal distinction, the mysterious union-in-separateness of God and the soul, is a necessary doctrine of all sane mysticism; for no scheme which fails to find a place for it can represent more than a fragment of that soul's intercourse with the spiritual world. Its affirmation was one of the distinguishing features of the Vaishnavite reformation preached by Ramanuja; the principle of which had descended through Ramananda to Kabir.

   Last, the warmly human and direct

 [1. Nos. VII and IX.]

 [p. 29]

apprehension of God as the supreme Object of love, the soul's comrade, teacher, and bridegroom, which is so passionately and frequently expressed in Kabir's poems, balances and controls those abstract tendencies which are inherent in the metaphysical side of his vision of Reality: and prevents it from degenerating into that sterile worship of intellectual formulae which became the curse of the Vedantist school. For the mere intellectualist, as for the mere pietist, he has little approbation.[1] Love is throughout his "absolute sole Lord": the unique source of the more abundant life which he enjoys, and the common factor which unites the finite and infinite worlds. All is soaked in love: that love which he described in almost Johannine language as the "Form of God." The whole of creation is the Play of the Eternal Lover;

 [1. Cf. especially Nos. LIX, LXVII, LXXV, XC, XCI.]

 [p. 30]

the living, changing, growing expression of Brahma's love and joy. As these twin passions preside over the generation of human life, so "beyond the mists of pleasure and pain" Kabir finds them governing the creative acts of God. His manifestation is love; His activity is joy. Creation springs from one glad act of affirmation: the Everlasting Yea, perpetually uttered within the depths of the Divine Nature.[1] In accordance with this concept of the universe as a Love-Game which eternally goes forward, a progressive manifestation of Brahma--one of the many notions which he adopted from the common stock of Hindu religious ideas, and illuminated by his poetic genius--movement, rhythm, perpetual change, forms an integral part of Kabir's vision of Reality. Though the Eternal and Absolute is

 [1. Nos. XVII, XXVI, LXXVI, LXXXII.]

 [p. 31]

ever present to his consciousness, yet his concept of the Divine Nature is essentially dynamic. It is by the symbols of motion that he most often tries to convey it to us: as in his constant reference to dancing, or the strangely modern picture of that Eternal Swing of the Universe which is "held by the cords of love."[1]

    It is a marked characteristic of mystical literature that the great contemplatives, in their effort to convey to us the nature of their communion with the supersensuous, are inevitably driven to employ some form of sensuous imagery: coarse and inaccurate as they know such imagery to be, even at the best. Our normal human consciousness is so completely committed to dependence on the senses, that the fruits of intuition itself are instinctively referred to them. In that intuition it seems

 [1. No. XVI.]

 [p. 32]

to the mystics that all the dim cravings and partial apprehensions of sense find perfect fulfilment. Hence their constant declaration that they see the uncreated light, they hear the celestial melody, they taste the sweetness of the Lord, they know an ineffable fragrance, they feel the very contact of love. "Him verily seeing and fully feeling, Him spiritually hearing and Him delectably smelling and sweetly swallowing," as Julian of Norwich has it. In those amongst them who develop psycho-sensorial automatisms, these parallels between sense and spirit may present themselves to consciousness in the form of hallucinations: as the light seen by Suso, the music heard by Rolle, the celestial perfumes which filled St. Catherine of Siena's cell, the physical wounds felt by St. Francis and St. Teresa. These are excessive dramatizations of the symbolism under

[p. 33]

which the mystic tends instinctively to represent his spiritual intuition to the surface consciousness. Here, in the special sense-perception which he feels to be most expressive of Reality, his peculiar idiosyncrasies come out.

   Now Kabir, as we might expect in one whose reactions to the spiritual order were so wide and various, uses by turn all the symbols of sense. He tells us that he has "seen without sight" the effulgence of Brahma, tasted the divine nectar, felt the ecstatic contact of Reality, smelt the fragrance of the heavenly flowers. But he was essentially a poet and musician: rhythm and harmony were to him the garments of beauty and truth. Hence in his lyrics he shows himself to be, like Richard Rolle, above all things a musical mystic. Creation, he says again and again, is full of music: it is music. At the heart of the Universe

[p. 34]

"white music is blossoming": love weaves the melody, whilst renunciation beats the time. It can be heard in the home as well as in the heavens; discerned by the ears of common men as well as by the trained senses of the ascetic. Moreover, the body of every man is a lyre on which Brahma, "the source of all music," plays. Everywhere Kabir discerns the "Unstruck Music of the Infinite"--that celestial melody which the angel played to St. Francis, that ghostly symphony which filled the soul of Rolle with ecstatic joy.[1] The one figure which he adopts from the Hindu Pantheon and constantly uses, is that of Krishna the Divine Flute Player.[2] He sees the supernal music, too, in its visual embodiment, as rhythmical movement: that mysterious dance of the universe before the

 [1. Nos. XVII, XVIII, XXXIX, XLI, LIV, LXXVI, LXXXIII, LXXXIX, XCVII.

2. Nos. L, LIII, LXVIII.]

 [p. 35]

face of Brahma, which is at once an act of worship and an expression of the infinite rapture of the Immanent God.'

   Yet in this wide and rapturous vision of the universe Kabir never loses touch with diurnal existence, never forgets the common life. His feet are firmly planted upon earth; his lofty and passionate apprehensions are perpetually controlled by the activity of a sane and vigorous intellect, by the alert commonsense so often found in persons of real mystical genius. The constant insistence on simplicity and directness, the hatred of all abstractions and philosophizings,[1] the ruthless criticism of external religion: these are amongst his most marked characteristics. God is the Root whence all manifestations, "material" and "spiritual," alike proceed; and God is the only need of

 [1. Nos. XXVI, XXXII, LXXVI.

2. Nos. LXXV, LXXVIII, LXXX, XC.]

 [p. 36]

man--"happiness shall be yours when you come to the Root."[1] Hence to those who keep their eye on the "one thing needful," denominations, creeds, ceremonies, the conclusions of philosophy, the disciplines of asceticism, are matters of comparative indifference. They represent merely the different angles from which the soul may approach that simple union with Brahma which is its goal; and are useful only in so far as they contribute to this consummation. So thorough-going is Kabir's eclecticism, that he seems by turns Vedantist and Vaishnavite, Pantheist and Transcendentalist, Brahman and Sufi. In the effort to tell the truth about that ineffable apprehension, so vast and yet so near, which controls his life, he seizes and twines together--as he might have woven together contrasting threads upon his loom--

 [1. No. LXXX.]

 [p. 37]

symbols and ideas drawn from the most violent and conflicting philosophies and faiths. All are needed, if he is ever to suggest the character of that One whom the Upanishad called "the Sun-coloured Being who is beyond this Darkness": as all the colours of the spectrum are needed if we would demonstrate the simple richness of white light. In thus adapting traditional materials to his own use he follows a method common amongst the mystics; who seldom exhibit any special love for originality of form. They will pour their wine into almost any vessel that comes to hand: generally using by preference--and lifting to new levels of beauty and significance--the religious or philosophic formulae current in their own day. Thus we find that some of Kabir's finest poems have as their subjects the commonplaces of Hindu philosophy and religion: the

[p. 38]

Lila or Sport of God, the Ocean of Bliss, the Bird of the Soul, Maya, the Hundred-petalled Lotus, and the "Formless Form." Many, again, are soaked in Sufi imagery and feeling. Others use as their material the ordinary surroundings and incidents of Indian life: the temple bells, the ceremony of the lamps, marriage, suttee, pilgrimage, the characters of the seasons; all felt by him in their mystical aspect, as sacraments of the soul's relation with Brahma. In many of these a particularly beautiful and intimate feeling for Nature is shown.'

   In the collection of songs here translated there will be found examples which illustrate nearly every aspect of Kabir's thought, and all the fluctuations of the mystic's emotion: the ecstasy, the despair, the still beatitude, the eager self-devotion, the flashes of wide illumination,

 [1. Nos. XV, XXIII, LXVII, LXXXVII, XCVII.]

 [p. 39]

the moments of intimate love. His wide and deep vision of the universe, the "Eternal Sport" of creation (LXXXII), the worlds being "told like beads" within the Being of God (XIV, XVI, XVII, LXXVI), is here seen balanced by his lovely and delicate sense of intimate communion with the Divine Friend, Lover, Teacher of the soul (X, XI, XXIII, XXXV, LI, LXXXV, LXXXVI, LXXXVIII, XCII, XCIII; above all, the beautiful poem XXXIV). As these apparently paradoxical views of Reality are resolved in Brahma, so all other opposites are reconciled in Him: bondage and liberty, love and renunciation, pleasure and pain (XVII, XXV, XL, LXXIX). Union with Him is the one thing that matters to the soul, its destiny and its need (LI, I, II, LIV, LXX, LXXIV, XCIII, XCVI); and this union, this discovery of God, is the simplest and most natural

[p. 40]

of all things, if we would but grasp it (XLI, XLVI, LVI, LXXII, LXXVI, LXXVIII, XCVII). The union, however, is brought about by love, not by knowledge or ceremonial observances (XXXVIII, LIV, LV, LIX, XCI); and the apprehension which that union confers is ineffable--"neither This nor That," as Ruysbroeck has it (IX, XLVI, LXXVI). Real worship and communion is in Spirit and in Truth (XL, XLI, LVI, LXIII, LXV, LXX), therefore idolatry is an insult to the Divine Lover (XLII, LXIX) and the devices of professional sanctity are useless apart from charity and purity of soul (LIV, LXV, LXVI). Since all things, and especially the heart of man, are God-inhabited, God-possessed (XXVI, LVI, LXXVI, LXXXIX, XCVII), He may best be found in the here-and-now: in the normal. human, bodily existence, the "mud" of material

[p. 41]

life (III, IV, VI, XXI, XXXIX, XL, XLIII, XLVIII, LXXII). "We can reach the goal without crossing the road" (LXXVI)--not the cloister but the home is the proper theatre of man's efforts: and if he cannot find God there, he need not hope for success by going farther afield. "In the home is reality." There love and detachment, bondage and freedom, joy and pain play by turns upon the soul; and it is from their conflict that the Unstruck Music of the Infinite proceeds. Kabir says: "None but Brahma can evoke its melodies."

   "This version of Kabir's songs is chiefly the work of Mr. Rabindranath Tagore, the trend of whose mystical genius makes him--as all who read these poems will see--a peculiarly sympathetic interpreter of Kabir's

[p. 42]

vision and thought. It has been based upon the printed Hindi text with Bengali translation of Mr. Kshiti Mohan Sen; who has gathered from many sources--sometimes from books and manuscripts, sometimes from the lips of wandering ascetics and minstrels--a large collection of poems and hymns to which Kabir's name is attached, and carefully sifted the authentic songs from the many spurious works now attributed to him. These painstaking labours alone have made the present undertaking possible.

   We have also had before us a manuscript English translation of 116 songs made by Mr. Ajit Kumar Chakravarty from Mr. Kshiti Mohan Sen's text, and a prose essay upon Kabir from the same hand. From these we have derived great assistance. A considerable number of readings from the translation have been adopted by us;

[p. 43]

whilst several of the facts mentioned in the essay have been incorporated into this introduction. Our most grateful thanks are due to Mr. Ajit Kumar Chakravarty for the extremely generous and unselfish manner in which he has placed his work at our disposal.

E. U.

The reference of the headlines of the poems is to:

 Santiniketana; Kabir by Sri Kshitimohan Sen, 4 parts, Brahmacharyasrama, Bolpur, 1910-1911.

For some assistance in normalizing the transliteration we are indebted to Professor J. F. Blumhardt.

[p. 44]

[p. 45]

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

KABIR'S POEMS

 

I

I. 13. mo ko kahan dhunro bande

 O SERVANT, where dost thou seek Me?
 Lo! I am beside thee.
 I am neither in temple nor in mosque: I am neither in Kaaba nor in Kailash:
 Neither am I in rites and ceremonies, nor in Yoga and renunciation.
 If thou art a true seeker, thou shalt at once see Me: thou shalt meet Me in a moment of time.
 Kabir says, "O Sadhu! God is the breath of all breath."

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

II

I. 16. Santan jat na pucho nirguniyan

 It is needless to ask of a saint the caste to which he belongs; [p. 46]
 For the priest, the warrior. the tradesman, and all the thirty-six castes, alike are seeking for God.
 It is but folly to ask what the caste of a saint may be;
 The barber has sought God, the washerwoman, and the carpenter--
 Even Raidas was a seeker after God.
 The Rishi Swapacha was a tanner by caste.
 Hindus and Moslems alike have achieved that End, where remains no mark of distinction.

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

III

I. 57. sadho bhai, jival hi karo as'a

 O FRIEND! hope for Him whilst you live, know whilst you live, understand whilst you live: for in life deliverance abides.
 If your bonds be not broken whilst living, what hope of deliverance in death? [p. 47]
 It is but an empty dream, that the soul shall have union with Him because it has passed from the body:
 If He is found now, He is found then,
 If not, we do but go to dwell in the City of Death.
 If you have union now, you shall have it hereafter.
 Bathe in the truth, know the true Guru, have faith in the true Name!
 Kabir says: "It is the Spirit of the quest which helps; I am the slave of this Spirit of the quest."

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

IV

I. 58. bago na ja re na ja

 Do not go to the garden of flowers!
 O Friend! go not there;
 In your body is the garden of flowers.
 Take your seat on the thousand petals of the lotus, and there gaze on the Infinite Beauty.

[p. 48]

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

V

I. 63. avadhu, maya taji na jay

 TELL me, Brother, how can I renounce Maya?
 When I gave up the tying of ribbons, still I tied my garment about me:
 When I gave up tying my garment, still I covered my body in its folds.
 So, when I give up passion, I see that anger remains;
 And when I renounce anger, greed is with me still;
 And when greed is vanquished, pride and vainglory remain;
 When the mind is detached and casts Maya away, still it clings to the letter.
 Kabir says, "Listen to me, dear Sadhu! the true path is rarely found."

[p. 49]

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

VI

I. 83. canda jhalkai yahi ghat mahin

 THE moon shines in my body, but my blind eyes cannot see it:
 The moon is within me, and so is the sun.
 The unstruck drum of Eternity is sounded within me; but my deaf ears cannot hear it.

So long as man clamours for the I and the Mine, his works are as naught:
 When all love of the I and the Mine is dead, then the work of the Lord is done.
 For work has no other aim than the getting of knowledge:
 When that comes, then work is put away.

The flower blooms for the fruit: when the fruit comes, the flower withers. [p. 50]
 The musk is in the deer, but it seeks it not within itself: it wanders in quest of grass.

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

VII

I. 85. Sadho, Brahm alakh lakhaya

 WHEN He Himself reveals Himself, Brahma brings into manifestation That which can never be seen.
 As the seed is in the plant, as the shade is in the tree, as the void is in the sky, as infinite forms are in the void--
 So from beyond the Infinite, the Infinite comes; and from the Infinite the finite extends.

The creature is in Brahma, and Brahma is in the creature: they are ever distinct, yet ever united.
 He Himself is the tree, the seed, and the germ. [p. 51]
 He Himself is the flower, the fruit, and the shade.
 He Himself is the sun, the light, and the lighted.
 He Himself is Brahma, creature, and Maya.
 He Himself is the manifold form, the infinite space;
 He is the breath, the word, and the meaning.
 He Himself is the limit and the limitless: and beyond both the limited and the limitless is He, the Pure Being.
 He is the Immanent Mind in Brahma and in the creature.

The Supreme Soul is seen within the soul,
 The Point is seen within the Supreme Soul,
 And within the Point, the reflection is seen again. [p. 52]
 Kabir is blest because he has this supreme vision!

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

VIII

I. 101. is ghat antar bag bagice

 WITHIN this earthen vessel are bowers and groves, and within it is the Creator:
 Within this vessel are the seven oceans and the unnumbered stars.
 The touchstone and the jewel-appraiser are within;
 And within this vessel the Eternal soundeth, and the spring wells up.
 Kabir says: "Listen tome, my Friend! My beloved Lord is within."

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

IX

I. 104. aisa lo nahin taisa lo

 O HOW may I ever express that secret word?
 O how can I say He is not like this, and He is like that? [p. 53]
 If I say that He is within me, the universe is ashamed:
 If I say that He is without me, it is falsehood.
 He makes the inner and the outer worlds to be indivisibly one;
 The conscious and the unconscious, both are His footstools.
 He is neither manifest nor hidden, He is neither revealed nor unrevealed:
 There are no words to tell that which He is.

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

X

I. 121. tohi mori lagan lagaye re phakir wa

 To Thee Thou hast drawn my love, O Fakir!
 I was sleeping in my own chamber, and Thou didst awaken me; striking me with Thy voice, O Fakir!
 I was drowning in the deeps of the [p. 54] ocean of this world, and Thou didst save me: upholding me with Thine arm, O Fakir!
 Only one word and no second--and Thou hast made me tear off all my bonds, O Fakir!
 Kabir says, "Thou hast united Thy heart to my heart, O Fakir!"

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XI

I. 131. nis' din khelat rahi sakhiyan sang

 I PLAYED day and night with my comrades, and now I am greatly afraid.
 So high is my Lord's palace, my heart trembles to mount its stairs: yet I must not be shy, if I would enjoy His love.
 My heart must cleave to my Lover; I must withdraw my veil, and meet Him with all my body: [p. 55]
 Mine eyes must perform the ceremony of the lamps of love.
 Kabir says: "Listen to me, friend: he understands who loves. If you feel not love's longing for your Beloved One, it is vain to adorn your body, vain to put unguent on your eyelids."

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XII

II. 24. hamsa, kaho puratan vat

 TELL me, O Swan, your ancient tale.
 From what land do you come, O Swan? to what shore will you fly?
 Where would you take your rest, O Swan, and what do you seek?

Even this morning, O Swan, awake, arise, follow me!
 There is a land where no doubt nor sorrow have rule: where the terror of Death is no more. [p. 56]
 There the woods of spring are a-bloom, and the fragrant scent "He is I" is borne on the wind:
 There the bee of the heart is deeply immersed, and desires no other joy.

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XIII

II. 37. angadhiya deva

 O LORD Increate, who will serve Thee?
 Every votary offers his worship to the God of his own creation: each day he receives service--
 None seek Him, the Perfect: Brahma, the Indivisible Lord.
 They believe in ten Avatars; but no Avatar can be the Infinite Spirit, for he suffers the results of his deeds:
 The Supreme One must be other than this.
 The Yogi, the Sanyasi, the Ascetics, are disputing one with another: [p. 57]
 Kabir says, "O brother! he who has seen that radiance of love, he is saved."

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XIV

II. 56. dariya ki lahar dariyao hai ji

 THE river and its waves are one
 surf: where is the difference between the river and its waves?
 When the wave rises, it is the water; and when it falls, it is the same water again. Tell me, Sir, where is the distinction?
 Because it has been named as wave, shall it no longer be considered as water?

Within the Supreme Brahma, the worlds are being told like beads:
 Look upon that rosary with the eyes of wisdom.

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

[p. 58]

XV

II. 57. janh khelat vasant rituraj

 WHERE Spring, the lord of the seasons, reigneth, there the Unstruck Music sounds of itself,
 There the streams of light flow in all directions;
 Few are the men who can cross to that shore!
 There, where millions of Krishnas stand with hands folded,
 Where millions of Vishnus bow their heads,
 Where millions of Brahmas are reading the Vedas,
 Where millions of Shivas are lost in contemplation,
 Where millions of Indras dwell in the sky,
 Where the demi-gods and the munis are unnumbered,
 Where millions of Saraswatis, Goddess of Music, play on the vina--[p. 59]
 There is my Lord self-revealed: and the scent of sandal and flowers dwells in those deeps.

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XVI

II. 59. janh, cet acet khambh dou

 BETWEEN the poles of the conscious and the unconscious, there has the mind made a swing:
 Thereon hang all beings and all worlds, and that swing never ceases its sway.
 Millions of beings are there: the sun and the moon in their courses are there:
 Millions of ages pass, and the swing goes on.
 All swing! the sky and the earth and the air and the water; and the Lord Himself taking form:
 And the sight of this has made Kabir a servant.

[p. 60]

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XVII

II. 61. grah candra tapan jot varat hai

 THE light of the sun, the moon, and the stars shines bright:
 The melody of love swells forth, and the rhythm of love's detachment beats the time.
 Day and night, the chorus of music fills the heavens; and Kabir says
 "My Beloved One gleams like the lightning flash in the sky."

Do you know how the moments perform their adoration?
 Waving its row of lamps, the universe sings in worship day and night,
 There are the hidden banner and the secret canopy:
 There the sound of the unseen bells is heard.
 Kabir says: "There adoration never ceases; there the Lord of the Universe sitteth on His throne." [p. 61]
 The whole world does its works and commits its errors: but few are the lovers who know the Beloved.
 The devout seeker is he who mingles in his heart the double currents of love and detachment, like the mingling of the streams of Ganges and Jumna;
 In his heart the sacred water flows day and night; and thus the round of births and deaths is brought to an end.

Behold what wonderful rest is in the Supreme Spirit! and he enjoys it, who makes himself meet for it.
 Held by the cords of love, the swing of the Ocean of Joy sways to and fro; and a mighty sound breaks forth in song.
 See what a lotus blooms there without water! and Kabir says
 "My heart's bee drinks its nectar." [p. 62]
 What a wonderful lotus it is, that blooms at the heart of the spinning wheel of the universe! Only a few pure souls know of its true delight.
 Music is all around it, and there the heart partakes of the joy of the Infinite Sea.
 Kabir says: "Dive thou into that Ocean of sweetness: thus let all errors of life and of death flee away."

Behold how the thirst of the five senses is quenched there! and the three forms of misery are no more!
 Kabir says: "It is the sport of the Unattainable One: look within, and behold how the moon-beams of that Hidden One shine in you."
 There falls the rhythmic beat of life and death: [p. 63]
 Rapture wells forth, and all space is radiant with light.
 There the Unstruck Music is sounded; it is the music of the love of the three worlds.
 There millions of lamps of sun and of moon are burning;
 There the drum beats, and the lover swings in play.
 There love-songs resound, and light rains in showers; and the worshipper is entranced in the taste of the heavenly nectar.
 Look upon life and death; there is no separation between them,
 The right hand and the left hand are one and the same.
 Kabir says: "There the wise man is speechless; for this truth may never be found in Vadas or in books."

I have had my Seat on the Self-poised One, [p. 64]
 I have drunk of the Cup of the Ineffable,
 I have found the Key of the Mystery,
 I have reached the Root of Union.
 Travelling by no track, I have come to the Sorrowless Land: very easily has the mercy of the great Lord come upon me.
 They have sung of Him as infinite and unattainable: but I in my meditations have seen Him without sight.
 That is indeed the sorrowless land, and none know the path that leads there:
 Only he who is on that path has surely transcended all sorrow.
 Wonderful is that land of rest, to which no merit can win;
 It is the wise who has seen it, it is the wise who has sung of it.
 This is the Ultimate Word: but can any express its marvellous savour? [p. 65]
 He who has savoured it once, he knows what joy it can give.
 Kabir says: "Knowing it, the ignorant man becomes wise, and the wise man becomes speechless and silent,
 The worshipper is utterly inebriated,
 His wisdom and his detachment are made perfect;
 He drinks from the cup of the inbreathings and the outbreathings of love."

There the whole sky is filled with sound, and there that music is made without fingers and without strings;
 There the game of pleasure and pain does not cease.
 Kabir says: "If you merge your life in the Ocean of Life, you will find your life in the Supreme Land of Bliss."

What a frenzy of ecstasy there is in [p. 66] every hour! and the worshipper is pressing out and drinking the essence of the hours: he lives in the life of Brahma.
 I speak truth, for I have accepted truth in life; I am now attached to truth, I have swept all tinsel away.
 Kabir says: "Thus is the worshipper set free from fear; thus have all errors of life and of death left him."

There the sky is filled with music:
 There it rains nectar:
 There the harp-strings jingle, and there the drums beat.
 What a secret splendour is there, in the mansion of the sky!
 There no mention is made of the rising and the setting of the sun;
 In the ocean of manifestation, which is the light of love, day and night are felt to be one. [p. 67]
 Joy for ever, no sorrow,--no struggle!
 There have I seen joy filled to the brim, perfection of joy;
 No place for error is there.
 Kabir says: "There have I witnessed the sport of One Bliss!"

I have known in my body the sport of the universe: I have escaped from the error of this world..
 The inward and the outward are become as one sky, the Infinite and the finite are united: I am drunken with the sight of this All!
 This Light of Thine fulfils the universe: the lamp of love that burns on the salver of knowledge.
 Kabir says: "There error cannot enter, and the conflict of life and death is felt no more."

[p. 68]

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XVIII

II. 77. maddh akas' ap jahan baithe

 THE middle region of the sky, wherein the spirit dwelleth, is radiant with the music of light;
 There, where the pure and white music blossoms, my Lord takes His delight.
 In the wondrous effulgence of each hair of His body, the brightness of millions of suns and of moons is lost.
 On that shore there is a city, where the rain of nectar pours and pours, and never ceases.
 Kabir says: "Come, O Dharmadas! and see my great Lord's Durbar."

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XIX

II. 20. paramatam guru nikat virajatn

 O MY heart! the Supreme Spirit, the great Master, is near you: wake, oh wake! 
 Run to the feet of your Beloved: for [p. 69]
 your Lord stands near to your head.
 You have slept for unnumbered ages; this morning will you not wake?

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XX

II. 22. man tu par utar kanh jaiho

 To what shore would you cross, O my heart? there is no traveller before you, there is no road:
 Where is the movement, where is the rest, on that shore?
 There is no water; no boat, no boatman, is there;
 There is not so much as a rope to tow the boat, nor a man to draw it.
 No earth, no sky, no time, no thing, is there: no shore, no ford!
 There, there is neither body nor mind: and where is the place that shall still the thirst of the soul? You shall find naught in that emptiness.
 Be strong, and enter into your own [p. 70] body: for there your foothold is firm. Consider it well, O my heart! go not elsewhere,
 Kabir says: "Put all imaginations away, and stand fast in that which you are."

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XXI

II. 33. ghar ghar dipak barai

 LAMPS burn in every house, O blind one! and you cannot see them.
 One day your eyes shall suddenly be opened, and you shall see: and the fetters of death will fall from you.
 There is nothing to say or to hear, there is nothing to do: it is he who is living, yet dead, who shall never die again.

Because he lives in solitude, therefore the Yogi says that his home is far away. [p. 71]
 Your Lord is near: yet you are climbing the palm-tree to seek Him.
 The Brahman priest goes from house to house and initiates people into faith:
 Alas! the true fountain of life is beside you., and you have set up a stone to worship.
 Kabir says: "I may never express how sweet my Lord is. Yoga and the telling of beads, virtue and vice--these are naught to Him."

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XXII

II. 38. Sadho, so satgur mohi bhawai

 O BROTHER, my heart yearns for that true Guru, who fills the cup of true love, and drinks of it himself, and offers it then to me.
 He removes the veil from the eyes, and gives the true Vision of Brahma:
 He reveals the worlds in Him, and [p. 72] makes me to hear the Unstruck Music:
 He shows joy and sorrow to be one:
 He fills all utterance with love.
 Kabir says: "Verily he has no fear, who has such a Guru to lead him to the shelter of safety!"

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XXIII

II. 40. tinwir sanjh ka gahira awai

 THE shadows of evening fall thick and deep, and the darkness of love envelops the body and the mind.
 Open the window to the west, and be lost in the sky of love;
 Drink the sweet honey that steeps the petals of the lotus of the heart.
 Receive the waves in your body: what splendour is in the region of the sea!
 Hark! the sounds of conches and bells are rising. [p. 73]
 Kabir says: "O brother, behold! the Lord is in this vessel of my body."

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XXIV

II. 48. jis se rahani apar jagat men

 MORE than all else do I cherish at heart that love which makes me to live a limitless life in this world.
 It is like the lotus, which lives in the water and blooms in the water: yet the water cannot touch its petals, they open beyond its reach.
 It is like a wife, who enters the fire at the bidding of love. She burns and lets others grieve, yet never dishonours love.
 This ocean of the world is hard to cross: its waters are very deep. Kabir says: "Listen to me, O Sadhu! few there are who have reached its end."

[p. 74]

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XXV

II. 45. Hari ne apna ap chipaya

 MY Lord hides Himself, and my Lord wonderfully reveals Himself:
 My Lord has encompassed me with hardness, and my Lord has cast down my limitations.
 My Lord brings to me words of sorrow and words of joy, and He Himself heals their strife.
 I will offer my body and mind to my Lord: I will give up my life, but never can I forget my Lord!

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XXVI

II. 75. onkar siwae koi sirjai

 ALL things are created by the Om;
 The love-form is His body.
 He is without form, without quality, without decay:
 Seek thou union with Him! [p. 75]
 But that formless God takes a thousand forms in the eyes of His creatures:
 He is pure and indestructible,
 His form is infinite and fathomless,
 He dances in rapture, and waves of form arise from His dance.
 The body and the mind cannot contain themselves, when they are touched by His great joy.
 He is immersed in all consciousness, all joys, and all sorrows;
 He has no beginning and no end;
 He holds all within His bliss.

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XXVII

II. 81. satgur soi daya kar dinha

 IT is the mercy of my true Guru that has made me to know the unknown;
 I have learned from Him how to walk without feet, to see without eyes, to hear without ears, to drink [p. 76] without mouth, to fly without wings;
 I have brought my love and my meditation into the land where there is no sun and moon, nor day and night.
 Without eating, I have tasted of the sweetness of nectar; and without water, I have quenched my thirst.
 Where there is the response of delight, there is the fullness of joy. Before whom can that joy be uttered?
 Kabir says: "The Guru is great beyond words, and great is the good fortune of the disciple."

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XXVIII

II. 85. nirgun age sargun nacai

 BEFORE the Unconditioned, the Conditioned dances: "Thou and I are one!" this trumpet proclaims. [p. 77]
 The Guru comes, and bows down before the disciple:
 This is the greatest of wonders.

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XXIX

II. 87. Kabir kab se bhaye vairagi

 GORAKHNATH asks Kabir:
 "Tell me, O Kabir, when did your vocation begin? Where did your love have its rise?"
 Kabir answers:
 "When He whose forms are manifold had not begun His play: when there was no Guru, and no disciple: when the world was not spread out: when the Supreme One was alone--
 Then I became an ascetic; then, O Gorakh, my love was drawn to Brahma.
 Brahma did not hold the crown on his head; the god Vishnu was not [p. 78] anointed as king; the power of Shiva was still unborn; when I was instructed in Yoga.

I became suddenly revealed in Benares, and Ramananda illumined me;
 I brought with me the thirst for the Infinite, and I have come for the meeting with Him.
 In simplicity will I unite with the Simple One; my love will surge up.
 O Gorakh, march thou with His music!"

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XXX

II. 95. ya tarvar men ek pakheru

 ON this tree is a bird: it dances in the joy of life.
 None knows where it is: and who knows what the burden of its music may be?
 Where the branches throw a deep [p. 79] shade, there does it have its nest: and it comes in the evening and flies away in the morning, and says not a word of that which it means.
 None tell me of this bird that sings within me.
 It is neither coloured nor colourless: it has neither form nor outline:
 It sits in the shadow of love.
 It dwells within the Unattainable, the Infinite, and the Eternal; and no one marks when it comes and goes.
 Kabir says: "O brother Sadhu! deep is the mystery. Let wise men seek to know where rests that bird."

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XXXI

II. 100. nis` din salai ghaw

 A SORE pain troubles me day and night, and I cannot sleep;
 I long for the meeting with my Beloved, and my father's house gives me pleasure no more. [p. 80]
 The gates of the sky are opened, the temple is revealed:
 I meet my husband, and leave at His feet the offering of my body and my mind.

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XXXII

II. 103. naco re mero man, matta hoy

 DANCE, my heart! dance to-day with joy.
 The strains of love fill the days and the nights with music, and the world is listening to its melodies:
 Mad with joy, life and death dance to the rhythm of this music. The hills and the sea and the earth dance. The world of man dances in laughter and tears.
 Why put on the robe of the monk, and live aloof from the world in lonely pride?
 Behold! my heart dances in the delight [p. 81] of a hundred arts; and the Creator is well pleased.

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XXXIII

II. 105. man mast hua tab kyon bole

 WHERE is the need of words, when love has made drunken the heart?
 I have wrapped the diamond in my cloak; why open it again and again?
 When its load was light, the pan of the balance went up: now it is full, where is the need for weighing?
 The swan has taken its flight to the lake beyond the mountains; why should it search for the pools and ditches any more?
 Your Lord dwells within you: why need your outward eyes be opened?
 Kabir says: "Listen, my brother! my Lord, who ravishes my eyes, has united Himself with me."

[p. 82]

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XXXIV

II. 110. mohi tohi lagi kaise chute

 HOW could the love between Thee and me sever?
 As the leaf of the lotus abides on the water: so thou art my Lord, and I am Thy servant.
 As the night-bird Chakor gazes all night at the moon: so Thou art my Lord and I am Thy servant.
 From the beginning until the ending of time, there is love between Thee and me; and how shall such love be extinguished?
 Kabir says: "As the river enters into the ocean, so my heart touches Thee."

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XXXV

II. 113. valam, awo hamare geh re

 MY body and my mind are grieved for the want of Thee;
 O my Beloved! come to my house. [p. 83]
 When people say I am Thy bride, I am ashamed; for I have not touched Thy heart with my heart.
 Then what is this love of mine? I have no taste for food, I have no sleep; my heart is ever restless within doors and without.
 As water is to the thirsty, so is the lover to the bride. Who is there that will carry my news to my Beloved?
 Kabir is restless: he is dying for sight of Him.

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XXXVI

II. 126. jag piyari, ab kan sowai

 O FRIEND, awake, and sleep no more!
 The night is over and gone, would you lose your day also?
 Others, who have wakened, have received jewels; [p. 84]
 O foolish woman! you have lost all whilst you slept.
 Your lover is wise, and you are foolish, O woman!
 You never prepared the bed of your husband:
 O mad one! you passed your time in silly play.
 Your youth was passed in vain, for you did not know your Lord;
 Wake, wake! See! your bed is empty: He left you in the night.
 Kabir says: "Only she wakes, whose heart is pierced with the arrow of His music."

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XXXVII

I. 36. sur parkas', tanh rain kahan paiye

 WHERE is the night, when the sun is shining? If it is night, then the sun withdraws its light. Where knowledge is, can ignorance endure? [p. 85] If there be ignorance, then knowledge must die.
 If there be lust, how can love be there? Where there is love, there is no lust.

Lay hold on your sword, and join in the fight. Fight, O my brother, as long as life lasts.
 Strike off your enemy's head, and there make an end of him quickly: then come, and bow your head at your King's Durbar.
 He who is brave, never forsakes the battle: he who flies from it is no true fighter.
 In the field of this body a great war goes forward, against passion, anger, pride, and greed:
 It is in the kingdom of truth, contentment and purity, that this battle is raging; and the sword that rings forth most loudly is the sword of His Name. [p. 86]
 Kabir says: "When a brave knight takes the field, a host of cowards is put to flight.
 It is a hard fight and a weary one, this fight of the truth-seeker: for the vow of the truth-seeker is more hard than that of the warrior, or of the widowed wife who would follow her husband.
 For the warrior fights for a few hours, and the widow's struggle with death is soon ended:
 But the truth-seeker's battle goes on day and night, as long as life lasts it never ceases."

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XXXVIII

I. 50. bhram ka tala laga mahal re

 THE lock of error shuts the gate, open it with the key of love: Thus, by opening the door, thou shalt wake the Beloved. [p. 87]
 Kabir says: "O brother! do not pass by such good fortune as this."

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XXXIX

I. 59. sadho, yah tan thath tanvure ka

 O FRIEND! this body is His lyre; He tightens its strings, and draws from it the melody of Brahma.
 If the strings snap and the keys slacken, then to dust must this instrument of dust return:
 Kabir says: "None but Brahma can evoke its melodies."

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XL

I. 65. avadhu bhule ko ghar lawe

 HE is dear to me indeed who can call back the wanderer to his home. In the home is the true union, in the home is enjoyment of life: why should I forsake my home and wander in the forest? [p. 88] If Brahma helps me to realize truth, verily I will find both bondage and deliverance in home.
 He is dear to me indeed who has power to dive deep into Brahma; whose mind loses itself with ease in His contemplation.
 He is dear to me who knows Brahma, and can dwell on His supreme truth in meditation; and who can play the melody of the Infinite by uniting love and renunciation in life.
 Kabir says: "The home is the abiding place; in the home is reality; the home helps to attain Him Who is real. So stay where you are, and all things shall come to you in time."

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XLI

I. 76. santo, sahaj samadh bhali

 O SADHU! the simple union is the best. Since the day when I met with my [p. 89] Lord, there has been no end to the sport of our love.
 I shut not my eyes, I close not my ears, I do not mortify my body;
 I see with eyes open and smile, and behold His beauty everywhere:
 I utter His Name, and whatever I see, it reminds me of Him; whatever I do., it becomes His worship.
 The rising and the setting are one to me; all contradictions are solved.
 Wherever I go, I move round Him,
 All I achieve is His service:
 When I lie down, I lie prostrate at His feet.

He is the only adorable one to me: I have none other.
 My tongue has left off impure words, it sings His glory day and night:
 Whether I rise or sit down, I can never forget Him; for the rhythm of His music beats in my ears. [p. 90]
 Kabir says: "My heart is frenzied, and I disclose in my soul what is hidden. I am immersed in that one great bliss which transcends all pleasure and pain."

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XLII

I. 79. tirath men to sab pani hai

 THERE is nothing but water at the holy bathing places; and I know that they are useless, for I have bathed in them.
 The images are all lifeless, they cannot speak; I know, for I have cried aloud to them.
 The Purana and the Koran are mere words; lifting up the curtain, I have seen.
 Kabir gives utterance to the words of experience; and he knows very well that all other things are untrue.

[p. 91]

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XLIII

I. 82. pani vic min piyasi

 I LAUGH when I hear that the fish in the water is thirsty:
 You do not see that the Real is in your home, and you wander from forest to forest listlessly!
 Here is the truth! Go where you will, to Benares or to Mathura; if you do not find your soul, the world is unreal to you.

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XLIV

I. 93. gagan math gaib nisan gade

 THE Hidden Banner is planted in the temple of the sky; there the blue canopy decked with the moon and set with bright jewels is spread.
 There the light of the sun and the moon is shining: still your mind to silence before that splendour. [p. 92]
 Kabir says: "He who has drunk of this nectar, wanders like one who is mad."

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XLV

I. 97. sadho, ko hai kanh se ayo

 WHO are you, and whence do you come?
 Where dwells that Supreme Spirit, and how does He have His sport with all created things?
 The fire is in the wood; but who awakens it suddenly? Then it turns to ashes, and where goes the force of the fire?
 The true guru teaches that He has neither limit nor infinitude.
 Kabir says: "Brahma suits His language to the understanding of His hearer."

[p. 93]

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XLVI

I. 98. sadho, sahajai kaya s'odho

 O SADHU! purify your body in the simple way.
 As the seed is within the banyan tree, and within the seed are the flowers, the fruits, and the shade:
 So the germ is within the body, and within that germ is the body again.
 The fire, the air, the water, the earth, and the aether; you cannot have these outside of Him.
 O, Kazi, O Pundit, consider it well: what is there that is not in the soul?
 The water-filled pitcher is placed upon water, it has water within and without.
 It should not be given a name, lest it call forth the error of dualism.
 Kabir says: "Listen to the Word, the Truth, which is your essence. He [p. 94] speaks the Word to Himself; and He Himself is the Creator."

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XLVII

I. 102. tarvar ek mul vin thada

 THERE is a strange tree, which stands without roots and bears fruits without blossoming;
 It has no branches and no leaves, it is lotus all over.
 Two birds sing there; one is the Guru, and the other the disciple:
 The disciple chooses the manifold fruits of life and tastes them, and the Guru beholds him in joy.
 What Kabir says is hard to understand: "The bird is beyond seeking, yet it is most clearly visible. The Formless is in the midst of all forms. I sing the glory of forms."

[p. 95]

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XLVIII

I. 107. calat mansa acal kinhi

 I HAVE stilled my restless mind, and my heart is radiant: for in Thatness I have seen beyond That-ness. In company I have seen the Comrade Himself.
 Living in bondage, I have set myself free: I have broken away from the clutch of all narrowness.
 Kabir says: "I have attained the unattainable, and my heart is coloured with the colour of love."

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XLIX

I. 105. jo disai, so to hai nahin

 THAT which you see is not: and for that which is, you have no words.
 Unless you see, you believe not: what is told you you cannot accept.
 He who is discerning knows by the word; and the ignorant stands gaping. [p. 96]
 Some contemplate the Formless, and others meditate on form: but the wise man knows that Brahma is beyond both.
 That beauty of His is not seen of the eye: that metre of His is not heard of the ear.
 Kabir says: "He who has found both love and renunciation never descends to death."

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

L

I. 126. murali bajat akhand sadaye

 THE flute of the Infinite is played without ceasing, and its sound is love:
 When love renounces all limits, it reaches truth.
 How widely the fragrance spreads! It has no end, nothing stands in its way.
 The form of this melody is bright like [p. 97] a million suns: incomparably sounds the vina, the vina of the notes of truth.

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

LI

I. 129. sakhiyo, ham hun bhai valamas'i

 DEAR friend, I am eager to meet my Beloved! My youth has flowered, and the pain of separation from Him troubles my breast.
 I am wandering yet in the alleys of knowledge without purpose, but I have received His news in these alleys of knowledge.
 I have a letter from my Beloved: in this letter is an unutterable message, and now my fear of death is done away.
 Kabir says: "O my loving friend! I have got for my gift the Deathless One."

[p. 98]

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

LII

I. 130. sain vin dard kareje hoy

 WHEN I am parted from my Beloved, my heart is full of misery: I have no comfort in the day, I have no sleep in the night. To whom shall I tell my sorrow?
 The night is dark; the hours slip by. Because my Lord is absent, I start up and tremble with fear.
 Kabir says: "Listen, my friend! there is no other satisfaction, save in the encounter with the Beloved."

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

LIII

I. 122. kaum murali s'abd s'un anand bhayo

 WHAT is that flute whose music thrills me with joy?
 The flame burns without a lamp;
 The lotus blossoms without a root; [p. 99]
 Flowers bloom in clusters;
 The moon-bird is devoted to the moon;
 With all its heart the rain-bird longs for the shower of rain;
 But upon whose love does the Lover concentrate His entire life?

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

LIV

I. 112. s'unta nahi dhun ki khabar

 HAVE you not heard the tune which the Unstruck Music is playing? In the midst of the chamber the harp of joy is gently and sweetly played; and where is the need of going without to hear it?
 If you have not drunk of the nectar of that One Love, what boots it though you should purge yourself of all stains?
 The Kazi is searching the words of the Koran, and instructing others: [p. 100] but if his heart be not steeped in that love, what does it avail, though he be a teacher of men?
 The Yogi dyes his garments with red: but if he knows naught of that colour of love, what does it avail though his garments be tinted?
 Kabir says: "Whether I be in the temple or the balcony, in the camp or in the flower garden, I tell you truly that every moment my Lord is taking His delight in me."

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

LV

I. 73. bhakti ka marag jhina re

 SUBTLE is the path of love!
 Therein there is no asking and no not-asking,
 There one loses one's self at His feet,
 There one is immersed in the joy of the seeking: plunged in the deeps of love as the fish in the water. [p. 101]
 The lover is never slow in offering his head for his Lord's service.
 Kabir declares the secret of this love.

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

LVI

I. 68. bhai koi satguru sant kahawai

 HE is the real Sadhu, who can reveal the form of the Formless to the vision of these eyes:
 Who teaches the simple way of attaining Him, that is other than rites or ceremonies:
 Who does not make you close the doors, and hold the breath, and renounce the world:
 Who makes you perceive the Supreme Spirit wherever the mind attaches itself:
 Who teaches you to be still in the midst of all your activities.
 Ever immersed in bliss, having no fear in his mind, he keeps the spirit of [p. 102] union in the midst of all enjoyments.
 The infinite dwelling of the Infinite Being is everywhere: in earth, water, sky, and air:
 Firm as the thunderbolt, the seat of the seeker is established above the void.
 He who is within is without: I see Him and none else.

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

LVII

I. 66. sadho, s'abd sadhna kijai

 RECEIVE that Word from which the Universe springeth!
 That word is the Guru; I have heard it, and become the disciple.
 How many are there who know the meaning of that word?

O Sadhu! practise that Word!
 The Vedas and the Puranas proclaim it,
 The world is established in it, [p. 103]
 The Rishis and devotees speak of it:
 But none knows the mystery of the Word.
 The householder leaves his house when he hears it,
 The ascetic comes back to love when he hears it,
 The Six Philosophies expound it,
 The Spirit of Renunciation points to that Word,
 From that Word the world-form has sprung,
 That Word reveals all.
 Kabir says: "But who knows whence the Word cometh?

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

LVIII

I. 63. pile pyala, ho matwala

 EMPTY the Cup! O be drunken!
 Drink the divine nectar of His Name!
 Kabir says: "Listen to me, dear Sadhu! [p. 104]
 From the sole of the foot to the crown of the head this mind is filled with poison."

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

LIX

I. 52. khasm na cinhai bawari

 O MAN, if thou dost not know thine own Lord, whereof art thou so proud?
 Put thy cleverness away: mere words shall never unite thee to Him.
 Do not deceive thyself with the witness of the Scriptures:
 Love is something other than this, and he who has sought it truly has found it.

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

LX

I. 56. sukh sindh ki sair ka

 THE savour of wandering in the ocean of deathless life has rid me of all my asking: [p. 105]
 As the tree is in the seed, so all diseases are in this asking.

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

LXI

I. 48. sukh sagar men aike

 WHEN at last you are come to the ocean of happiness, do not go back thirsty.
 Wake, foolish man! for Death stalks you. Here is pure water before you; drink it at every breath.
 Do not follow the mirage on foot, but thirst for the nectar;
 Dhruva, Prahlad, and Shukadeva have drunk of it, and also Raidas has tasted it:
 The saints are drunk with love, their thirst is for love.
 Kabir says: "Listen to me, brother! The nest of fear is broken.
 Not for a moment have you come face to face with the world: [p. 106]
 You are weaving your bondage of falsehood, your words are full of deception:
 With the load of desires which you. hold on your head, how can you be light?"
 Kabir says: "Keep within you truth, detachment, and love."

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

LXII

I. 35. sati ko kaun s'ikhawta hai

 WHO has ever taught the widowed wife to burn herself on the pyre of her dead husband?
 And who has ever taught love to find bliss in renunciation?

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

LXIII

I. 39. are man, dhiraj kahe na dharai

 WHY so impatient, my heart?
 He who watches over birds, beasts, and insects, [p. 107]
 He who cared for you whilst you were yet in your mother's womb,
 Shall He not care for you now that you are come forth?
 Oh my heart, how could you turn from the smile of your Lord and wander so far from Him?
 You have left Your Beloved and are thinking of others: and this is why all your work is in vain.

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

LXIV

I. 117. sain se lagan kathin hai, bhai

 NOW hard it is to meet my Lord!
 The rain-bird wails in thirst for the rain: almost she dies of her longing, yet she would have none other water than the rain.
 Drawn by the love of music, the deer moves forward: she dies as she listens to the music, yet she shrinks not in fear. [p. 108]
 The widowed wife sits by the body of her dead husband: she is not afraid of the fire.
 Put away all fear for this poor body.

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

LXV

I. 22. jab main bhula, re bhai

 O BROTHER! when I was forgetful, my true Guru showed me the Way.
 Then I left off all rites and ceremonies, I bathed no more in the holy water:
 Then I learned that it was I alone who was mad, and the whole world beside me was sane; and I had disturbed these wise people.
 From that time forth I knew no more how to roll in the dust in obeisance:
 I do not ring the temple bell:
 I do not set the idol on its throne: [p. 109]
 I do not worship the image with flowers.
 It is not the austerities that mortify the flesh which are pleasing to the Lord,
 When you leave off your clothes and kill your senses, you do not please the Lord:
 The man who is kind and who practises righteousness, who remains passive amidst the affairs of the world, who considers all creatures on earth as his own self,
 He attains the Immortal Being, the true God is ever with him.
 Kabir says: "He attains the true Name whose words are pure, and who is free from pride and conceit."

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

LXVI

I. 20. man na rangaye

 THE Yogi dyes his garments, instead of dyeing his mind in the colours of love: [p. 110]
 He sits within the temple of the Lord, leaving Brahma to worship a stone.
 He pierces holes in his ears, he has a great beard and matted locks, he looks like a goat:
 He goes forth into the wilderness, killing all his desires, and turns himself into an eunuch:
 He shaves his head and dyes his garments; he reads the Gita and becomes a mighty talker.
 Kabir says: "You are going to the doors of death, bound hand and foot!"

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

LXVII

I. 9. na jane sahab kaisa hai

 I DO not know what manner of God is mine.
 The Mullah cries aloud to Him: and why? Is your Lord deaf? The subtle anklets that ring on the [p. 111] feet of an insect when it moves are heard of Him.
 Tell your beads, paint your forehead with the mark of your God, and wear matted locks long and showy: but a deadly weapon is in your heart, and how shall you have God?

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

LXVIII

III. 102. ham se raha na jay

 I HEAR the melody of His flute, and I cannot contain myself:
 The flower blooms, though it is not spring; and already the bee has received its invitation.
 The sky roars and the lightning flashes, the waves arise in my heart,
 The rain falls; and my heart longs for my Lord.
 Where the rhythm of the world rises and falls, thither my heart has reached: [p. 112]
 There the hidden banners are fluttering in the air.
 Kabir says: "My heart is dying, though it lives."

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

LXIX

III. 2. jo khoda masjid vasat hai

 IF God be within the mosque, then to whom does this world belong?
 If Ram be within the image which you find upon your pilgrimage, then who is there to know what happens without?
 Hari is in the East: Allah is in the West. Look within your heart, for there you will find both Karim and Ram;
 All the men and women of the world are His living forms.
 Kabir is the child of Allah and of Ram: He is my Guru, He is my Pir.

[p. 113]

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

LXX

III. 9. s'il santosh sada samadrishti

 HE who is meek and contented., he who has an equal vision, whose mind is filled with the fullness of acceptance and of rest;
 He who has seen Him and touched Him, he is freed from all fear and trouble.
 To him the perpetual thought of God is like sandal paste smeared on the body, to him nothing else is delight:
 His work and his rest are filled with music: he sheds abroad the radiance of love.
 Kabir says: "Touch His feet, who is one and indivisible, immutable and peaceful; who fills all vessels to the brim with joy, and whose form is love."

[p. 114]

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

LXXI

III. 13. sadh sangat pitam

 GO thou to the company of the good, where the Beloved One has His dwelling place:
 Take all thy thoughts and love and instruction from thence.
 Let that assembly be burnt to ashes where His Name is not spoken!
 Tell me, how couldst thou hold a wedding-feast, if the bridegroom himself were not there?
 Waver no more, think only of the Beloved;
 Set not thy heart on the worship of other gods, there is no worth in the worship of other masters.
 Kabir deliberates and says: "Thus thou shalt never find the Beloved!"

[p. 115]

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

LXXII

III. 26. tor hira hirailwa kicad men

 THE jewel is lost in the mud, and all are seeking for it;
 Some look for it in the east, and some in the west; some in the water and some amongst stones.
 But the servant Kabir has appraised it at its true value, and has wrapped it with care in the end of the mantle of his heart.

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

LXXIII

III. 26. ayau din gaune ka ho

 THE palanquin came to take me away to my husband's home, and it sent through my heart a thrill of joy;
 But the bearers have brought me into the lonely forest, where I have no one of my own. [p. 116]
 O bearers, I entreat you by your feet, wait but a moment longer: let me go back to my kinsmen and friends, and take my leave of them.
 The servant Kabir sings: "O Sadhu! finish your buying and selling, have done with your good and your bad: for there are no markets and no shops in the land to which you go."

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

LXXIV

III. 30. are dil, prem nagar ka ant na paya

 O MY heart! you have not known all the secrets of this city of love: in ignorance you came, and in ignorance you return.
 O my friend, what have you done with this life? You have taken on your head the burden heavy with stones, and who is to lighten it for you? [p. 117]
 Your Friend stands on the other shore, but you never think in your mind how you may meet with Him:
 The boat is broken, and yet you sit ever upon the bank; and thus you are beaten to no purpose by the waves.
 The servant Kabir asks you to consider; who is there that shall befriend you at the last?
 You are alone, you have no companion: you will suffer the consequences of your own deeds.

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

LXXV

III. 55. ved kahe sargun ke age

 THE Vedas say that the Unconditioned stands beyond the world of Conditions.
 O woman, what does it avail thee to dispute whether He is beyond all or in all? [p. 118]
 See thou everything as thine own dwelling place: the mist of pleasure and pain can never spread there.
 There Brahma is revealed day and night: there light is His garment, light is His seat, light rests on thy head.
 Kabir says: "The Master, who is true, He is all light."

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

LXXVI

III. 48. tu surat nain nihar

 OPEN your eyes of love, and see Him who pervades this world I consider it well, and know that this is your own country.
 When you meet the true Guru, He will awaken your heart;
 He will tell you the secret of love and detachment, and then you will know indeed that He transcends this universe. [p. 119]
 This world is the City of Truth, its maze of paths enchants the heart:
 We can reach the goal without crossing the road, such is the sport unending.
 Where the ring of manifold joys ever dances about Him, there is the sport of Eternal Bliss.
 When we know this, then all our receiving and renouncing is over;
 Thenceforth the heat of having shall never scorch us more.

He is the Ultimate Rest unbounded:
 He has spread His form of love throughout all the world.
 From that Ray which is Truth, streams of new forms are perpetually springing: and He pervades those forms.
 All the gardens and groves and bowers are abounding with blossom; and the air breaks forth into ripples of joy. [p. 120]
 There the swan plays a wonderful game,
 There the Unstruck Music eddies around the Infinite One;
 There in the midst the Throne of the Unheld is shining, whereon the great Being sits--
 Millions of suns are shamed by the radiance of a single hair of His body.
 On the harp of the road what true melodies are being sounded! and its notes pierce the heart:
 There the Eternal Fountain is playing its endless life-streams of birth and death.
 They call Him Emptiness who is the Truth of truths, in Whom all truths are stored!

There within Him creation goes forward, which is beyond all philosophy; for philosophy cannot attain to Him: [p. 121]
 There is an endless world, O my Brother! and there is the Nameless Being, of whom naught can be said.
 Only he knows it who has reached that region: it is other than all that is heard and said.
 No form, no body, no length, no breadth is seen there: how can I tell you that which it is?
 He comes to the Path of the Infinite on whom the grace of the Lord descends: he is freed from births and deaths who attains to Him.
 Kabir says: "It cannot be told by the words of the mouth, it cannot be written on paper:
 It is like a dumb person who tastes a sweet thing--how shall it be explained?"

[p. 122]

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

LXXVII

III. 60. cal hamsa wa des' jahan

 O MY heart! let us go to that country where dwells the Beloved, the ravisher of my heart!
 There Love is filling her pitcher from the well, yet she has no rope wherewith to draw water;
 There the clouds do not cover the sky, yet the rain falls down in gentle showers:
 O bodiless one! do not sit on your doorstep; go forth and bathe yourself in that rain!
 There it is ever moonlight and never dark; and who speaks of one sun only? that land is illuminate with the rays of a million suns.

[p. 123]

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

LXXVIII

III. 63. kahain Kabir, s'uno ho sadho

 KABIR says: "O Sadhu! hear my deathless words. If you want your own good, examine and consider them well.
 You have estranged yourself from the Creator, of whom you have sprung: you have lost your reason, you have bought death.
 All doctrines and all teachings are sprung from Him, from Him they grow: know this for certain, and have no fear.
 Hear from me the tidings of this great truth!
 Whose name do you sing, and on whom do you meditate? O, come forth from this entanglement!
 He dwells at the heart of all things, so why take refuge in empty desolation? [p. 124]
 If you place the Guru at a distance from you, then it is but the distance that you honour:
 If indeed the Master be far away, then who is it else that is creating this world?
 When you think that He is not here, then you wander further and further away, and seek Him in vain with tears.
 Where He is far off, there He is unattainable: where He is near, He is very bliss.
 Kabir says: "Lest His servant should suffer pain He pervades him through and through."
 Know yourself then, O Kabir; for He is in you from head to foot.
 Sing with gladness, and keep your seat unmoved within your heart.

[p. 125]

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

LXXIX

III. 66. na main dharmi nahin adharmi

 I AM neither pious nor ungodly, I live neither by law nor by sense,
 I am neither a speaker nor hearer, I am neither a servant nor master, I am neither bond nor free,
 I am neither detached nor attached.
 I am far from none: I am near to none.
 I shall go neither to hell nor to heaven.
 I do all works; yet I am apart from all works.
 Few comprehend my meaning: he who can comprehend it, he sits unmoved.
 Kabir seeks neither to establish nor to destroy.

[p. 126]

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

LXXX

III. 69. satta nam hai sab ten nyara

 THE true Name is like none other name!
 The distinction of the Conditioned from the Unconditioned is but a word:
 The Unconditioned is the seed, the Conditioned is the flower and the fruit.
 Knowledge is the branch, and the Name is the root.
 Look, and see where the root is: happiness shall be yours when you come to the root.
 The root will lead you to the branch, the leaf, the flower, and the fruit:
 It is the encounter with the Lord, it is the attainment of bliss, it is the reconciliation of the Conditioned and the Unconditioned.

[p. 127]

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

LXXXI

III. 74. pratham ek jo apai ap

 IN the beginning was He alone, sufficient unto Himself: the formless, colourless, and unconditioned Being.
 Then was there neither beginning, middle, nor end;
 Then were no eyes, no darkness, no light;
 Then were no ground, air, nor sky; no fire, water, nor earth; no rivers like the Ganges and the Jumna, no seas, oceans, and waves.
 Then was neither vice nor virtue; scriptures there were not, as the Vedas and Puranas, nor as the Koran.
 Kabir ponders in his mind and says, "Then was there no activity: the Supreme Being remained merged in the unknown depths of His own self." [p. 128]
 The Guru neither eats nor drinks, neither lives nor dies:
 Neither has He form, line, colour, nor vesture.
 He who has neither caste nor clan nor anything else--how may I describe His glory?
 He has neither form nor formlessness,
 He has no name,
 He has neither colour nor colourlessness,
 He has no dwelling-place.

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

LXXXII

III. 76. kahain Kabir vicar ke

 KABIR ponders and says: "He who has neither caste nor country, who is formless and without quality, fills all space."
 The Creator brought into being the Game of Joy: and from the word Om the Creation sprang. [p. 129]
 The earth is His joy; His joy is the sky;
 His joy is the flashing of the sun and the moon;
 His joy is the beginning, the middle, and the end;
 His joy is eyes, darkness, and light.
 Oceans and waves are His joy: His joy the Sarasvati, the Jumna, and the Ganges.
 The Guru is One: and life and death., union and separation, are all His plays of joy!
 His play the land and water, the whole universe!
 His play the earth and the sky!
 In play is the Creation spread out, in play it is established. The whole world, says Kabir, rests in His play, yet still the Player remains unknown.

[p. 130]

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

LXXXIII

III. 84. jhi jhi jantar bajai

 THE harp gives forth murmurous music; and the dance goes on without hands and feet.
 It is played without fingers, it is heard without ears: for He is the ear, and He is the listener.
 The gate is locked, but within there is fragrance: and there the meeting is seen of none.
 The wise shall understand it.

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

LXXXIV

III. 89. mor phakirwa mangi jay

 THE Beggar goes a-begging, but
 I could not even catch sight of Him:
 And what shall I beg of the Beggar He gives without my asking.
 Kabir says: "I am His own: now let that befall which may befall!"

[p. 131]

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

LXXXV

III. 90. naihar se jiyara phat re

 MY heart cries aloud for the house of my lover; the open road and the shelter of a roof are all one to her who has lost the city of her husband.
 My heart finds no joy in anything: my mind and my body are distraught.
 His palace has a million gates, but there is a vast ocean between it and me:
 How shall I cross it, O friend? for endless is the outstretching of the path.
 How wondrously this lyre is wrought! When its strings are rightly strung, it maddens the heart: but when the keys are broken and the strings are loosened, none regard it more.
 I tell my parents with laughter that I must go to my Lord in the morning; [p. 132]

They are angry, for they do not want me to go, and they say: "She thinks she has gained such dominion over her husband that she can have whatsoever she wishes; and therefore she is impatient to go to him."
 Dear friend, lift my veil lightly now; for this is the night of love.
 Kabir says: "Listen to me! My heart is eager to meet my lover: I lie sleepless upon my bed. Remember me early in the morning!"

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

LXXXVI

III. 96. jiv mahal men S'iv pahunwa

 SERVE your God, who has come into this temple of life!
 Do not act the part of a madman, for the night is thickening fast.
 He has awaited me for countless ages, [p. 133] for love of me He has lost His heart:
 Yet I did not know the bliss that was so near to me, for my love was not yet awake.
 But now, my Lover has made known to me the meaning of the note that struck my ear:
 Now, my good fortune is come.
 Kabir says: "Behold! how great is my good fortune! I have received the unending caress of my Beloved!"

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

LXXXVII

I. 71. gagan ghata ghaharani, sadho

 CLOUDS thicken in the sky! O, listen to the deep voice of their roaring;
 The rain comes from the east with its monotonous murmur.
 Take care of the fences and boundaries [p. 134] of your fields, lest the rains overflow them;
 Prepare the soil of deliverance, and let the creepers of love and renunciation be soaked in this shower.
 It is the prudent farmer who will bring his harvest home; he shall fill both his vessels, and feed both the wise men and the saints.

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

LXXXVIII

III. 118. aj din ke main jaun balihari

 THIS day is dear to me above all other days, for to-day the Beloved Lord is a guest in my house;
 MY chamber and my courtyard are beautiful with His presence.
 My longings sing His Name, and they are become lost in His great beauty:
 I wash His feet, and I look upon His Face; and I lay before Him as an [p. 135] offering my body, my mind, and all that I have.
 What a day of gladness is that day in which my Beloved, who is my treasure, comes to my house!
 All evils fly from my heart when I see my Lord.
 "My love has touched Him; my heart is longing for the Name which is Truth."
 Thus sings Kabir, the servant of all servants.

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

LXXXIX

I. 100. koi s'unta hai jnani rag gagan men

 IS there any wise man who will listen to that solemn music which arises in the sky?
 For He, the Source of all music, makes all vessels full fraught, and rests in fullness Himself. [p. 136]
 He who is in the body is ever athirst, for he pursues that which is in part:
 But ever there wells forth deeper and deeper the sound "He is this--this is He"; fusing love and renunciation into one.
 Kabir says: "O brother! that is the Primal Word."

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XC

I. 108. main ka se bujhaun

 TO whom shall I go to learn about my Beloved?
 Kabir says: "As you never may find the forest if you ignore the tree, so He may never be found in abstractions."

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XCI

III. 12. samskirit bhasha padhi linha

 I HAVE learned the Sanskrit language, so let all men call me wise:
 But where is the use of this, when I [p. 137] am floating adrift, and parched with thirst, and burning with the heat of desire?
 To no purpose do you bear on your head this load of pride and vanity.
 Kabir says: "Lay it down in the dust, and go forth to meet the Beloved. Address Him as your Lord."

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XCII

III. 110. carkha calai surat virahin ka

 THE woman who is parted from her lover spins at the spinning wheel.
 The city of the body arises in its beauty; and within it the palace of the mind has been built.
 The wheel of love revolves in the sky, and the seat is made of the jewels of knowledge:
 What subtle threads the woman weaves, and makes them fine with love and reverence! [p. 138]
 Kabir says: "I am weaving the garland of day and night. When my Lover comes and touches me with His feet, I shall offer Him my tears."

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XCIII

III. 111. kotin bhanu candra taragan

 BENEATH the great umbrella of my King millions of suns and moons and stars are shining!
 He is the Mind within my mind: He is the Eye within mine eye.
 Ah, could my mind and eyes be one! Could my love but reach to my Lover! Could but the fiery heat of my heart be cooled!
 Kabir says: "When you unite love with the Lover, then you have love's perfection."

[p. 139]

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XCIV

I. 92. avadhu begam des' hamara

 O SADHU! my land is a sorrowless land.
 I cry aloud to all, to the king and the beggar, the emperor and the fakir--
 Whosoever seeks for shelter in the Highest, let all come and settle in my land!
 Let the weary come and lay his burdens here!

So live here, my brother, that you may cross with ease to that other shore.
 It is a land without earth or sky, without moon or stars;
 For only the radiance of Truth shines in my Lord's Durbar.
 Kabir says: "O beloved brother! naught is essential save Truth."

[p. 140]

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XCV

I. 109. sain ke sangat sasur ai

 CAME with my Lord to my Lord's home: but I lived not with Him and I tasted Him not, and my youth passed away like a dream.
 On my wedding night my women-friends sang in chorus, and I was anointed with the unguents of pleasure and pain:
 But when the ceremony was over, I left my Lord and came away, and my kinsman tried to console me upon the road.
 Kabir says, "I shall go to my Lord's house with my love at my side; then shall I sound the trumpet of triumph!"

[p. 141]

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XCVI

I. 75. samajh dekh man mit piyarwa

 O FRIEND, dear heart of mine, think well! if you love indeed, then why do you sleep?
 If you have found Him, then give yourself utterly, and take Him to you.
 Why do you loose Him again and again?
 If the deep sleep of rest has come to your eyes, why waste your time making the bed and arranging the pillows?
 Kabir says: "I tell you the ways of love! Even though the head itself must be given, why should you weep over it?"

[p. 142]

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XCVII

II. 90. sahab ham men, sahab tum men

 THE Lord is in me, the Lord is in you, as life is in every seed. O servant! put false pride away, and seek for Him within you.
 A million suns are ablaze with light,
 The sea of blue spreads in the sky,
 The fever of life is stilled, and all stains are washed away; when I sit in the midst of that world.
 Hark to the unstruck bells and drums! Take your delight in love!
 Rains pour down without water, and the rivers are streams of light.
 One Love it is that pervades the whole world, few there are who know it fully:
 They are blind who hope to see it by the light of reason, that reason which is the cause of separation--
 The House of Reason is very far away! [p. 143]
 How blessed is Kabir, that amidst this great joy he sings within his own vessel.
 It is the music of the meeting of soul with soul;
 It is the music of the forgetting of sorrows;
 It is the music that transcends all coming in and all going forth.

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XCVIII

II. 98. ritu phagun niyarani

 THE month of March draws near: ah, who will unite me to my Lover?
 How shall I find words for the beauty of my Beloved? For He is merged in all beauty.
 His colour is in all the pictures of the world, and it bewitches the body and the mind.
 Those who know this, know what is this unutterable play of the Spring. [p. 144]
 Kabir says: "Listen to me, brother' there are not many who have found this out."

      
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

XCIX

II. 111. Narad, pyar so antar nahi

 OH Narad! I know that my Lover cannot be far:
 When my Lover wakes, I wake; when He sleeps, I sleep.
 He is destroyed at the root who gives pain to my Beloved.
 Where they sing His praise, there I live;
 When He moves, I walk before Him: my heart yearns for my Beloved.
 The infinite pilgrimage lies at His feet, a million devotees are seated there.
 Kabir says: "The Lover Himself reveals the glory of true love."

[p. 145]

     
The Songs of Kabir, tr. by Rabindranath Tagore, intro. by Evelyn Underhill, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

C

II. 122. koi prem ki peng jhulao re

 HANG up the swing of love to-day! Hang the body and the mind between the arms of the Beloved, in the ecstasy of love's joy:
 Bring the tearful streams of the rainy clouds to your eyes, and cover your heart with the shadow of darkness:
 Bring your face nearer to His ear, and speak of the deepest longings of your heart.
 Kabir says: "Listen to me, brother! bring the vision of the Beloved in your heart."

  


===== BOOK: sor.txt =====


    The Sorceress, by Jules Michelet, [1939], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Sorceress

  

By Jules Michelet

  

as translated by Alfred Richard Allinson from the French (original title "La Sorciere," Paris: E. Dentu [1862]).

  

Originally published as "Satanism and Witchcraft" New York: Citadel Press [1939]

  

Also reprinted unaltered as "Witchcraft, Sorcery and Superstition" New York: Citadel/Carol Publishing [1995]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, December 2007, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the United States because it was published between 1923 and 1963 inclusive without any renewal at the US Copyright Office.

     The Sorceress, by Jules Michelet, [1939], at sacred-texts.com

[p. v]

  

CONTENTS

           

        

       PAGE

     
      INTRODUCTION

       <page viii>

     
       

       
   PART ONE

        

     
      
   1.

       DEATH OF THE GODS

       <page 3>

     
       

       Christianity believed the world to be on the point of death--The world of   demons--The Bride of Corinth

        

     
      
   2.

       WHAT DROVE THE MIDDLE AGES TO DESPAIR

       <page 11>

     
       

       The People makes itself Legends--But originality is prohibited--The People   defends its lands--But is made a serf of

        

     
      
   3.

       THE LITTLE DEMON OF THE HEARTH AND HOME

       <page 21>

     
       

       Promiscuity of the primitive villa--An   independent hearth and home--The serf's wife--True to the old gods--Robin   Goodfellow

        

     
      
   4.

       TEMPTATIONS

       <page 32>

     
       

       The Serf invokes the Spirit of Hidden Treasures--Feudal raids and cruel   feudal customs--The goodwife's Brownie turns into a demon after all

        

     
      
   5.

       DIABOLICAL POSSESSION

       <page 41>

     
       

       Gold gains the mastery in 1300--The peasant wife in alliance with the Demon   of gold--Foul terrors of the Middle Ages--The Lady of the Village--Hatred and   rivalry of the Lady of the Castle

        

     
      
   6.

       THE PACT WITH SATAN

       <page 55>

     
       

       The serf's wife gives herself to the Devil--The Sorceress and the Blasted   Hearth

        

     
      
   7.

       KING OF THE DEAD

       <page 61>

     
       

       She calls back the spirits of loved ones dead--Conception of Satan softened   and mollified

        

     
      
   8.

       PRINCE OF NATURE

       <page 69>

     
       

       Rigours of the Mediaeval Winter relax--The Sorceress submits to Oriental   influences--Conceives Nature

        

     
      
   9.

       SATAN THE HEALER

       <page 77>

     
       

       Diseases of the Middle Ages--The Sorceress utilizes poisons for

        

     
       

       [p. vi]

        

     
       

       their cure--The Solanaceae (Herbs of Consolation)--Women for the first time   cared for medically

        

     
      
   10.

       CHARMS AND LOVE POTIONS

       <page 89>

     
       

       Blue Beard and Griselda--The Castle a suppliant to the Sorceress--Her   cunning ways

        

     
      
   11.

       COMMUNION OF REVOLT--WITCHES' SABBATHS--THE BLACK MASS

       <page 98>

     
       

       The old semi-Pagan Sabasia--The   Black Mass, and its four Acts: Act I. The Introit, the Kiss of Devotion, the   Banquet; Act II. The Offertory, Woman at once Altar and Sacrifice

        

     
      
   12.

       BLACK MASS CONTINUED--LOVE AND DEATH--SATAN DISAPPEARS

       <page 109>

     
       

       Act III. Incestuous love-making; Act IV. Death of Satan; the Sorceress   flies to rejoin her lover in Hell

        

     
       

       
   PART TWO

        

     
      
   13.

       THE SORCERESS IN HER DECADENCE--SATAN MULTIPLIED AND VULGARISED

       <page 119>

     
       

       Sorceresses and Sorcerers employed by the Great--The Chatelaine a   Werewolf--Last of the love-potions

        

     
      
   14.

       PERSECUTIONS

       <page 129>

     
       

       The Malleus Maleficarum--Satan   master of the World

        

     
      
   15.

       A HUNDRED YEARS' TOLERATION IN FRANCE

       <page 143>

     
       

       Spain begins when France leaves off--A reaction; the Lawyers show   themselves as good at burning as the Priests

        

     
      
   16.

       THE BASQUE WITCHES, 1609

       <page 150>

     
       

       They direct their own Judges in the way they should go

        

     
      
   17.

       SATAN TURNS ECCLESIASTIC, 1610

       <page 159>

     
       

       Diversions and Distractions of the Modern "Sabbath"

        

     
      
   18.

       GAUFFRIDI, 1610

       <page 168>

     
       

       Priests prosecuted for Sorcery by the Monks--Conventual jealousies

        

     
      
   19.

       THE NUNS OF LOUDUN--URBAIN GRANDIER, 1633, 1634

       <page 189>

     
       

       An eloquent and popular Priest; suspected of Sorcery--Morbid and   extraordinary manifestations among the Nuns of Loudun

        

     
      
   20.

       THE NUNS OF LOUVIERS AND SATANIC POSSESSION--MADELEINE BAVENT,   1640-1647

       <page 207>

     
       

       Illuminism; the Devil plays Quietist--Duel between the Fiend and the   Physician

        

     
      
   21.

       SATAN TRIUMPHANT IN THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY

       <page 221>

     
       

       [p. vii]

        

     
      
   22.

       FATHER GIRARD AND CHARLOTTE CADIeRE

       <page 229>

     
      
   23.

       CHARLOTTE CADIeRE AT THE CONVENT OF OLLIOULES

       <page 260>

     
      
   24.

       TRIAL OF CHARLOTTE CADIeRE, 1730, 1731

       <page 283>

     
      EPILOGUE

       <page 307>

     
       

       Satan and Jesus,--is a Reconciliation possible?--The Sorceress has perished,   but the Fairy survives, and will survive--Imminence of a Religious Renovation

        

     
      NOTES AND ELUCIDATIONS

       <page 312>

     
      1.

       The Inquisition

       <page 312>

     
      2.

       Method of Procedure

       <page 315>

     
      3.

       Satan as Physician, Love Philtres,   etc.

       <page 318>

     
      4.

       The Last Act of the Witches' Sabbath

       <page 320>

     
      5.

       Literature of Sorcery and Witchcraft

       <page 323>

     
      6.

       Decadence, etc

       <page 325>

     
      7.

       The spot where the present book was completed

       <page 327>

     
   
     The Sorceress, by Jules Michelet, [1939], at sacred-texts.com

[p. viii]

  

INTRODUCTION

SPRENGER said, before 1500: "We should speak of the Heresy of the Sorceresses, not of the Sorcerers; the latter are of small account." So another writer under Louis XIII.: "For one Sorcerer, ten thousand Sorceresses."

"Nature makes them Sorceresses,"--the genius peculiar to woman and her temperament. She is born a creature of Enchantment. In virtue of regularly recurring periods of exaltation, she is a Sibyl; in virtue of love, a Magician. By the fineness of her intuitions, the cunning of her wiles--often fantastic, often beneficent--she is a Witch, and casts spells, at least and lowest lulls pain to sleep and softens the blow of calamity.

All primitive peoples start alike; this we see again and again in the accounts given by travellers. Man hunts and fights. Woman contrives and dreams; she is the mother of fancy, of the gods. She possesses glimpses of the second sight, and has wings to soar into the infinitude of longing and imagination. The better to count the seasons, she scans the sky. But earth has her heart as well. Her eyes stoop to the amorous flowers; a flower herself in her young beauty, she learns to know them as playfellows and intimates. A woman, she asks them to heal the men she loves.

Pathetic in their simplicity these first beginnings of Religion and Science! Later on, each province will be separated, we shall see mankind specialise--as medicine-man, astrologer or prophet, necromancer, priest, physician. But in these earliest days woman is all in all, and plays every part.

A strong and bright and vigorous religion, such as was Greek Paganism, begins with the Sibyl, to end with the Sorceress. The

[p. ix]

first, a virgin fair and beautiful, brilliant in the full blaze of dawn, cradled it, gave it its charm and glamour. In later days, when sick and fallen, in the gloom of the Dark Ages, on heaths and in forests, it was concealed and protected by the Sorceress; her dauntless pity fed its needs and kept it still alive. Thus for religions it is woman is mother, tender protectress and faithful nurse. Gods are like men; they are born and they die on a woman's breast.

 

But what a price she paid for her fidelity! . . . Magian queens of Persia, enchanting Circe, sublime Sibyl, alas! how are you fallen, how barbarous the transformation you have suffered! . . . She who, from the throne of the Orient, taught mankind the virtues of plants and the motions of the stars, she who, seated on the Delphic tripod and, illumined by the very god of light, gave oracles to a kneeling world, is the same that, a thousand years later, is hunted like a wild beast, chased from street to street, reviled, buffeted, stoned, scorched with red-hot embers! . . .

The clergy has not stakes enough, the people insults, the child stones, for the unhappy being. The poet, no less a child, throws yet another stone at her, a crueller one still for a woman. Gratuitously insulting, he makes her out always old and ugly. The very word Sorceress or Witch calls up the image of the Weird Sisters of Macbeth. Yet the cruel witch trials prove exactly the opposite; many perished just because they were young and pretty.

The Sibyl foretold the future; but the Sorceress makes it. Here is the great, the vital distinction. She evokes, conjures, guides Destiny. She is not like Cassandra of old, who foresaw the coming doom so clearly, and deplored it and awaited its approach; she creates the future. Greater than Circe, greater than Medea, she holds in her hand the magic wand of natural miracle, she has Nature to aid and abet her like a sister. Foreshadowings of the modern Prometheus are to be seen in her,--a beginning

[p. x]

of industry, above all of the sovereign industry that heals and revivifies men. Unlike the Sibyl, who seemed ever gazing towards the dayspring, she fixes her eyes on the setting sun; but it is just this sombre orb of the declining luminary that shows long before the dawn (like the glow on the peaks of the High Alps) a dawn anticipatory of the true day.

The Priest realises clearly where the danger lies, that an enemy, a menacing rival, is to be feared in this High-priestess of Nature he pretends to despise. Of the old gods she has invented new ones. Beside the old Satan of the past, a new Satan is seen burgeoning in her, a Satan of the future.

 

For a thousand years the people had one healer and one only,--the Sorceress. Emperors and kings and popes, and the richest barons, had sundry Doctors of Salerno, or Moorish and Jewish physicians; but the main body of every State, the whole world we may say, consulted no one but the Saga, the Wise Woman. If her cure failed, they abused her and called her a Witch. But more generally, through a combination of respect and terror, she was spoken of as the Good Lady, or Beautiful Lady (Bella Donna), the same name as that given to fairies.

Her fate resembled that which still often befalls her favourite herb, the belladonna, and other beneficent poisons she made use of, and which were antidotes of the great scourges of the Middle Ages. Children and ignorant passers-by cursed these sombre flowers, without understanding their virtues, scared by their suspicious colour. They shudder and fly the spot; yet these are the Comforting plants (Solanaceae), which, wisely administered, have worked so many cures and soothed so much human agony.

They are found growing in the most sinister localities, in lonely, ill-reputed spots, amid ruins and rubbish heaps,--yet another resemblance with the Sorceress who utilises them. Where, indeed, could she have taken up her habitation, except on savage heaths, this child of calamity, so fiercely persecuted,

[p. xi]

so bitterly cursed and proscribed? She gathered poisons to heal and save; she was the Devil's bride, the mistress of the Incarnate Evil One, yet how much good she effected, if we are to credit the great physician of the Renaissance! Paracelsus, when in 1527, at Bale, he burned the whole pharmacopoeia of his day, declared he had learned from the Sorceresses all he knew.

Had they not earned some reward? Yes! and reward they had. Their recompense was torture and the stake. New punishments were devised for their especial benefit, new torments invented. They were brought to trial en masse, condemned on the slightest pretext. Never was such lavish waste of human life. To say nothing of Spain, the classic land of the auto-da-fe, where Moor and Jew are always associated with Witches, seven thousand were burned at Treves, and I know not how many at Toulouse; at Geneva five hundred in three months (1513); eight hundred at Wurzburg, in one batch almost, and fifteen hundred at Bamberg,--both of these quite small bishoprics! Ferdinand II. himself, the bigot, the cruel Emperor of the Thirty Years' War, was forced to restrain these worthy bishops, else they would have burned all their subjects. I find, in the Wurzburg list, a wizard of eleven, a schoolboy, and a witch of fifteen, at Bayonne, two sorceresses of seventeen, damnably pretty.

Mark this, at certain epochs the mere word of Sorceress or Witch is an arm wherewith Hate can kill at discretion. Female jealousy, masculine avarice, are only too ready to grasp so convenient a weapon. Such and such a neighbour is rich? . . . Witch! witch! Such and such is pretty? . . . Ah! witch! We shall see Murgin, a little beggar-girl, casting this terrible stone at a great lady, whose only crime was being too beautiful, the Chatelaine de Lancinena, and marking her white forehead with the death sign.

Accused of sorcery, women anticipate, if they can, the torture that is inevitable by killing themselves. Remy, that worthy judge of Lorraine who burned eight hundred of them, boasts of this Reign of Terror: "So sure is my justice," he declared, "that

[p. xii]

sixteen witches arrested the other day, never hesitated, but strangled themselves incontinently."

 

In the long course of study for my history during the thirty years I have devoted to it, this horrible literature of Sorcery, or Witchcraft, has passed through my hands again and again. First I exhausted the Manuals of the Inquisition, the asinine collections of the Dominicans--the Whips, Hammers, Ant-Swarms, Fustigations, Lanterns, etc., to give some of the absurd titles these books bear. Next I read the men of the Law, the lay judges who take the place of these monks, and who despise them without being much less idiotic themselves. I say a word or two of these elsewhere; for the present I have only one observation to make, viz. that from 1300 down to 1600, and even later, the administration of justice is identically the same. With the exception of one small interlude in the Parlement of Paris, we find always and everywhere the same ferocity of folly. Ability and talent make no difference. The wise and witty De Lancre, a magistrate of Bordeaux under Henri IV., a man of enlightened ideas in politics, directly he has to deal with witchcraft, falls back to the level of a Nider or a Sprenger, two imbecile monks of the fifteenth century.

One is filled with amazement to see all these widely different epochs, all these men of varying cultivation, unable to make one step in advance. But the explanation is simple; they were one and all arrested, let us rather say, blinded, hopelessly intoxicated and made cruel savages of, by the poison of their first principle, the doctrine of Original Sin. This is the fundamental dogma of universal injustice: "All lost for one alone, not only punished but deserving punishment, undone even before they were born and desperately wicked, dead to God from the beginning. The babe at its mother's breast is a damned soul already."

Who says so? All do, even Bossuet. A Roman theologian of weight, Spina, Master of the Sacred Palace, formulates the

[p. xiii]

doctrine in precise words: "Why does God permit the death of the innocent? He does so justly. For if they do not die by reason of the sins they have committed, yet they are guilty of death by reason of original sin" [*1]

From this monstrous theory two consequences follow, in justice and in logic. The judge is always sure of doing justice; anyone brought before him is inevitably guilty, and if he defends himself, doubly guilty. No call for Justice to sweat, and rack its brains in order to distinguish true and false; in every case the decision is a foregone conclusion. The logician likewise and the schoolman may spare themselves the trouble of analysing the soul of man, of examining the phases through which it passes, of considering its complexity, its internal disparities and self-contradictions. No need, as we feel ourselves bound to do, to explain how, by slow and subtle degrees, the soul may grow vicious instead of virtuous. These refinements, these doubts and difficulties and scruples, if they understood them at all, how they would laugh at them, and shake their heads in scorn, and how gracefully would the fine long ears that ornament their empty pates waggle to and fro!

Particularly when the Compact with the Devil comes into question, that ghastly covenant where, for some small ephemeral gain, the soul sells itself into everlasting torment, we philosophers should endeavour to trace out the accursed path, the appalling ladder of calamities and crimes, capable of having brought it so low. But our theologian can ignore all such considerations! For him Soul and Devil were created for each other; so that at the first temptation, for a caprice, a sudden longing, a passing fancy, the soul flies headlong to this dreadful extremity.

 

Nor can I see any traces of modern writers having made much inquiry into the moral chronology of Sorcery. They confine themselves far too much to the connections between the Middle

[p. xiv]

[paragraph continues] Ages and Classical Antiquity. The connection is real enough, but slight and of quite minor importance. Neither the ancient Enchantress, nor yet the Celtic and Germanic Seeress, are yet the true Sorceress. The harmless Sabasia (festivals of Bacchus Sabasius), a miniature rustic "Sabbath" which survived down to Mediaeval times, are far from identical with the Black Mass of the fourteenth century, that deliberate and deadly defiance of Jesus. These gloomy conceptions were not passed on down the long thread of tradition; they sprang ready made from the horrors of the time.

From when does the Sorceress date? I answer unhesitatingly, "From the ages of despair."

From the profound despair the World owed to the Church. I say again unhesitatingly, "The Sorceress is the Church's crime."

I pass over the string of plausible explanations by which the priests attempt to mitigate her guilt: "Weak and frivolous by nature, open to every temptation, women were led astray by concupiscence." Alas! in the wretchedness and famine of those dreadful times, this was no force sufficient to rouse to demoniac frenzy. Loving women, jealous and forsaken, children driven out of doors by a cruel stepmother, mothers beaten by their sons (all hackneyed subjects of legendary tales), may indeed have been tempted to invoke the Evil Spirit; but all this does not constitute the Sorceress, the Witch. Because the unhappy creatures call upon Satan, it does not follow that he accepts their service. They are still far, very far, from being ripe for him. They have yet to learn to hate God.

 

To understand this better, read the accursed Registers still extant of the Inquisition, not in the extracts compiled by Llorente, Lamotte-Langon, etc., but in what is extant of the original Registers of Toulouse. Read them in their vapid sameness, their dismal aridity, their shocking unconscious savagery. A few pages, and you are cold at heart, a cruel chill strikes home

[p. xv]

to the vitals. Death, death, always death, you feel it in every page. You are already in the tomb, or immured in a little chamber of stone with damp-stained walls. The happiest gate is death. The dreadful thing is the in pace. One word recurs continually, like a bell of horror tolled, and tolled again, to drive the dead in life into despair,--always the same word, Immured.

Dread apparatus for crushing and annihilating souls, cruel press for breaking hearts. The screw turns, and turns, till breath fails and the very bones crack, and she springs from the horrid engine a mystery in an unknown world!

The Sorceress has neither father nor mother, neither son, nor mate, nor kindred. She appears none knows from whence, a monster, an aerolite from the skies. Who so bold, great God! as to come nigh her?

Where is her lurking-place? In untracked wilds, in impenetrable forests of bramble, on blasted heaths, where entangled thistles suffer no foot to pass. She must be sought by night, cowering beneath some old-world dolmen. If you find her, she is isolated still by the common horror of the countryside; she has, as it were, a ring of fire round her haunts.

'Tis hard to credit it, but she is a woman still. Even this fearful life has its spring of womanhood, its feminine electricity, in virtue of which she is dowered with two gifts

The , half-insane madness, illuminism, of the seer, which according to its degree is poetry, second sight, preternatural vision, a faculty of speech at once simple and astute, above all else the power of believing in her own falsehoods. This gift is unknown to the male Sorcerer; the Wizard fails to comprehend its very elements.

From it flows a second, the sublime faculty of solitary conception, that parthenogenesis our physiologists of to-day recognise as existing among the females of numerous species. The same fecundity of body is no less procreative where conceptions of the spirit are involved.

[p. xvi]

All alone, she conceived and brought forth. Whom or what? Another of her own kind, so like the original as to cheat the eyes.

Child of hate, conceived of love; for without love nothing can be created. The Sorceress, terror-struck as she is at her strange offspring, yet sees herself so faithfully reproduced, finds such content in contemplating this new idol, that instantly she sets it on the altar, worships it, immolates herself to it, giving her own body as victim and living sacrifice.

We shall often and often find her telling the judge: "There is only one thing I am afraid of,--not to suffer enough for him." [*2]

Do you know how the newborn infant salutes the new world he enters? With a horrid scream of laughter. And has he not good cause to be glad, there on the free and open plains, far from the dungeons of Spain, and the immured victims of Toulouse? His in pace is wide as the world itself. He comes and goes, roaming where he will. His the boundless forest! his the vast heath that stretches away to the farthest horizon! his the round world and the riches thereof! The Sorceress calls him tenderly, "Robin, Robin mine! "--from the name of that gallant outlaw, the gay Robin Hood, that lived under the greenwood tree. Another pet name she loves to give him is Verdelet, Joli-Bois, Vert-Bois. The green woods, indeed, are the frolicsome scamp's favourite haunts; one glimpse of bush and briar, and he is off, a wild truant of Nature.

 

The astounding thing is that at the first essay the Sorceress really and truly made a living being. He has every mark of actuality. He has been seen and heard, and everybody can describe him.

The saints, those children of affection, the sons of the house, pay little heed, only watch and dream; they wait in patient waiting, confident of getting their share of the Elect in God's

[p. xvii]

good time. The small degree of activity they possess is concentrated within the narrow circle of Imitation--the word sums up the Middle Ages. But for him, the bastard all curse, whose share is only the lash, he has no thought of waiting. He is for ever prying and searching, never an instant still, trying all things in heaven and earth. He is to the last degree curious and inquisitive, scrutinising, rummaging, sounding, poking his nose everywhere. At the solemn Consummatum est he grins, and makes a derisive mow. His word is always "Not yet!" and "Forward still!"

All the same, he is not hard to please. Nothing rebuffs him; what Heaven throws in his way, he picks up with alacrity. For instance the Church has rejected Nature as something impure and suspect. Satan seizes on it, and makes it his pride and ornament. Better still, he utilises it, turns it to profit, originates the arts from it, accepting gladly the great name they would fain cast at him as a stigma and a disgrace, that of Prince of this World.

"Alas for them that laugh!"--they had declared with startling unwisdom; for what was this but giving Satan a fine initial advantage to start with, the monopoly of laughter, and proclaiming him amusing? Let us say necessary at once; for laughter is an essential function of human nature. How support life at all, if we cannot laugh,--at any rate when we are in sorrow?

The Church, which sees in our life below only a test and trial for one to come, takes care not to prolong it needlessly. Her medicine is resignation, a waiting and a hoping for death. Here is a great field opened to Satan; he becomes physician, healer of living men. Nay more! consoler as well; he has the compassion to show us our dead, to evoke the shades of the dear ones we have loved and lost.

Another trifle the Church has cast away and condemned--Logic, the free exercise of Reason. Here again is an appetising dainty the Enemy snaps up greedily.

The Church had built of solid stone and tempered mortar a

[p. xviii]

narrow in pace, vaulted, low-browed and confined, lighted by the merest glimmer of day through a tiny slit. This they called the schools. A few shavelings were let loose in it, and told "to be free"; they one and all grew halting cripples. Three hundred, four hundred years, only made them more helplessly paralysed. Between Abelard and Occam the progress made is--nil!

A pretty tale, to say we must look there for the origin of the Renaissance! The Renaissance came about, no doubt of that; but how? by the satanic effort of men who broke through the vault, the struggles of condemned criminals who would see the light of heaven. It came about in the main far away from schools and scholastics, in that school of wild nature where Satan lectured a truant band of Sorceresses and shepherd lads.

A dangerous curriculum, if ever there was one! But its very risks stimulated the love of knowledge, the frantic longing to see and know. It was there began the black sciences, the forbidden Chemistry of poisons, and the accursed thing, Anatomy. The shepherd, first to scan the stars, along with his discoveries in Astronomy, brought to the common stock his sinister recipes and his experiments on animals. Then the Sorceress would contribute a corpse filched from the nearest graveyard; and for the first time--at the risk of the stake--men could contemplate that miracle of God's handicraft "which" (as M. Serres so well said) "we hide in silly prudishness instead of trying to understand."

The only Doctor admitted to these classes, Paracelsus, noted a third as well, who now and again would glide in to join the sinister conclave, bringing Surgery with him as his contribution. This was the surgeon of those gentle times,--the Public Executioner, the man of unflinching hand, whose plaything was the branding-iron, who broke men's bones and could set them again, who could slay and make alive, and hang a felon up to a certain point and no further.

This criminal University of the Sorceress, the Shepherd, and the Hangman, by means of its experiments--a sacrilege every

[p. xix]

one--emboldened the other and rival seat of learning and forced its scholars to study. For each was fain to live; and otherwise the Witch would have monopolised all, and the Schoolmen turned their backs for good and all on Medicine. The Church had to submit, and wink at these crimes. She allowed there were good poisons (Grillandus); she permitted dissection in public, though reluctantly and under dire constraint. In 1306 the Italian Mondino opened and dissected a woman, and another in 1315. It was a solemn and beneficent revelation, the veritable discovery of a new world,--far more so than Christopher Columbus's. Fools shuddered, and howled in protest; wise men dropped on their knees.

 

With victories like these to his credit, Satan could not but live. Alone the Church would never have had strength to crush him. Fire and stake were of no avail, but a certain line of policy was more successful.

With no little astuteness the kingdom of Satan was divided against itself. In opposition to his daughter and bride, the Sorceress, was set her son, the Healer.

The Church, deeply and from the bottom of her heart as she hated the latter, none the less established his monopoly, to secure the Sorceress's ruin. She declares, in the fourteenth century, that if a woman dare to cure without having studied, she is a Witch and must die.

But how should she study publicly? Imagine the scene, at once ludicrous and terrible, that would have occurred if the poor savage creature had ventured to enter the schools! What merriment and wild gaiety! In the bale-fires of St. John's day, cats chained together were burned to death. But think of the Sorceress bound to this caterwauling rout of hell, the Witch screaming and roasting in the flames, what a treat for the gentle band of young shavelings and sucking pedants!

We shall see Satan's decadence all in good time,--a sorry tale. We shall see him pacified, grown a good old sort. He is

[p. xx]

robbed and pillaged, till at last, of the two masks he wore at the Witches' Sabbath, the foulest is adopted by Tartuffe.

His spirit is everywhere. But for himself, for his own personality, in losing the Witch, he lost all. The Wizards were bores, and nothing more.

Now that his fall has been so far consummated, do his foes quite realise what they have done? Was he not a necessary actor, an indispensable factor in the great engine of religious faith,--something out of gear nowadays? Every organism that works well is double, has two sides; life is hardly possible otherwise. A certain balance between two forces is necessary, forces mutually opposed and symmetrical, but unequal. The inferior acts as counterpoise, corresponding to the other. The superior grows impatient at the check, and is for abolishing it altogether. But the wish is a mistaken one.

When Colbert, in 1672, shelved Satan with so little ceremony, forbidding the Judges of the Realm to hear cases of Witchcraft, the Norman Parlement, in its obstinate conservatism, its sound Norman logicality, demonstrated the dangers attending such a decision. The Devil is nothing less than a dogma closely bound up with all the rest. Touch the vanquished of the ages--are you not touching the victor too? Doubt the acts of the one--is not this paving the way to doubt those of the other, those very miracles he did to fight the Devil? The pillars of heaven are based in the abyss. The rash man who shakes this infernal foundation may well crack the walls of paradise.

Colbert paid no heed; he had so many other things to do. But it may be the Devil heard. And his wounded spirit is greatly consoled. In the petty trades where he now gains his living--Spiritualism, Table-turning, and the like--he resigns himself to insignificance, and thinks, at any rate, he is not the only time-hallowed institution that is a-dying.

Footnotes

^xiii:1 De Strigibus, ch. 9.

^xvi:2 Lancre.

     The Sorceress, by Jules Michelet, [1939], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1] [p. 2]

[p. 3]

  

PART ONE

  

1

  

DEATH of the GODS

THERE are authors who assure us that a little while before the final victory of Christianity a mysterious voice was heard along the shores of the Aegean Sea, proclaiming: "Great Pan is dead!"

The old universal god of Nature is no more. Great the jubilation; it was fancied that, Nature being defunct, Temptation was dead too. Storm-tossed for so many years, the human soul was to enjoy peace at last.

Was it simply a question of the termination of the ancient worship, the defeat of the old faith, the eclipse of time-honoured religious forms? No! it was more than this. Consulting the earliest Christian monuments, we find in every line the hope expressed, that Nature is to disappear and life die out--in a word, that the end of the world is at hand.

The game is up for the gods of life, who have so long kept up a vain simulacrum of vitality. Their world is falling round them in crumbling ruin. All is swallowed up in nothingness: "Great Pan is dead!"

 

It was no new evangel that the gods must die. More than one ancient cult is based on this very notion of the death of the gods. Osiris dies, Adonis dies--it is true, in this case, to rise again. Aeschylus, on the stage itself, in those dramas that were played only on the feast-days of the gods, expressly warns them, by the voice of Prometheus, that one day they must die. Die! but how?--vanquished, subjugated to the Titans, the antique powers of Nature.

Here it is an entirely different matter. The early Christians,

[p. 4]

as a whole and individually, in the past and in the future, hold Nature herself accursed. They condemn her as a whole and in every part, going so far as to see Evil incarnate, the Demon himself, in a flower. [*1] So, welcome--and the sooner the better--the angel-hosts that of old destroyed the Cities of the Plain. Let them destroy, fold away like a veil, the empty image of the world, and at length deliver the saints from the long-drawn ordeal of temptation.

The Gospel says: "The day is at hand." The Fathers say: "Soon, very soon." The disintegration of the Roman Empire and the inroads of the barbarian invaders raise hopes in St. Augustine's breast, that soon there will be no city left but the City of God.

Yet how long a-dying the world is, how obstinately determined to live on! Like Hezekiah, it craves a respite, a going backward of the dial. So be it then, till the year One Thousand,--but not a day longer.

 

Is it so certain, as we have been told over and over again, that the old gods were exhausted, sick of themselves and weary of existence? that out of sheer discouragement they as good as gave in their own abdication? that Christianity was able with a breath to blow away these empty phantoms?

They point to the gods at Rome, the gods of the Capitol, where they were only admitted in virtue of an anticipatory death, I mean on condition of resigning all they had of local sap, of renouncing their home and country, of ceasing to be deities representative of such and such a nation. Indeed, in order to receive them, Rome had had to submit them to a cruel operation, that left them poor, enervated, bloodless creatures. These great centralised Divinities had become, in their official life, mere dismal functionaries of the Roman Empire. But, though fallen from its high estate, this Aristocracy of Olympus had in nowise involved in its own decay the host of indigenous gods, the crowd

[p. 5]

of deities still holding possession of the boundless plains, of woods and hills and springs, inextricably blended with the life of the countryside. These divinities, enshrined in the heart of oaks, lurking in rushing streams and deep pools, could not be driven out.

Who says so? The Church herself, contradicting herself flatly. She first proclaims them dead, then waxes indignant because they are still alive. From century to century, by the threatening voice of her Councils, [*2] she orders them to die. . . . And lo! they are as much alive as ever!

"They are demons . . ."--and therefore alive. Unable to kill them, the Church suffers the innocent-hearted countryfolk to dress them up and disguise their true nature. Legends grow round them, they are baptised, actually admitted into the Christian hierarchy. But are they converted? Not yet by any means. We catch them still on the sly continuing their old heathen ways and Pagan nature.

Where are they to be found? In the desert, on lonely heaths, in wild forests? Certainly, but above all in the house. They cling to the most domestic of domestic habits; women guard and hide them at board and even bed. They still possess the best stronghold in the world--better than the temple, to wit the hearth.

 

History knows of no other revolution so violent and unsparing as that of Theodosius. There is no trace elsewhere in antiquity of so wholesale a proscription of a religion. The Persian fire-worship, in its high-wrought purity, might outrage the visible gods of other creeds; but at any rate it suffered them to remain. Under it the Jews were treated with great clemency, and were protected and employed. Greece, daughter of the light, made merry over the gods of darkness, the grotesque pot-bellied Cabiri; but still she tolerated them, and even adopted them as working gnomes, making her own Vulcan in their likeness. Rome,

[p. 6]

in the pride of her might, welcomed not only Etruria, but the rustic gods as well of the old Italian husbandman. The Druids she persecuted only as embodying a national resistance dangerous to her dominion.

Victorious Christianity, on the contrary, was fain to slaughter the enemy outright, and thought to do so. She abolished the Schools of Philosophy by her proscription of Logic and the physical extermination of the philosophers, who were massacred under the Emperor Valens. She destroyed or stripped the temples, and broke up the sacred images. Quite conceivably the new legend might have proved favourable to family life, if only the father had not been humiliated and annulled in St. Joseph, if the mother had been given prominence as the trainer, the moral parent of the child Jesus. But this path, so full of rich promise, was from the first abandoned for the barren ambition of a high, immaculate purity.

Thus Christianity deliberately entered on the lonely road of celibacy, one the then world was making for of its own impulse--a tendency the imperial rescripts fought against in vain. And Monasticism helped it on the downward slope.

Men fled to the desert; but they were not alone. The Devil went with them, ready with every form of temptation. They must needs revolutionise society, found cities of solitaries,--it was of no avail. Everyone has heard of the gloomy cities of anchorites that grew up in the Thebaid, of the turbulent, savage spirit that animated them, and of their murderous descents upon Alexandria. They declared they were possessed of the Devil, impelled by demons,--and they told only the truth.

There was an enormous void arisen in Nature's plan. Who or what should fill it? The Christian Church is ready with an answer: The Demon, everywhere the Demon--Ubique Daemon. [*3]

Greece no doubt, like all other countries, had had its energumens,

[p. 7]

men tormented, possessed by spirits. But the similarity is purely external and accidental, the resemblance more apparent than real. In the Thebaid it is no case of spirits either good or bad, but of the gloomy children of the pit, wilfully perverse and malignant. Everywhere, for years to come, these unhappy hypochondriacs are to be seen roaming the desert, full of self-loathing and self-horror. Try to realise, indeed, what it means,--to be conscious of a double personality, to really believe in this second self, this cruel indweller that comes and goes and expiates within you, and drives you to wander forth in desert places and over precipices. Thinner and weaker grows the sufferer; and the feebler his wretched body, the more fiercely the demon harries it. Women in particular are filled, distended, inflated by these tyrants, who impregnate them with the infernal aura, stir up internal storm and tempest, make them the sport and plaything of their every caprice, force them into sin and despair.

Nor is it human beings only that are demoniac. Alas! all Nature is tainted with the horror. If the devil is in a flower, how much more in the gloomy forest! The light that seemed so clear and pure is full of the creatures of night. The Heavens full of Hell,--what blasphemy! The divine morning star, that has shed its sparkling beam on Socrates, Archimedes, Plato, and once and again inspired them to sublimer effort, what is it now?--a devil, the great devil Lucifer. At eve, it is the devil Venus, whose soft and gentle light leads mortals into temptation.

I am not surprised at such a society turning mad and savage. Furious to feel itself so weak against the demons, it pursues them everywhere, in the temples and altars of the old faith to begin with, later in the heathen martyrs. Festivals are abolished; for may they not be assemblages for idolatrous worship? Even the family is suspect; for might not the force of habit draw the household together round the old classic Lares? And why a family at all? The empire is an empire of monks.

Yet the individual man, isolated and struck silent as he is, still gazes at the skies, and in the heavenly host finds once more

[p. 8]

the old gods of his adoration. "This is what causes the famines," the Emperor Theodosius declares, "and all the other scourges of the Empire,"--a terrible dictum that lets loose the blind rage of the fanatic populace on the heads of their inoffensive Pagan fellow-citizens. The Law blindly unchains all the savagery of mob-law.

Old gods of Heathendom, the grave gapes for you! Gods of Love, of Life, of Light, darkness waits to engulf you! The cowl is the only wear. Maidens must turn nuns; wives leave their husbands, or if they still keep the domestic hearth, be cold and continent as sisters.

But is all this possible? Who shall be strong enough with one breath to blow out the glowing lamp of God? So reckless an enterprise of impious piety may well bring about strange, monstrous, and astounding results. . . . Let the guilty tremble!

Repeatedly in the Middle Ages shall we find the gloomy story recurring of the Bride of Corinth. First told in quite early days by Phlegon, the Emperor Hadrian's freedman, it reappears in the twelfth century, and again in the sixteenth,--the deep reproach, as it were, the irrepressible protest of outraged Nature.

 

"A young Athenian goes to Corinth, to the house of the man who promises him his daughter in marriage. He is still a Pagan, and is not aware that the family he hopes to become a member of has just turned Christian. He arrives late at night. All are in bed, except the mother, who serves the meal hospitality demands, and then leaves him to slumber, half dead with fatigue. But hardly is he asleep, when a figure enters the room,--a maiden, clad in white, wearing a white veil and on her brow a fillet of black and gold. Seeing him, she raises her white hand in surprise: 'Am I then already so much a stranger in the house? . . . Alas! poor recluse. . . . But I am filled with shame, I must begone.' 'Nay! stay, fair maiden; here are Ceres and Bacchus, and with you, love! Fear not, and never look so pale!' 'Back, back, I say! I have no right to happiness any more. By a vow my sick mother

[p. 9]

made, youth and life are for ever fettered. The gods are no more, and the only sacrifices now are human souls.' 'What! can this be you? You, my promised bride I love so well, promised me from a child? Our fathers' oath bound us indissolubly together under Heaven's blessing. Maiden! be mine!' 'No! dear heart, I cannot. You shall have my young sister. If I groan in my chill prison-house, you in her arms must think of me, me who waste away in thoughts of you, and who will soon be beneath the sod.' 'No! no! I call to witness yonder flame; it is the torch of Hymen. You shall come with me to my father's house. Stay with me, my best beloved!' For wedding gift he offers her a golden cup. She gives him her neck-chain; but chooses rather than the cup a curl of his hair.

"'Tis the home of spirits; she drinks with death-pale lips the dark, blood-red wine. He drinks eagerly after her, invoking the God of Love. Her poor heart is breaking, but still she resists. At last in despair he falls weeping on the bed. Then throwing herself down beside him: 'Ah! how your grief hurts me! Yet the horror of it, if you so much as touched me! White as snow, and cold as ice, such alas! and alas! is your promised bride.' 'Come to me! I will warm you, though you should be leaving the very tomb itself. . . .' Sighs, kisses pass between the pair. 'Cannot you feel how I burn?' Love unites them, binds them in one close embrace, while tears of mingled pain and pleasure flow. Thirstily she drinks the fire of his burning mouth; her chilled blood is fired with amorous ardours, but the heart stands still within her bosom.

"But the mother was there, though they knew it not, listening to their tender protestations, their cries of sorrow and delight. 'Hark! the cock-crow! Farewell till to-morrow, to-morrow night!' A lingering farewell, and kisses upon kisses!

"The mother enters furious, to find her daughter! Her lover strives to enfold her, to hide her, from the other's view; but she struggles free, and towering aloft from the couch to the vaulted roof: 'Oh! mother, mother! so you begrudge me my night of joy,

[p. 10]

you hunt me from this warm nest. Was it not enough to have wrapped me in the cold shroud, and borne me so untimely to the tomb? But a power beyond you has lifted the stone. In vain your priests droned their prayers over the grave; of what avail the holy water and the salt, where youth burns hot in the heart? Cold earth cannot freeze true Love! . . . You promised; I am returned to claim my promised happiness. . . .

"'Alack! dear heart, you must die. You would languish here and pine away. I have your hair; 'twill be white to-morrow. [*4] . . . Mother, one last prayer! Open my dark dungeon, raise a funeral pyre, and let my loving heart win the repose the flames alone can give. Let the sparks fly upward and the embers glow! We will back to our old gods again.'"

Footnotes

^4:1 Compare Muratori, Script. It., i. 293, 545, on St. Cyprian; A. Maury, Magie, 435.

^5:2 See Mansi, Baluze; Council of Arles, 442; Tours, 567; Leptines, 743; the Capitularies, etc. Gerson even, towards 1400.

^6:3 See the Lives of the Fathers of the Desert, and the authors quoted by A. Maury, Magie, 317. In the fourth century the Messalians, believing themselves to be full of demons, were constantly blowing their noses, and spitting unceasingly, in their incredible efforts to expectorate these.

^10:4 At this point of the story I suppress an expression that may well shock us. Goethe, so noble in the form of his writings, is not equally so in the spirit. He quite mars the wonderful tale, fouling the Greek with a gruesome Slavonic notion. At the instant when the lovers are dissolved in tears, he makes the girl into a vampire. She curses because she is athirst for blood, to suck his heart's blood. The poet makes her say coldly and calmly this impious and abominable speech: "When he is done, I will go on to others; the new generation shall succumb to my fury."

The Middle Ages dress up this tradition in grotesque garb to terrify us with the devil Venus. Her statue receives from a young man a ring, which he imprudently places on her finger. Her hand closes on it, she keeps it as a sign of betrothal; then at night, comes into his bed to claim the rights it confers. To rid him of his hellish bride, an exorcism is required (S. Hibb., part iii. chap. iii. 174). The same story occurs in the Fabliaux, but absurdly enough applied to the Virgin. Luther repeats the classical story, if my memory serves me, in his Table-talk, but with great coarseness, letting us smell the foulness of the grave. The Spaniard Del Rio transfers the scene from Greece to Brabant. The affianced bride dies shortly before the wedding-day. The passing-bell is tolled; the grief-stricken bridegroom roams the fields in despair. He hears a wail; it is the loved one wandering over the heath. . . . "See you not," she cries, "who my guide is?" "No!" he replies, and seizing her, bears her away to his home. Once there, the account was very near growing over tender and touching. The grim inquisitor, Del Rio, cuts short the thread with the words, "Lifting the veil, they found a stake with a dead woman's skin drawn over it." The Judge Le Loyes, though not much given to sensibility, nevertheless reproduces for us the primitive form of the legend. After him, there is an end of these gloomy story-tellers, whose trade is done. Modern days begin, and the Bride has won the day. Buried Nature comes back from the tomb, no longer a stealthy visitant, but mistress of the house and home.

     The Sorceress, by Jules Michelet, [1939], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 11]

  

2

  

WHAT DROVE the MIDDLE AGES to DESPAIR

"BE YE like unto new-born babes" (quasi modo geniti infantes); be little children for innocence of heart, and peacefulness and forgetfulness of all causes of offence, calm and serene, under the hand of Jesus.

Such is the sweet counsel the Church gives this stormy world on the morrow of the great catastrophe. In other words: "Volcanoes, scoriae, ashes, lava, grow green and lush with grass. Fields burned up with fire, come, carpet yourselves with flowers."

One circumstance, it is true, then was promised the peace that revivifies,--all the schools were ended, the path of logic abandoned and deserted. A method of infinite simplicity rendered all discussion futile, and set before the feet of all the easy downward road they must needs follow henceforth. If the Credo was of doubtful interpretation, still life was all traced out plainly enough in the track of legend. The first word, and the last, was the same,--Imitation.

"Imitate, and all will be well; only repeat and copy." Yes! but is this really and truly the way of genuine infancy, the infancy that vivifies the heart of man, makes him find new sources of refreshment and fertility? To begin with, I can see in this world that moulds childhood and infancy only attributes of senility, over-refinement, servility, impotence. What is this literature compared with the sublime monuments of Greeks and Jews? even compared with the Roman genius? We find precisely the same literary decline that befell in India, from Brahminism to Buddhism; a garrulous verbiage succeeding to lofty inspiration.

[p. 12]

[paragraph continues] One book plagiarises another, till presently they cannot even copy correctly. They rob one from the other, and the marbles of Ravenna are torn down to adorn Aix-la-Chapelle. The whole fabric of society is of a piece; the bishop who is lord of a city, the barbarian prince of a half-savage tribe, model themselves on the Roman magistrature. Our monks we think so original, are only repeating in their monastery the villa of an earlier day, as Chateaubriand well observes. They have no notion of fashioning a new society, any more than of refertilising the old. Mere imitators of the Eastern monks, they would fain have had their dependants poor monkish taskmen, a sterile population of celibate lay brothers. It was in their despite family life renewed itself, and so renewed the world.

When we observe how quickly these old monks are ageing, how in a single century the level drops from the wise monk St. Benedict to the pedant Benedict of Ariane, we clearly realise that these gentry were purely and entirely innocent of the grand popular creation that grew up about the ruins; I refer to the Lives of the Saints. The monks wrote them, but it was the people made them. This young vegetation may throw its luxuriance of leaf and blossom over the crumbling walls of the old Roman building converted into a monastery, but it does not grow out of it, we may be very sure. It has roots deep in the soil; the people sowed it there, the family worked the ground, all took a hand in its production--men, women, and children. The precarious, restless life of those times of violence made these poor countryfolk imaginative, ready to put faith in their own dreams that consoled them in their misery,--wild dreams, teeming with wonders and full of absurdities, equally ludicrous and delightful.

These families, living isolated in the woods or on the mountains (as men live still in the Tyrol and the High Alps), coming down to the plains but one day in the week, were filled with the hallucinations their loneliness encouraged. A child had seen this, a woman had dreamed that. A brand-new Saint arose in the district; his story ran through the countryside, like a ballad, in

[p. 13]

rough-and-ready rhyme. It was sung and danced at evening under the oak by the fountain. The priest who came on Sunday to say Mass in the forest chapel found the legendary song in every mouth already. Then he said to himself: "Well! after all, the tale is a beautiful one and an edifying; . . . it does honour to the Church. Vox populi, vox Dei! . . . But however did they come across it?" Then would they show him authentic witnesses, of unimpeachable veracity,--the tree, the rock, that saw the apparition, the miracle. What more could be said after that?

Reported at the Abbey, the legend will soon find a monk, good for nothing better, whose only craft is the pen, both curious and credulous, ready to believe anything and everything miraculous. He writes it all out, embroiders the simple tale with his vapid rhetoric, spoils it somewhat. But at any rate here it is duly recorded and recognised, read in refectory, and before long in church. Recopied, loaded, overloaded with embellishments, often grotesque embellishments, it will descend from age to age, till at last it takes honourable rank and place in the Golden Legend.

 

Even to-day, when we read these beautiful tales, when we listen to the simple, artless, solemn melodies into which these rustic populations put all their young enthusiasm, we cannot but recognise a very real inspiration, and bewail the irony of fate when we think what was to be their eventual lot.

These people had taken literally the Church's touching appeal: "Be ye as little children." But they applied it to the very thing least dreamed in the original conception. The more Christianity had feared and abhorred Nature, the more these folk loved her and held her good and harmless,--even sanctified her, giving her a part to play in the legend.

The animals which the Bible so harshly calls hairy beasts, and which the monk mistrusts, fearing to find demons incarnated in them, come into these charming tales in the most touching way, as, for instance, the hind that warms and comforts Genevieve de Brabant.

[p. 14]

Even apart from the life of legends, in everyday existence, these humble fireside friends, these gallant helpers in the day's work, gain a higher place in men's esteem. They have their proper rights, [*1] and their proper estate. If in God's infinite goodness there is room for the lowliest, if He ever seems to have a preference for such out of pity, why should not my ass be allowed in church? He has his defects, no doubt,--which makes him only the more like me. He is a sturdy fellow to work, but thickskulled; he is intractable and obstinate, in one word, he is my very counterpart.

Hence those grand festivals, the most beautiful of the Middle Ages, of the Innocents, of Fools, of the Ass. It is the very people of that day which in the ass presents its own likeness in person before the altar, ugly, ludicrous, and down-trodden! Truly a touching sight! Led by Balaam, he enters solemnly between the Sibyl and Virgil, [*2] enters to bear witness. If of old he kicked against Balaam, this was because he saw flashing before him the sword of the old Law. But here the Law is abrogated and done with, and the world of Grace seems to open wide its doors to receive the lowliest, the simple ones of the earth. The people believes it all in the innocency of its heart. Hence the sublime canticle, in which it addressed the ass, as it might have addressed itself:--

A genoux, et dis Amen!
 Assez mange d'herbe et de foin!
 Laisse les vieilles choses, et va! [*3]

[p. 15]

Le neuf emporte le vieux!
 La verite fait fuir l'ombre!
 La lumiere chasse la nuit!  [*3]

What insolence and wrong-headedness! Is this what they required of you, disobedient, unruly children, when they told you to be as little children? They offered you milk; you drink strong wine instead. They would lead you gently, bridle in hand, by the narrow way. Gentle, timid creatures, you seemed afraid to put one foot before another. Then behold! of a sudden the bridle is broken . . . one leap, and you swap over the course.

Ah! how unwise it was to let you invent your saints, and raise your altar, then bedeck and load and bury it in flowers, till its original form is all but indistinguishable. What can be discerned is the old heresy, long ago condemned by the Church, the innocence of Nature. An old heresy do I say? Nay! rather a new heresy that will live many a long day yet,--the emancipation of mankind.

Now listen and obey:

It is expressly forbidden to invent, to create. No more originality; no more legends; no more new saints. There are enough already. Forbidden to innovate in the forms of worship with new melodies; inspiration is prohibited. Any martyrs that should come to light are to keep quiet in their graves, and wait with becoming humility till the Church recognises them. Forbidden for clergy or monks to confer on peasants the tonsure that enfranchises them. Such the narrow, timid spirit of the Carlovingian Church, [*4] which deliberately contradicts herself, gives herself the lie, now says to little children, "Be ye old men!"

[p. 16]

What a change is here! But can it be meant seriously? Did they not tell us to be young? Nay! the priest is no longer  with the people. A mighty divorce is beginning, an infinite gulf of separation. Henceforth the priest, a great lord now or a prince, will sing the Office in a golden cope, using the sovereign tongue of the great empire that is no more. We, poor cattle of the field, having lost the language of mankind, the only one God will deign to hear, what can we do now but low and bleat, in company with the innocent companion that never scorns us, that in wintertime warms us in the stall and covers us with his fleece? We will live with the dumb beasts, and be dumb ourselves.

In very truth, we have then the less need to go to Church. But she will not let us off; she orders us back, to listen to words we cannot understand.

From that day forth a monstrous fog, a heavy, grey, leaden fog, enwraps the world. Say, for how long? for a thousand long, dreary, terrible years! For ten whole centuries, a languor no previous age has known oppressed the Middle Ages, even to some extent later times, in a condition midway between sleep and waking, under the empire of a dismal, an intolerable phenomenon,--that convulsion of supreme boredom we call a yawn.

The indefatigable church bell rings out the accustomed hours,--and folks yawn; a nasal chant drones on in antiquated Latin,--and folks yawn. Everything is foreseen; no room is left for hope in all the world. Day after day events will recur in  the same way. The inevitable oppression of to-morrow makes men yawn before to-day is done, and the never-ending perspective of days, and years, of weary sameness still to come, weighs on the spirits beforehand and sickens of life. From brain to stomach, from stomach to mouth, the automatic, the fatally irresistible, convulsion travels, distending the jaws in an endless and cureless gape. A veritable disease, which pious Bretons openly avow, imputing it, it is true, to the Devil's machinations. He lies crouching in the woods, say the Breton peasants; to the herdsman as he passes with his beasts, he sings Vespers and all

[p. 17]

the other Offices, and sets him yawning, yawning till he is like to die. [*5]

 

To be old is to be feeble. When the Saracens, when the North-men, threaten us, what will be our fate, if the people is still old and decrepit? Charlemagne weeps unavailing tears, and the Church with him, confessing that the holy relics, against these barbarian demons, can no longer protect the altars. [*6] Were it not well to appeal to the arm of the intractable child they were going to bind, the arm of the young giant they were fain to paralyse? A self-contradictory movement marks the ninth century throughout,--at one time the people is held back, at another pushed forward, at one time feared, at another appealed to for help. With the people's aid, by the people's hands, barriers are thrown up, shelters contrived, to stop the barbarian invaders, to protect the priests, and the saints, escaped from their churches.

Despite the Bald Emperor's prohibition, a castle-keep rises on the mountain height. There the fugitive arrives, "Take me in, in God's name,--at any rate my wife and children. I will camp with my bestial in your outer bailey." The castle restores his courage and he feels himself a man at last. It shelters him; he defends it, and so protects his protector.

In earlier days the poor, under stress of famine, surrendered themselves to the rich and powerful as serfs. Now it is very different; he gives himself as vassal, that is to say, brave and valiant champion. [*7]

He gives himself, yet remains his own man, keeping the right to renounce his allegiance. "I am for higher things; the world is

[p. 18]

wide. I too, as well as another, may raise my castle on the steep. . . . I have defended the outside; I shall know how to guard my head in the inside."

Here we have the grand, noble origin of the Feudal world. The man of the keep received his vassals, but said to them, "You shall leave me when you will, and I will even help you to do it, if needful; so far, indeed, that if you are mired, I will get down off my horse myself to succour you." This is the ancient formula word for word. [*8]

 

But one morning what is this I see? Do my eyes deceive me? The Lord of the Valley sallies forth to raid the lands round about, sets up landmarks none may overpass, and even invisible lines of demarcation. "What is it? What does it mean?" . . . It means that the Lordship is enclosed: "The Feudal Lord, under lock and key, holds all immured, between sky and earth."

Alas! alas! By virtue of what right is the vassus (the valiant man, that is) henceforth to be a prisoner? Nay! vassus, they will maintain, may equally be equivalent to slave.

In the same way servus, meaning servant (often a high-born servant, a Count or Prince of the Empire), will signify for the weak and lowly, a serf, a villein whose life is valued at a denier.

This is the hateful net they are taken in. But yonder on his plot of ground is one who maintains his land is free, an allod (allodium, aleu), a "fief of the sun." He sits on his boundary-stone, crushes his hat down firm on his head, and watches the Feudal Lord, the Emperor himself, pass by. [*9]

"Go your ways, ride on, Emperor, you sit tight in your saddle, and I on my boundary-stone yet tighter. You pass, but I remain. . . . For I am Freedom."

But . . . I have not the heart to tell the man's eventual fate. The air thickens round him, and his breath fails more and more. He seems bewitched. He cannot move, he is as if paralysed. His

[p. 19]

beasts too grow thinner and thinner, as though a spell were on them. His servants die of hunger. His land is fallen barren. He is hag-ridden o' nights.

Still he holds on; he says, "A poor man's house is his castle."

But they will not leave him alone. He is cited, and must answer, to the Imperial Court. He repairs thither, a survival from a vanished world, a spectre of the past, a thing unrecognisable. "What is it?" the younger men ask each other. "He is neither Seigneur nor serf! Why, then, what is he? He is nothing."

"'Who am I?' ask you? I am he who built the first castle-keep, and defended it in your behoof; he who, leaving its walls, strode bravely to the bridge to meet the heathen Northmen. . . . More than that, I dammed the river, I reclaimed the alluvial waste, I created the very soil, like God who made 'the dry land appear.' . . . This soil, who shall drive me off it?"

"Nay, my friend," answered his neighbour, "you shall not be driven off it. You shall cultivate it still, this soil . . . only on other conditions from what you think. . . . Remember, good friend, how in the heedlessness of youth (it is fifty years agone now) you wedded Jacqueline, a little maid of my father's serfs. . . . Remember the maxim: 'Who treads my hen, is my cock.' You belong to my hen-roost. Come, off belt and away sword! . . . Henceforth you are my serf."

There is no invention here; it is all bare truth. The atrocious story recurs over and over again in the Middle Ages. And what a bitter weapon of tyranny it was! I have abridged and omitted much, for every time one returns to these incidents, the same sharp point of pity and indignation pierces the heart.

One there was who, under so dire an outrage, fell into such a passion of fury he could find never a word to say. 'Twas like Roland betrayed at Roncesvaux. All the blood of his body rose to his throat and choked him. . . . His eyes flashed fire, his poor dumb mouth, dumb but so fiercely eloquent, turned all the assemblage pale. . . . They shrank back in terror. . . . He was

[p. 20]

dead. His veins had burst. . . . His arteries shot the red blood into the very faces of his murderers. [*10]

 

This instability of condition and tenure, this horrid, shelving declivity, down which a man slips from free man to vassal,--from vassal to servant,--from servant to serf, is the great terror of the Middle Ages, the basis of its despair. There is no way of escape; one step, and the man is lost. He is an alien, a waif and stray, a head of wild game; serfdom or death, these are the only alternatives. The heavy soil clogs the feet, and entangles and engulfs the passer-by in its miry depths. The poisoned air kills him, lays its dead hand on him, turns him into a dead man, a nonentity, a brute beast, a life priced at ten farthings,--a life anyone may take and expiate the murder for ten farthings down. Such were the two main, external features of Mediaeval wretchedness, the two great hardships that drove men to give themselves to Satan. Now to look at the internal aspect, to examine the foundations of life and character, and sound the depths of human existence, at the same unhappy period.

Footnotes

^14:1 See J. Grimm, Rechts Alterthumer, and Michelet, Origines du Droit.

^14:2 From the ritual of Rouen. See Ducange, under Festum; Carpentier, under Kalendae, and Martene, iii. 110. The Sibyl was crowned, followed by Jews and Gentiles, by Moses and the Prophets, Nebuchadnezzar, etc. From the earliest times, and from century to century, the seventh to the sixteenth, the Church endeavours vainly to proscribe the great popular festivals of the Ass, of the Innocents, of Children, and of Fools. She meets with no success, previously to the rise of the modern spirit.

^14:3

"Down on your knees, and Amen say!
 Enough you've eat of grass and hay!
 Leave go old things, and up, away!

^15:3

The new world puts the old to flight!
 Truth turns the gloomy dusk to light!
 Dawn's brightness drives away the night!"

Vetustatem novitas,
 Umbram fugat claritas,
 Noctem lux eliminat.
                  (Rouen Ritual.)

^15:4 See the Capitularies passim.

^17:5 A very famous Breton (Renan), last man of the Middle Ages, but who was nevertheless a friend of my own, on the occasion of the quite ineffectual journey he made for the conversion of Rome, received brilliant offers when in the Eternal City. "What would you have?" the Pope asked him. "One thing and one thing only: a dispensation from the Breviary . . . I am sick to death of it."

^17:6 Such was Hincmar's well-known admission.

^17:7 A distinction too little appreciated, too little noticed, by writers who have enlarged upon personal surrender, "recommendation" to a superior, etc.

^18:8 Grimm, Rechts Alterthumer; Michelet, Origines du Droit.

^18:9 Grimm, on the word aleu (allodium).

^20:10 This is what happened to the Comte d'Avesnes, when his free land was declared a mere fief, and himself a mere vassal, the man of the Comte de Hainault. Read also the terrible history of the Grand Chancellor of Flanders, the First Magistrate of Bruges, who for all this was nevertheless claimed, and successfully claimed, as a serf (Gualterius, Scriptores Rerum Francicarum, xiii. 334).

     The Sorceress, by Jules Michelet, [1939], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 21]

  

3

  

The LITTLE DEMON of the HEARTH and HOME

THE early centuries of the Middle Ages, when the legends were in making, give all the impression of a dream. Among rustic populations, deeply submissive to the Church and of a gentle spirit (the legends themselves attest this), we would gladly assume a high degree of innocence. Surely it must have been God's own time, this. Nevertheless, in the Penitentiaries, where the most ordinary sins are noted down, strange and dishonouring forms of depravity are mentioned too, of rare occurrence under the reign of Satan.

This is due to two causes--utter ignorance, and the habit of living in common, which brought near relatives into the closest contiguity. They seem to have had scarce an inkling of our morality. Their own, in spite of ecclesiastical prohibitions, appears to have been that of the Patriarchs, of the remotest antiquity, which looks upon marriage with strange women as wicked, and only allows the kinswoman to be a lawful bride. Allied families formed only a single household. Not daring as yet to disperse their dwellings over the wastes that surrounded them, tilling merely the outlying demesne of a Merovingian palace or of a monastery, they retired every night together with their beasts under the roof of a vast villa. Hence inconveniences similar to those of the ergastulum of classical antiquity, in which slaves were herded promiscuously. More than one of these communities still existed in the Middle Ages, and even later. The Lord of the Soil recked little of what resulted from the arrangement. He regarded as forming a single family this tribe, this mass of human

[p. 22]

beings "getting up and going to bed together,"--"eating bread off one platter and meat out of one pot."

In this indiscriminate way of living, woman met with very little care or protection; the place she occupied was an extremely humble one. True, the virgin, the ideal woman, rose higher from century to century, but the woman of real life counted for mighty little in these rustic communities, these massed aggregates of men and cattle. Such was the unhappy but inevitable outcome of a state of things which could only change for the better when the common habitation was subdivided, when at length men plucked up courage to live apart, in separate hamlets, or to settle as isolated cultivators of fertile lands at a distance, and build huts in clearings of the forest. The separate hearth created true family life; the nest made the bird. Henceforth they have ceased to be chattels--they are living souls. . . . The wife and mother has come into existence.

 

A touching moment. At length she has a home; she can therefore be pure and holy at last, poor creature. She can brood quietly over a thought, and undisturbed, as she sits spinning, dream dreams while he is abroad in the forest. The hut is wretched enough, damp and ill-built, and the winter wind whistles through it; but to make up for all defects it is silent. There are dim corners in it where her dreams can find a lodgement.

She is an owner now, possesses something of her very own. Distaff, bed, chest is all the household has, as the old song says. [*1] But soon a table will be added, a bench, or a couple of stools. . . . A poorly appointed house! but its furniture includes a living soul. The firelight heartens it; the consecrated bush of box guards the bed, to which is often added a pretty bunch of vervain.

[p. 23]

[paragraph continues] The lady of this palace sits spinning at her door, watching a few sheep the while. They are not rich enough yet to keep a cow; but this will come in time, if God blesses the house. The forest, a bit of pasture land, a hive of bees that feed on the heath are their livelihood. They do not grow much wheat yet, having no certainty of reaping a crop so long in growing. This life, poverty-stricken as it is, is yet less hard upon the wife. She is not broken with fatigue, made old and ugly before her time, as she will be when the time of farming on a large scale has arrived. And she has more leisure too. Beware of judging her in any way by the coarse literature of the Noels and fabliaux, the silly laughter and licence of the broad tales composed at a later date. She is alone, without neighbours. The evil, unhealthy life of dark little shut-in towns, the prying into each other's affairs, the pitiful, perilous scandal-mongering,--none of this is begun yet! There is no old harridan yet, coming creeping at dusk down the narrow, gloomy street to tempt the young wife and tell her someone is a-dying of love for her. The serf's wife we are describing now has no friend but her dreams, no one to gossip with but her beasts or the forest trees.

They talk to her,--we know not what about. They awake in her things her mother told her, her grandmother--old, old things that for century after century have been handed on from woman to woman. Harmless memories come back of the ancient spirits of the country, a gentle, genial family religion, which in the common life just quitted and its noisy promiscuity, had doubtless lost most of its force, but which now returns like a ghost and haunts the lonely cabin.

A strange, dainty world of fairies and elves, made to appeal to a woman's soul. Directly the great stream of invention that produced the saintly legends runs dry and stops, these other legends, older and equally poetical, but in a totally different way, come to share their vogue with them, and reign softly and secretly in gentle hearts. They are the woman's especial treasure, which she

[p. 24]

fondles and caresses. A fairy is a woman too, a fantastic mirror in which she sees her own self, only fairer and daintier than the reality.

What were the Fairies? What we are told is that in old days, queens of the Gauls, proud and fantastic princesses, at the coming of Christ and His apostles, were wickedly impertinent and turned their backs. In Brittany they were dancing at the time, and never stopped. Hence their cruel sentence; they are doomed to live on till the Day of Judgment. [*2] Many of them are reduced to the tiny dimensions of a rabbit or a mouse; for instance, the kowrig-gwans (fairy dwarfs), who at night-time, at the foot of old Druidical stones, ring you round with their elvish dances; or to take another example, the lovely Queen Mab, who makes her royal coach out of a walnut-shell. They are a trifle capricious, and sometimes mischievously disposed,--and what wonder, considering their unhappy destiny? Whimsical and tiny as they are, they possess a heart, and crave to be loved. Sometimes kindly, sometimes the reverse, they are full of fancies. At the birth of a child they come down the chimney, endow the babe with gifts good or bad, and fix its fate. They love good spinsters, and spin divinely themselves. To spin like a fairy, the goodwives say.

In the Fairy Tales, disencumbered of the absurd ornaments the latest editors have dressed them out in, is found the people's very inmost heart. They mark a poetical period between the coarse promiscuity of the primitive villa and the licence of the days when a rising bourgeoisie produced the cynical fabliaux.

These Tales have a historical side, recalling the great famines,--in the ogres and so on. But as a rule they float in a higher ether than common history, soaring on the wings of Fantasy through the realms of eternal Poesy, expressing the desires of men's hearts, which are ever the same and have an unchanging history of their own.

[p. 25]

The longing of the poor serf to get breathing time, to find rest, to discover a treasure that shall end his wretchedness, recurs again and again in them. More often still, by a nobler aspiration, this treasure trove is a soul to boot, a treasure of sleeping love that must be awaked,--as in "The Sleeping Beauty"; though often the charming heroine is found hidden under a mask by reason of a fatal spell. Whence that touching Trilogy, that admirable crescendo,--Riquet of the Tuft, Ass's Skin, Sleeping Beauty. Love will take no denial; under all these hideous disguises, it pursues, and wins, the hidden fair one. The last of these three tales reaches the true sublime, and I suppose no one has ever been able to read it without tears.

A very real and very genuine passion underlies it, that of unhappy, quite hopeless love, one that cruel Nature often sows between pure souls of too widely separated ranks, the poignant regret of the peasant woman that she cannot make herself fair and desirable, to be loved of the knight; the stifled sighs of the serf, as looking down his furrow, he sees riding by on a white horse a too, too charming vision, the beautiful, the adored, mistress of the castle and the lands he tills. It is like the Eastern fable, the melancholy idyll of the impossible loves of the Rose and the Nightingale. But there is one great difference; the bird and the flower are both beautiful, equal even in beauty. But here the inferior being, so low placed in the scale of rank, confesses humbly, "I am plain and homely, a monster of ugliness!" The pity of it! . . . But all the same, with a persistency and a heroic power of will unknown to the East, and by the very ardour of his longing, he breaks through the silly obstacles in his way. He loves so truly he is loved in turn, this monster; and Love makes him beautiful.

There is an infinite tenderness in it all. This soul of enchantment turns her thoughts to others besides herself; and is eager to save all nature and all society as well. All the victims of those rough days are her especial favourites,--the child beaten by a cruel stepmother, the youngest sister scorned and ill-treated by

[p. 26]

the others. She extends her pity even to the lady of the castle herself, compassionating her for being in the hands of the ferocious baron, Blue Beard. She commiserates the brutes, and comforts them for the misery of still wearing the shapes of animals. They must be patient, a brighter time is coming; one day their captive souls will take wings and be free, lovable and beloved. This is the other side of Ass's Skin and other similar stories. Here at any rate is evidence of a woman's tender-heartedness. The rude field labourer is brutal enough with his beasts; but woman is different, she sees something else than beasts in them. She judges them as a child does, observes the human and spiritual elements in them, ennobles the whole animal world with her sympathy. Oh! happy spell! Lowly as she is, and convinced of her own plainness, yet she has invested all Nature with her beauty, and the charm of her personality.

 

But is she so plain, this little peasant wife, whose dreaming imagination feeds on all these fancies? I have described her life, how she keeps house, how she spins as she watches her sheep, how she trips to the forest and gathers her little bundle of firewood. No very hard work is hers as yet; she is not the repulsive-looking countrywoman of a later time, disfigured by unremitting labour in the wheat fields. Neither is she the heavy citizen's dame, fat and indolent, of the towns, who formed the subject of so many appetising stories amongst our forefathers. Our heroine is timid, and has no sense of security; soft and gentle, she is conscious of being in God's hand. On the mountain crag she sees the black and lowering castle, whence a thousand dangers may at any moment descend. She fears and honours her husband; a serf elsewhere, by her side he is a king. For him she keeps the best, living on almost nothing herself. She is slim and small, like the pictured saints in church windows. The meagre fare of those days is bound to make fine-strung creatures, but having only a frail vitality. Witness the enormous infant mortality. These pale-faced blossoms are nothing but nerves. At a later date this will

[p. 27]

break out in the epileptic dances of the fourteenth century. At present in the twelfth and thereabouts, two weaknesses are connected with this condition of semi-starvation: at night, somnambulism, and by day, hallucination, dreamy reverie, and the gift of tears.

 

All innocence as the woman is, still she has a secret--we have said so before--a secret she never, never confesses at church. She carries shut within her breast a fond remembrance of the poor ancient gods, [*3] now fallen to the estate of spirits, and a feeling of compassion for them. For do not for an instant suppose, because they are gods, they are exempt from pain and suffering. Lodged in rocks, in the trunks of oaks, they are very unhappy in winter. They greatly love heat, and prowl round the houses; they have been surprised in stables, warming themselves beside the cattle. Having no more incense, no more victims, poor things, they sometimes take some of the housewife's milk. She, good managing soul, does not stint her husband, but diminishes her own portion, and when evening comes, leaves a little cream behind in the bowl.

These spirits, which no longer appear except by night, sadly regret their exile from the day, and are eager for lights. At nightfall the goodwife hardens her heart and sallies out fearfully, bearing a humble taper to the great oak where they dwell, or the mysterious pool whose surface will double the flame in its dark mirror to cheer the unhappy outlaws.

[p. 28]

Great heavens! if she were discovered! Her husband is a prudent man, and has a holy terror of the Church's anger; he would most certainly beat her, if he knew. The priest makes fierce war on the poor spirits, and hunts them out of every corner. Yet surely they might be let live in peace in the old oaks. What harm do they do in the forest? But no! Council after Council launches its anathemas against them. On certain days the priest even goes to the oak, and mumbles prayers and sprinkles holy water to drive away the evil spirits.

What would become of them if there were no kind soul to pity them? But she is their protection; good Christian as she is, she yet has a warm corner in her heart for them. None other is to be trusted with sundry little intimate secrets of her woman's nature, innocent enough secrets for a chaste wife like her, but which the Church would be sorely scandalised if it heard. They are her confessors, to whom she does not fear to make these touching feminine confidences. She thinks of them as she lays the Yule log on the fire. It is Christmas, but it is the old Feast of the Spirits of the North as well, the Feast of the Longest Night. The same of the Vigil of May Night, the pervigilium of Maia, when the mystic tree is planted. The same again, the fires of St. John's Eve, the true festival of life and flowers and new-born love. Above all, the childless wife makes it a duty to love these feasts, and observe them piously. A vow to the Virgin might not perhaps be successful; she is hardly in full sympathy with such a case. Whispering low, the anxious wife prefers to address her prayer to some old-world deity, adored as a rustic god of yore, and whom such-and-such a church has been good-natured enough to make into a saint. [*4] Thus bed and cradle, the tenderest mysteries a chaste and fond soul broods over, all this is still the province of the gods of ancient days.

 

Nor are the spirits ungrateful. One day she wakes, and lo! without her putting a hand to anything, the household tasks are

[p. 29]

done. She is struck dumb, crosses herself, and says nothing. When her man is gone to work she asks herself what it means, but can find no answer. It must be a spirit. "What is he? what is he like? . . . Oh! how I should love to see him! . . . But I am afraid. . . . They say folks die who see a spirit." Meantime the cradle moves, rocks all by itself. . . . She is lost in wonder, and presently hears a tiny, soft, soft voice, so low she might almost think it spoke within her own breast. It says, "Dear, dearest mistress, if I love to rock your child, 'tis because I am a little child myself." Her heart beats wildly, but soon she gathers better courage. The harmless innocence of the act makes the spirit seem harmless too; he must be good and gentle, one God must surely tolerate at least.

 

Henceforth she is no longer alone. She plainly feels his presence, and he is never far from her. He rubs against her skirt, she can hear the rustle he makes. He is for ever on the move about her, and evidently cannot quit her side. If she goes to the stable, there he is again. And she is almost sure, the other day, he was in the butter-firkin. [*5]

What a pity she cannot catch him and have a good look at him! Once, all of a sudden, when she stirred the live embers, she thought she saw him dancing an elfin dance among the sparks. Another time she all but captured him in a rose. Small as he is, he works away, sweeping and tidying and sparing her a world of trouble. All the same he has his faults. He is volatile and overbold, and if he were caught he would most likely escape. Also he sees and hears too much. Sometimes he repeats in the morning some little word she has said quite low, low down, at bedtime, after the light was out. She knows for certain he is very indiscreet,

[p. 30]

and most inquisitive. It troubles her to feel herself followed about everywhere; she complains how annoying it is, and likes it all the while. Sometimes she will threaten him and send him about his business. At last she is really alone, and quite reassured at the thought. But next moment she feels on her cheek a light caressing breath, a touch like a bird's wing. He was under a leaf, the rogue. . . . He laughs, and his sweet voice--no mockery in it now--tells her his delight in having stolen a march on his modest, modest mistress. Now she is really angry; but the rascal only trills, "No! no! little mistress, darling little mistress, you are not angry,--not at a thing like that!"

She is ashamed and dares say no more. But she has her suspicions he loves her over-well. Her scruples are awaked,--and she loves him all the more. At night she thought she felt him in bed, that he had slipped in between the sheets. She was afraid, offered a prayer to God, and pressed close to her goodman's side. What is she to do? She has not the heart or the courage to tell the priest. So she tells her husband, who laughs at first in sheer incredulity. Then she confesses a little more,--that Robin Goodfellow is a sly fellow, sometimes too bold by half. . . . "What matter? he is so wee!" Thus her husband himself reassures her.

Are we also to be reassured, we who can see more plainly? Yes! she is still perfectly good and innocent. She would shudder to imitate the great lady up yonder in the castle, who under her very husband's eyes, has her court of lovers and her page. Still we must allow the elfin lover has made good progress already. Impossible to have a less compromising page than one who can lie hid in a rose. And there is much that is love-like about him too. Few can be more encroaching; so tiny he is, he can slip in anywhere.

He slips even into the husband's heart, pays court to him, wins his good graces. He looks after his tools, works in his garden, and of evenings for his reward, behind the child and the cat, crouches in the chimney corner. His little voice makes itself heard, for all the world like a cricket's, but he is seldom seen, except when a

[p. 31]

struggling beam of light falls upon a particular crack where he loves to lie. Then they catch a glimpse, or think they do, of a sharp, whimsical little face; and cry, "Ah, ha! little one, we saw you."

All very well to tell them at church they must beware of evil spirits, that one they think quite harmless, one that slips into the house like a puff of wind, may really and truly be a demon. They take good care not to believe a word of it. Why! his littleness is proof enough of innocence; and certainly they have prospered more since he came. The husband is as sure of it as the wife, perhaps surer. He is firmly convinced the dear, frolicsome little Brownie makes the happiness of their home.

Footnotes

^22:1

Trois pas du cote du banc,
 Et trois pas du cote du lit,
 Trois pas du cote du coffre
 Et trois pas, revenez ici.

           "Three steps towards the bench,
             Three steps towards the bed,
             Three steps towards the chest,
             And three steps back again."
    (Old French song of The Dancing-Master.)

^24:2 The authorities of all dates have been brought together in M. Alfred Maury's two learned books, Les Fees, 1843, and La Magie, 1860. Consult also, for the North, Grimm's Mythologie.

^27:3 Nothing can be more touching than this fidelity to the old faith. In spite of persecution, in the fifth century, the peasants used still to carry in procession, under the form of poor little dolls of linen and flour, the deities of the great old religions--Jupiter, Minerva, Venus. Diana was indestructible, even in the remotest corner of Germany (see Grimm). In the eighth century some pagan processions are still performed. In some humble cabins, sacrifices are still made and auguries taken, etc. (Indiculus paganiarum, Council of Leptines in Hainault). The Capitularies threaten death in vain. In the twelfth century Burchard of Worms mentions the various prohibitions and declares they were all unavailing. In 1389 the Sorbonne once more condemns the remaining traces of Paganism, and about 1400 Gerson (Contra Astrol.) mentions Astrology as an actual superstition still obstinately surviving.

^28:4 A. Maury, Magie, 159.

^29:5 This is one of the little glutton's favourite hiding-places. The Swiss, who know his likings, to this day make him presents of milk. Their name for him is troll; among the Germans he is called kobold, nix; among the French, follet, goblin, lutin; among the English, Puck, Robin Goodfellow. Shakespeare makes him oblige sleepy maidservants by pinching them black and blue to wake them in the mornings.

     The Sorceress, by Jules Michelet, [1939], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 32]

  

4

  

TEMPTATIONS

I HAVE omitted from the above picture the deep shadows of that cruel period, as these would have darkened it unduly. I refer especially to the uncertainty in which the rustic household habitually lived as to its lot, the suspense, the chronic terror of the savage violence that might burst at any moment on their unoffending heads from the castle above.

The feudal regime involved precisely the two things of all others that go farthest to make a hell on earth; on the one hand, the extreme of immobility,--the man was nailed to the soil, and emigration utterly impossible; on the other, a high degree of uncertainty as to the continuance of existing conditions.

Optimistic historians who talk so glibly of fixed quit-rents, and charters, and purchases of emancipation, forget the paucity of guarantees forthcoming for it all. So much is bound to be paid to the Feudal Lord, but he can take all the rest too, if he likes. This is called in so many words the right of prehension. Work away, goodman! And while you are abroad in the fields, the dreaded troop from the heights may swoop down on your house and carry off what it pleases "for the service of the Seigneur."

No wonder, if you look at him the fellow is gloomy over his furrow, and hangs his head! . . . Yes! and he is always like that, with anxious brow and heavy heart, like a man constantly expecting bad news.

Is he pondering revenge? Not he; but two thoughts fill his mind, two anxieties trouble him alternately. The first, "In what condition will you find your house when you go back to-night?" The other, "Ah! if only the clod I turn would let me see a treasure

[p. 33]

underneath! if the kind Devil would give me wherewith to buy our freedom!"

It is said that at this appeal (like the Etruscan "genius" that emerged one day from under the ploughshare in the shape of a child) a dwarf, a gnome, would often lift its tiny figure from the soil and standing up in the furrow ask him, "What will you of me then?" But the poor man would be dumbfoundered, and wanted nothing now. He turned pale and crossed himself, and then the whole vision was gone.

Was he sorry afterwards? Did he never say to himself, "Fool, fool, do you mean then to be for ever unhappy?" I can well believe it, but I am no less convinced an unsurmountable barrier of terror prevented him from going further. I do not think for an instant, as the monks would have us believe, who have given accounts of Sorcery and Witchcraft, that the pact with Satan was a mere caprice, a sudden impulse of a lover or a miser. We need only consult common sense and human nature to be certain of the contrary, that people never resorted to such extremes except as a last resource, in utter despair, under the awful pressure of unending wrong and wretchedness.

 

"But," they tell us, "these excessive miseries must have been largely diminished as we near the days of St. Louis, who forbade private wars between great lords." My own opinion is exactly the opposite. During the eighty or a hundred years which intervened between this prohibition and the English Wars (12401340), the seigneurs, no longer having their customary amusement of burning and pillaging the lands of the neighbouring lord, were ferocious in the treatment of their vassals. St. Louis's peace was their war.

The ecclesiastical seigneurs, the monkish seigneurs, and the like, make the reader of the Journal d'Etudes Rigault (published recently) fairly shudder. The book gives a revolting picture of wild, barbarian licence. The monkish seigneurs showed especial violence towards the nunneries. The austere Rigault, Confessor

[p. 34]

of the sainted King and Archbishop of Rouen, makes a personal investigation into the condition of Normandy. Every night he rides up to the door of a fresh monastery. Everywhere he finds the monks leading the bold, bad life of feudal nobles, going armed, drinking, duelling, hunting recklessly over waste and cornland alike, the nuns living with them in indiscriminate concubinage, and everlastingly with child by them.

Such was the Church! What must the lay nobles have been? What was the inside like of those gloomy towers that, viewed from the plain below, inspired mere panic terror? Two tales, true history doubtless both of them, Blue Beard and Griselda, tell us something. What was he for his vassals, his serfs, this torturer, who treated his own family with such refinement of cruelty? We can judge from the only one of them brought to trial, and that not till the fifteenth century, Gilles de Ritz, the kidnapper of children. Sir Walter Scott's Front de Boeuf, the barons of melodrama and romance, are poor creatures compared to these terrible realities. The Templar in Ivanhoe is an equally feeble and an entirely artificial portrait. The author has not dared to face the foul actualities of celibacy among the Knights of the Temple, and of life inside the fortified castle, where very few women were allowed, as being mere useless mouths. The Romances of Chivalry give exactly the opposite of the truth. Indeed, it has often been observed how literature in many cases expresses the entire contrary of contemporary life and character; as, for instance, the insipid pastoral plays of the Florian type that held the stage during the Terror of the Revolutionary Period.

The domestic arrangements of these mediaeval castles, where they can still be traced, tell us more than all the books put together. Men-at-arms, pages, serving-men, packed together at night under low-browed vaults, by day stationed on the battlements, on narrow terraces, suffering the most atrocious boredom, found breath and life only in their sallies on to the plain below--no longer now warlike expeditions against neighbouring lands,

[p. 35]

but hunting parties, man-hunting parties, exactions, outrages, without number on the households of the surrounding serfs. The Lord knew perfectly well himself that a mass of men like this without women could only be kept in hand on condition of occasional licence.

The appalling notion of a hell where God uses the wickedest souls, the most sinful of all there, to torture the less sinful, delivered up to them as playthings, this noble dogma of the Middle Ages was literally realised. Men felt instinctively God was far from them. Each razzia was another proof of the domination of Satan, a convincing proof it was to him they must henceforth address their prayers.

To add insult to injury, there was much coarse laughter and ribald wit indulged in. "But surely the serf women were too unattractive," it may be objected. The answer is, it was no question of beauty; the pleasure consisted in outraging, beating, and making women cry. As late as the seventeenth century, the great Court ladies would almost die of laughing to hear the Duke of Lorraine describe how his fellows raided peaceable villages, killing and torturing every woman, old women included.

Outrage was especially rife, as may be supposed, among the well-to-do households, of a relatively superior rank, which were to be found among the serfs, families of serfs supplying mayors to the community from generation to generation, such as are found as far back as the twelfth century taking the first place in the villages. The nobility hated, mocked, and would fain have ruined these. Their new sense of moral dignity was an unpardonable offence; it was unforgivable that their wives and daughters should be chaste and virtuous women. What right had they to be respectable? Their honour was not theirs to keep. Serfs of the body, that was the cruel phrase everlastingly thrown in their teeth.

 

It will be hard to believe in days to come that, among Christian people, the Law did a worse thing than any it did to the

[p. 36]

slaves of Antiquity,--that it expressly sanctioned as a right the most deadly outrage that can wring a human being's heart.

The ecclesiastic seigneur, no less than the lay, possesses this foul prerogative. In a parish in the neighbourhood of Bourges, the cure, being a seigneur, laid express claim to the firstfruits of every bride, though in practice he was quite willing to sell his wife's virginity to the husband for money down. [*1]

The theory has been too readily accepted that this outrage was only formal, never actually done. But the price named in certain countries for release from it was far beyond the means of almost any peasant. In Scotland, for instance, the Feudal Superior claimed "several cows,"--an enormous, an impossible price. Thus the poor young peasant's wife was at her Lord's discretion. Moreover, the Fors du Bearn state in so many words that the right was literally exacted. "The peasant's eldest son is always reckoned the Seigneur's child, for he may be of his engendering." [*2]

All feudal customs, even where this is not mentioned, invariably impose an obligation on the newly made bride to go up to the castle to present the marriage meat-offering. An odious practice to force the poor trembling creature thus to run the gauntlet of anything it might enter the heads of the wild pack of insolent, wifeless retainers that harboured there to do to her.

 

One can still see the shameful scene,--the young husband bringing his bride to the castle. One can imagine the guffaws of the knights and squires, the ribald tricks of the pages, that welcomed the unhappy pair. "At any rate the presence of the Lady of the Castle will keep them in check," you say. Not a bit of it. The fair chatelaine the romances would have us think so delicate, [*3] but who was quite capable of taking command of the garrison

[p. 37]

in her Lord's absence; who was used to judging, punishing, ordering torture or death; who had a hold over the Baron himself by means of the fiefs she brought him--she was no tenderhearted protectress, least of all for a serf, who perhaps was a pretty woman too. Flaunting publicly, as was the habit of the time, her favoured knight and her page, she was not sorry to justify the liberties she allowed herself by similar misdemeanours on her husband's part.

She will be no obstacle to the game in hand, the amusement they are getting out of the poor trembling fellow eager to redeem his wife. They begin by bargaining with him, laughing at the agonies of the "hard-fisted peasant," and end by sucking his very marrow and blood. Why this dead set at the pair? Because he is fittingly dressed, an honest man of respectable position, a notable person in his village. Because she is pious, chaste, and modest, because she loves him, because she is afraid and in tears. Her pretty eyes ask for pity,--in vain.

The unfortunate man offers all he possesses, even the dowry itself. . . . No use! it is not enough. Angered at the injustice of such harsh treatment, he urges, "But my neighbour, he paid nothing." . . . Ho! ho! argufying now, the insolent scoundrel! Then the whole pack crowds round him, shouting; sticks and brooms belabour him with a hail of blows. Finally he is hustled and kicked out of doors, and they scream after him: "Jealous brute, with your ugly, lenten looks, who's stealing your wife? You shall have her back to-night, and to cap the favour, with child! . . . Say thank you; why! you're nobles now. Your firstborn will be a Baron!" All crowd to the windows to see this ludicrous figure, death in his heart, wedding-clothes on his back. . . . Peals of laughter pursue him, and the roystering mob, down to the meanest scullion, gives chase to the "poor cuckold!" [*4]

[p. 38]

The man would have died on the spot of rage and chagrin, but for one hope,--of the Devil's help. He goes home alone, and finds his house, how empty, how deserted! No! not empty; there is someone there. Satan sits at the hearth-side.

Presently she returns too, pale, disordered, in pitiful estate! . . . She throws herself on her knees, and craves his pardon. At this the man's heart is like to burst. . . . He puts his two arms round her neck, and weeps and sobs and cries aloud till the very walls tremble. . . .

Still her coming brings God back to the house. Whatever she may have endured, she is pure, innocent, and holy yet. Satan will get nothing to-day. The Pact is not ripe for signing yet.

Our silly national Fabliaux and ridiculous Contes without exception assume that under this mutual injury and all subsequent ones she will have to affront, the wife is on the side of her outragers and against her husband; they would have us believe that the poor girl, bullied and shamefully used, made a mother in spite of herself, is delighted and overjoyed at it all. Can anything be more improbable? No doubt rank, politeness, elegance were likely enough to seduce her; but no one took the trouble to use these means. They would have much fine fun indeed of anyone who for a serf's wife should have played the high-bred lover. All the rout, chaplain, cellarer, down to the very serving-men, thought they were honouring her by outrage. The humblest page fancied himself a great Lord, if only he seasoned his love-making with insults and blows.

 

One day, when the poor woman had been maltreated in her husband's absence, she was heard to exclaim, as she recoiled her

[p. 39]

long hair, "Oh, miserable Saints of wood, of what avail to make vows to them? Are they deaf? or are they grown old? . . . Why have I not a Spirit to protect me, strong and powerful,--if an evil Spirit, I cannot help it? I see them many a one carved in stone at the church door. What are they doing there? Why do they not fly to their proper home, the castle yonder, to carry off these miscreants and roast them in hell? . . . Oh for strength and power! Who can give me these? I would gladly give my whole self in exchange. . . . Alas! what could I give? What have Ito give? I have nothing left. Woe on me, body and soul,--on my soul that is but ashes! Why--why cannot I have, instead of my elfin friend, who is good for nothing, a great, strong, powerful Spirit?"

"Oh, sweet little mistress mine, 'tis by your fault I am so small, and I cannot grow bigger. . . . And besides, if I were big, you would never have liked me, never have allowed me near you, and your husband even less. You would have had me driven off by your priests and their holy water. . . . I will be big and strong if you wish. . . . Mistress mine, Spirits are neither big nor little, strong nor weak. At desire, the tiniest can become a giant."

"Why? How?"

"Nothing simpler. To turn your Spirit into a giant, you have but to give him a gift."

"A gift! What gift?"

"A sweet woman's soul."

"Oh, horror! Who are you, say? And what is this you ask?" "Nay, such gifts are made every day. . . . Would you price yourself higher than the lady yonder of the castle? She has pledged her soul to her husband, to her lover; nevertheless she gives it again all to her page, a child, a little silly lad. I am far more than your page; I am more than any serving-boy. In how many things have I been your little maid and tirewoman? Nay, do not blush, do not be angry. . . . Let me tell you only, I am all about you, and already perhaps within you. For how else should I know your thoughts, even the very thought you hide

[p. 40]

from your own self? . . . Who am I? I am your little soul, that talks unconcernedly to your great, your proper soul. . . . We are inseparable. Do you rightly know how long I have been with you? For more than a thousand years. For I was your mother's, and her mother's, your grandmother's and great-grandmother's. . . . I am the genius of the hearth and home."

"Tempter! tempter! . . . but what will you do?"

"I will make your husband rich, and you powerful, so that folk shall fear you."

"What say you? Are you then the demon of hidden treasures?"

"Why call me demon, if I am but doing a just work, a task of kindness and gentle piety? . . . God cannot be everywhere, He cannot be always at work. He likes to rest sometimes, and leaves us, the Spirits, to see to little matters, to correct the inadvertences of His Providence, the miscarriages of His justice. . . . Your husband is an instance, poor, hardworking, deserving mortal, who toils and moils himself to death, and gains the barest living. God has not had time yet to think of him. . . . Albeit a trifle jealous, still I love him, my good host,--and pity him. He can no more, he must give in. He will die like your children, killed already by dire poverty. Last winter he was ill. What will become of him next winter?"

Then she put her face between her two hands, and wept for long hours. At last, when she had no more tears left, though her sobs still shook her breast, he said, "I ask nothing. . . . Only, I beseech you, let us save him between us."

She had made no promise, but she belonged to him from that hour forth.

Footnotes

^36:1 Lauriere, ii. 100, under word Marquette; Michelet, Origines du Droit, 264.

^36:2 This work was not published till (1842) subsequently to the Origines (1837).

^36:3 This delicacy and refinement is well instanced in the treatment the ladies of the Court were for inflicting with their own hands on Jean de Menny, their poet, the author of the Roman de la Rose (about 1500). They would certainly [p. 37]have carried out their intention, had it not been for the witty poet's clever subterfuge.

^37:4 Nothing can be merrier than the old French Contes; but they have a certain monotony. The jokes are limited to three: the injured husband's [p. 38] despair, the squalls of the victim of the lash, the grimaces of the fellow on the gallows. The first is funny; the second sets you laughing till you cry; but there! the third caps all, and you hold your sides in inextinguishable merriment! Mark now, the three are only one after all. It is always the man who is down, the weakling that can be outraged without risk of retaliation, the person who is incapable of self-defence.

     The Sorceress, by Jules Michelet, [1939], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 41]

  

5

  

DIABOLICAL POSSESSION

BUT the terrible age is the age of gold. By this I mean the cruel epoch when gold first got the mastery. The date is 1300, in the reign of Philippe le Bel of France, a king at once of gold and iron, it would appear, a great monarch that never opened his mouth, that seemed to have a dumb spirit, but at the same time a mighty arm,--strong enough to burn down the "Temple," long enough to stretch to Rome and with iron gauntlet to give the first buffet to the astonished Pope.

Henceforth gold is High Pope, and god of all, and not without good reason. The movement began in Europe with the Crusades; wealth is not deemed wealth unless it has wings and is capable of moving freely hither and thither, admits of rapid exchange. The King, to strike his far-off blows, needs gold and gold only. The army of gold, the army of the King's treasury, spreads far and wide over the whole face of the land. The great Baron, who has brought home dreams of splendour from the East, is ever longing, for its marvels,--damascened weapons, oriental carpets and spices, horses of pure Arab blood. For all this he must have gold. When the serf brings in his wheat, his Lord spurns him with his foot, crying, "That is not all I want; I would have gold."

From that day the world is changed. Hitherto, in the midst of many evils, there was at any rate peace and security so far as the levies were concerned. As years were good or bad, the quit-rent followed the course of nature and the quality and quantity of the harvest. If the Lord of the Soil said, "'Tis a fine tribute you offer," the answer was, "My Lord, God has given no more."

But gold! alas! where to find gold? . . . We have no army to

[p. 42]

raid it from the rich cities of Flanders. Where are we to dig the earth to win its treasure? Ah! if only we had the Spirit of hidden treasures [*1] to be our guide!

While all are in despair, the peasant wife with the elfin ally is already seated on her sacks of wheat in the neighbouring little market town. She is all alone, the rest of her village cronies are still busy making up their minds.

She sells at what price she will. Even when the others do arrive, the cream of the custom goes to her; some mysterious, magic attraction draws all to her, and no one even thinks of beating down her terms. Before the appointed day, her husband carries his quit-rent in good solid coin to the feudal elm. "Astonishing! astonishing!" all the neighbours cry. . . . "For sure the Devil must be in the Dame!"

[p. 43]

They laugh, but she is far from sharing their mirth. She is sad and sore afraid. Pray as she will, strange tingling, creeping sensations disturb her rest, and set her trembling in her bed. She sees grotesque and horrible shapes about her. The Familiar Spirit, once so tiny and so gentle, is grown a wilful tyrant. Terrified at his boldness, she is restless and angry and fain to rise. She submits, but with sighs and groans; she feels her loss of independence, and exclaims, "Alack! I am no longer my own woman now!"

 

"Well! well!" cries the Baron, in high satisfaction, "here's verily a peasant with some sense at last; he positively pays in advance. I tell you, I like you, man! Can you cast accounts?" "Yes! a little." "Well, then, 'tis you shall settle accounts with all my folk. Every Saturday you shall take your seat under this elm to receive their moneys. On Sunday morning, before Mass, you must bring up the proceeds to the castle."

A mighty change this, truly! The goodwife's heart beats high when, Saturday come, she sees her poor husband, mere labourer and serf that was, sitting like a little lord himself under the shadow of the feudal tree. A trifle dazzled and confused at first, he gets used to the position finally and assumes an air of gravity. Nor is it safe to poke fun at him; the Baron means him to be respected. When he comes up to the castle, and rivals are for laughing at him and playing him some nasty trick or other in their jealousy, "You see yonder embrasure," says the Baron; "the rope you may not see, but it is all ready. The first to lay a hand on him, shall dangle out of the one at the end of the other, and so I tell you, shut and stump."

 

The saying is repeated, and there settles round them a sort of atmosphere of terror, everyone louts low, very low indeed to them; but they are avoided and shunned when they walk the roads. The neighbours strike into bye-paths with a furtive air and a pretence of not seeing them. The change makes them proud

[p. 44]

just at first, but soon saddens them, as they realise their isolation in the midst of village society. She with her delicate perception sees plainly enough the hate and scorn the Castle bears her, the hate and fear of her companions of the countryside. She feels herself between two dangers, in a terrible loneliness. No protection but the Baron, or rather the money they provide him with; but to get this money, to stimulate the peasant's reluctance, to overcome the vis inertiae he offers, to drag something even from those who have nothing, what persistent pressure, what threats, what harshness, are required! The goodman was never meant for such a trade; his wife encourages him, urges him, saying, "Be stiff with them, cruel if needs must. Strike hard. Else you will be behindhand with your payments. And then we are indeed undone!"

Such the anxieties of the day, trifling in comparison with the torments of the night. She has all but lost the power of sleeping. She gets up, and paces up and down, prowling about the house. All is quiet; and yet how changed the house is! It has lost all its old pleasant sense of security and gentle innocence! What is the cat ruminating over as she lies before the fire, feigning to be asleep and blinking her half-shut yellow eyes at me? The goat with her long beard and her wily, sinister looks, knows a deal more than she says. And the cow, half seen in the moonlit stall, why does she gaze at me askance in that mysterious way? . . . How uncanny it all is!

She shudders, and lies down again by her husband's side. "Lucky man, how sound he sleeps! . . . But I have done with sleep; I shall never sleep again!" . . . Nevertheless she drops off at last. But then, how she suffers! Her importunate friend is at her ear, eager, tyrannical. He persecutes her without mercy; if she drives him off a moment by the sign of the cross or a prayer, he is back again directly in some other shape. "Behind me, Satan! Beware! I am a Christian soul. . . . No! not that; you must not do that."

[p. 45]

Then in revenge he assumes a hundred hideous forms. He glides a shining serpent over her bosom, dances a loathly toad on her belly, or with a bat's pointed beak steals horrid kisses from her shuddering mouth. . . . He is trying every art to drive her to extremities, to force her, vanquished and exhausted, to assent at last to his vile propositions. But she is not beaten yet; she will not say, Yes! She prefers to suffer her nightly tortures, the never-ending martyrdom of the awful struggle.

 

"How far can a Spirit be incarnate too? . . . Are his foul attempts corporeal realities or no? Would she be doing carnal sin if she yielded to her persecutor? Would it be actual and veritable adultery?" . . . Subtle questions these he asks at times to unnerve and undermine her resistance. "If I am nothing but a breath, a vapour, a puff of wind (as many Doctors of the Church teach), why so fearful, little trembling soul? and what has your husband to say in the matter?"

One of the worst torments of pious souls throughout the Middle Ages is that many doubts we should deem frivolous and purely academical were then burning questions, agitating and terrifying men's minds, taking the form of visions, sometimes of fierce arguments with the Devil, or agonising debates with a tortured conscience. The Demon, for all his furious manifestations in the case of demoniacs, nevertheless remains a Spirit down to the very end of the Roman Empire, and up to the time of St. Martin, in the fifth century. On the invasion of the barbarians, he grows barbarian too, and more and more carnal and corporeal,--so much so that he takes to stone-throwing, and amuses himself with pelting to pieces the bell of St. Benedict's cloister. The Church, to frighten off the savage encroachers on ecclesiastical property, makes the Devil more and more frankly incarnate, teaching men to believe he will torment sinners, not merely as soul acting upon soul, but materially in their flesh, that they will suffer actual bodily tortures,--not the flames of an ideal hell, but

[p. 46]

every exquisite pang of physical pain that blazing brands, the gridiron, and the red-hot spit can inflict.

This conception of diabolic torturers, tormenting the souls of the dead with material agonies, was a perfect gold-mine for the mediaeval Church. The survivors, torn with grief and pity, asked eagerly, "Cannot we, from this world to that, redeem these unhappy souls? Cannot we expiate their offences by dint of fines and imposition, as is done in earthly matters?" The bridge between the two worlds was Cluny,--the Cluniacs from their first foundation (about 900) having at once grown into one of the richest of the monastic orders.

So long as God punished in person, making His hand heavy on sinners, or at any rate striking by sword of an angel (according to the noble antique phrase), it was not so horrible. The hand of the Lord was severe,--a Judge's hand, but still a Father's too. The angel when he struck was still pure and clean as his own sword. But it is by no means so when the ministers of execution are foul demons. They are very far from imitating the angel that burned Sodom, but only after quitting the city. They remain, and their hell is a horrid Sodom, where Damned Souls, more deeply stained with sin than the sinners given into their power, find an odious pleasure in the torments they inflict. This doctrine men saw inculcated in the artless sculptures carved around church doors, from which they learned the dreadful lesson how fiends experience a wanton delight in causing pain. Under pretext of punishment, the devils work out on their victims the most revolting caprices. A profoundly immoral conception, and a truly damnable, this,--of justice, falsely so-called, favouring the coarser part, making its perversity yet more perverse by handing it over a plaything to torment, corrupting the very demons themselves!

 

A cruel, cruel time! Think how black and lowering was the sky; how it weighed on the heads of mankind! Think of the poor little children, their minds filled with these dreadful notions,

[p. 47]

trembling with terror in the very cradle! Think of the pure, innocent girl, shuddering lest Damnation lurk in the pleasure she involuntarily finds in the workings of the Spirit; of the wife, as she lies in the marriage-bed, tortured by the same assaults, resisting yet ever and anon feeling the stir within her! . . . A horrid experience, known to those who have the tapeworm. To be conscious of a twofold life, to feel the horrid thing moving within one, now violently, now with a silky, undulatory creeping that is even worse, and recalls the sensations of seasickness,--till a man dashes away in frenzy, horror-struck at himself and his own body, longing only to escape, to die. . . .

Even at such times as the Demon was not actively tormenting her, the woman subjected to his assaults might be seen gloomily roaming around, a prey to melancholy thoughts. For there is no hope left of cure. His entry is irresistible; he penetrates everywhere like a foul miasma. Is he not the Prince of the Air, the Prince of Storms,--of internal no less than of external storm? We find this coarsely, but vigorously, portrayed under the arch of the great doors of Strasburg Cathedral. At the head of the company of Foolish Virgins, their leader, the woman of sin who is enticing them down to the abyss, is full, swollen out, with the Demon, who hideously distends her body and escapes from beneath her skirts in a black cloud of dense, stifling smoke.

This distension is one cruel mark of Diabolical Possession,--at once a punishment and a boast. She carries her belly thrust forward, the proud wanton of Strasburg, and her head well thrown back, triumphing in her hideous grossness, rejoicing in her monstrous deformity.

She is not like this yet, the woman we are describing. But she is already puffed out with the Devil, and with evil pride in her new fortunes. Sleek and fair, she walks the street, her head high, her face expressing pitiless disdain and scorn of the very earth she treads on. Her neighbours are afraid, and both hate and admire her.

Our village dame says plainly by mien and look: "'Tis I

[p. 48]

should be the Lady of the Castle! . . . What is she at, I would know, in the high tower yonder, wanton, idle jade, among all those men, and her husband so far away?" A rivalry springs up; and the village, which hates her, is proud of her none the less. "The Lady of the Castle is Baroness; but ours is Queen . . . more than Queen, something none dare name. . . ." Terrible and fantastic her beauty, a cruel beauty, compact at once of pride and pain. The Foul Fiend in person glares out of her eyes.

 

She is his in a sense, but only in a sense as yet. She is herself still, and steadfastly refuses to surrender her personality. For the moment she is neither the Devil's nor God's. True the demon may enter into her, permeate her whole being in subtle vapours; but so far he has really won nothing, for her will is still unsubdued. She is possessed, bedevilled; but Satan is still very far from having got her in his power. At times he will practise on her atrocious, but quite unavailing, torments. He will kindle a flame of fire in bosom and belly and bowels; she writhes and struggles in agony, but nevertheless defies him.

"No! vile torturer, I will not yield up my identity, I will not!"

"Beware! I will lash you with a whip of scorpions; I will tear your flesh so savagely, you will thenceforth go in tears, piercing the shuddering air with your screams."

The succeeding night he does not come. Next morning (it is Sunday morning) her husband went up to the castle, and returned a picture of desperation. The Baron had told him: "A stream that trickles drop by drop will never turn the mill. . . . You bring me a farthing at a time,--what use is that? . . . I must be starting in a fortnight. The King is marching on Flanders, and I have not so much as a war-horse ready, for my old charger goes lame since the tourney. See to it; I must have a hundred silver pounds." "But--but where to find them, my Lord?" "Sack the whole village as you will. I will give you men enough. . . . Tell your oafs they are ruined men unless the

[p. 49]

money comes--and yourself shall be the first to die. . . . I am sick of you. You have a woman's heart; you are a craven and a sluggard. You shall pay dear for your cowardice and slackness. Look you! only a straw turns the scale that I don't keep you here, that you never see your home again. . . . 'Tis Sunday; they would have a good laugh down yonder to see you dancing in the air over my battlements."

The unhappy wight repeats this to his wife. In sheer despair he prepares for death, and recommends his poor soul to God. She is as terrified as he, and can neither rest nor sleep. But what can she do? She is deeply sorry now she sent the Spirit away. If only he would come back again! . . . Next morning at her husband's rising, she falls back exhausted on the bed. In an instant she feels a ponderous weight on her breast; she pants and almost chokes. The incubus slips lower, presses the woman's belly, while simultaneously she feels her arms gripped by a pair of hands that are like steel. "You wished for me. . . . Well! here I am. Ha! cruel recreant, at last, at last your soul is mine?" "Nay! but, great sir, is it mine to give? My poor husband! You used to love him. . . . You said so. . . . You promised. . . ." "Your husband! come, have you forgotten? . . . are you so sure you have always kept your will steadfast for him? . . . For your soul, I ask you for it out of mere complacence, for indeed 'tis mine already. . . ."

"Not so, great sir," she answers back, her pride rekindling spite of her sore strait. "Not so! my soul is mine, my husband's, consecrated by my marriage vow. . . ."

"Little fool, little fool! you are incorrigible! Even now, under the goad, you persist in struggling! . . . I have seen it, your soul, I know it by heart, every hour of the day and night,--and better than you do yourself. Day by day I have watched your first essays at resistance, your times of grief and of despair! I have noted your hours of discouragement, when you murmured to yourself, 'Who can resist the irresistible?' I have been present

[p. 50]

at your periods of yielding too. You have suffered something, and cried a little, but never very loud. . . . If I have claimed your soul of you, 'tis because it is a lost soul already. . . .

"Now your husband is on the verge of ruin. . . . How save him? I will take compassion on you. . . . You are mine; but I would have more,--I would have you give yourself to me, avowedly and of your own free will. If not, his ruin will be consummated."

She answered soft and low, through her sleep: "Alackaday! my body and my miserable flesh, take them, take them, to save my husband. . . . But my heart, never. None has ever had it yet, and I cannot give it."

So said, she lay waiting her fate, resigned. . . . Then he threw her two words, saying: "Remember, in them is your only safety." Then she shuddered from head to foot, rigid with horror to feel herself empaled by a fiery bolt, inundated by an ice-cold flood. . . . A piercing scream,--and she found herself lying in her astonished husband's arms, drenching him with her tears.

 

She tore herself violently away, and sprang from the bed, trembling at the thought of forgetting the two indispensable words. Her husband was terrified; for she did not so much as see him, but kept throwing the savage looks of a Medea at the chamber walls around her. Never was her beauty more resplendent. In the dark pupil and the yellow-tinctured white of her fierce eyes flashed a gleam no man would dare encounter, the sulphurous lava glow of a volcano.

She marched straight to the town. The first of the two words was green. She saw hanging at the door of a shop a green robe,--green, colour of the Prince of this World. It was old and worn, but once on her shoulders shone forth new and dazzling. She marched, without a word of inquiry, straight to the house of a Jew, and knocked loudly. The door is opened cautiously, and the poor Jew discovered sitting on the ground, half smothered in the

[p. 51]

ashes. "Good sir, I must have a hundred silver pounds!" "Why! lady, how should I lend such a sum? The Prince Bishop of this city, to force me tell where my gold lies hid, has had my teeth drawn one by one. [*2] . . . Look, see my bleeding gums." "I know, I know; but it is just the means to destroy your Prince Bishop I come to you for. When the Pope is buffeted, the Bishop will scarce stand firm. Who says so? It is the word of Toledo." [*3]

The Jew hung his head. She stooped over him and breathed softly in his ear. . . . She was in deadly earnest, and the Devil to back her to boot. A strange wave of heat filled the room; even the old man felt as if a fountain of fire had shot up before his eyes. "Lady," he cried, gazing at her from under his brows, "Lady, poor, ruined as I am, I had a few pence in reserve to buy meat for my unhappy children." "You will never repent it, Jew. . . . I will swear you the great oath, the oath that kills. . . . What you lend me you shall have back in one week, in good time, at earliest morn. . . . I swear it by your great oath, and mine, a mightier watchword still, Toledo."

A year passed. She was grown stout and rosy, resplendent like fine gold. Men marvelled at her fascination, and admired and obeyed her with one consent. By a miracle of Satan, the Jew was become open-handed, ready to lend money at the smallest sign. She it was, and she alone, kept up the castle as well by her credit in the city as by the terror her harsh exactions inspired in the village. The triumphant green robe was everywhere, coming and going, every day seeming newer and more splendid. Her own person

[p. 52]

assumed an almost superhuman beauty, instinct with victory and haughty insolence. One prodigy there was that startled beholders, and each said wonderingly, "A grown woman,--and she grows taller, more stately, day by day!"

Meantime a new development; the Seigneur is returned. The Lady of the Castle, who for long durst not come down for fear of confronting the lady of the plain, has mounted her milk-white palfrey. She comes to meet her husband, with all her folk about her, draws rein and gravely greets him.

First and foremost she exclaims, "Ah! how wearily have I waited you! how could you leave your faithful bride to languish so long in lonesome widowhood? . . . And yet, and yet, I cannot give you place by my side this night, an you grant me not one boon." "Ask it, ask it, fairest lady!" returned the knight, laughing gaily. "But ask quickly. . . . Verily I am in haste to have you in my arms, lady mine. . . . I wot you are grown more beautiful than ever!"

Then she spoke low in his ear, and none knows what it was she said. But before climbing to the castle, the good Baron set foot to earth before the village church, and went in. Under the porch, standing at the head of the village grandees, he sees a lady he fails to recognise, though he louts low before her. Proud as Lucifer, she wore towering above the heads of the men the lofty two-peaked coif of the period,--the Devil's bonnet as it was often called on account of the double horns that formed its ornament. The great lady blushed hotly, and passed on eclipsed and looking small and homely by comparison. Then furious she hissed under her breath. "Yes! there she stands,--your vassal, your serf all the while! 'Tis the last straw; all rank and order is overset, and asses bray insult at horses!"

Coming out, the bold-faced page, the favourite, draws a poniard from his girdle, and dextrously, with a single slash of the keen blade, slits the fine green robe from waist to feet. [*4] She came

[p. 53]

near fainting at the cruel outrage, while the crowd stood staring and amazed. But they soon understood, when they saw the Baron's retainers one and all dash forward to hunt the prey. . . . Swift and pitiless fell the whistling lashes. . . . She flies, but feebly; she is already a trifle unwieldy. Barely ten paces, and she stumbles. Her best friend and gossip has thrown a stone in her path to trip her feet. . . . At this a shout of brutal laughter; but she lies cowering, screaming shrilly. . . . But the pages are remorseless, and whip her to her feet again with their lashes. The noble, gallant pack join in, and pick out the tenderest spots for biting. At long last, a haggard figure in the dreadful procession that welters round her, she reaches her own house-door,--to find it shut! With hand and foot she knocks and kicks, shrieking, "Good husband, quick! oh, quick! open, open!" But yet she hung there, spread-eagled, like the wretched barn-door owl you see nailed to a farmer's door, while the blows continued to rain down on her unceasingly. Not a sound within the house. Was the husband within? or was it that, scared for his riches, he dared not face the crowd, dared not risk the pillage of his goods?

Under all these outrages and blows and sounding buffets she fell swooning at last. Then she sat crouching on the chill stones of the threshold, naked, half-dead, her long hair barely covering her bleeding flesh. Then one of the castle party cries enough; "We have no wish to kill her."

So they leave her, and she runs to hiding. But in spirit she sees

[p. 54]

the gay doings in the Castle Hall. The Baron, giddy-headed as he is, could not help exclaiming, "Nay! I am half sorry for it all." But the chaplain says smoothly, "If the woman is possessed, as they say she is, my Lord, your duty to your good vassals, your duty to all the countryside, is to deliver her up to Holy Church. It is awful to see, since these scandals of the Templars and of the Pope, the progress the Devil is a-making. Against him one thing only avails, the stake. . . ." A Dominican interrupts, "Excellent well, your Reverence, you have spoke excellent well. Deviltry--deviltry is heresy of the first degree. Like the heretic, the devil-possessed must be burned alive. Still sundry of our good Fathers do not trust now even to the stake itself entirely. Wisely and well they would fain before all have the erring soul slowly and surely purged, tried, tamed by fastings, lest it be burned in its unrepentant pride and go triumphing to the stake. If you, my Lady, in your piety and sweet charity, if yourself would take the task of working in this our sister's stubborn heart, setting her for some years or so in pace in a brave dungeon of which you only should hold the key, you might indeed by firm discipline and proper torments, save her poor soul, shame the Foul Fiend, and at last yield her up, chastened and humbled, into the hands of Mother Church."

Footnotes

^42:1 Demons afflict the world throughout the whole period of the Middle Ages. But Satan does not assume his definitive character before the thirteenth century. "Pacts with the Evil One," M. A. Maury observes, "are very rarely found before this epoch." I can quite believe it; for how conclude a covenant with a being that really and truly does not as yet exist? Neither of the two contracting parties, in fact, was ripe for the agreement. For the human will to come to this appalling extremity of selling itself for all eternity, it must needs have first grown desperate. The merely unhappy man is still far from despair; it is the being who is utterly and hopelessly wretched, who has complete consciousness of his own wretchedness, and consequently full and complete agony of suffering, without any expectation of relief, it is he and he only who knows what despair is. Desperation in this sense may be predicated of the poor man of the fourteenth century, who is asked to perform the impossible,--to pay quit-rent and taxes in money. In the present chapter and the succeeding one, I have noted the incidence, sentiment and progress of despair, capable of leading up to the horrible covenant of the Pact with Satan, and what is even worse than the pact pure and simple, the appalling condition and profession of Sorcery or Witchcraft. The word is used freely enough, but the thing is still exceptional, being nothing more nor less than a marriage with the powers of Evil and a sort of consecration to the Devil. To make my descriptions more easily comprehensible, I have connected the details of this subtle and difficult piece of analysis by a thin thread of fictitious narrative. However, after all the framework is of small importance; the essential point is to realise that such enormities did not arise (as writers have tried to make us believe) from mere heedlessness and thoughtlessness, from the weakness of fallen human nature, from the chance temptations of concupiscence. Their existence implied the fatal overmastering pressure of an age of iron, the irresistible constraint of grim necessities,--required that Hell itself should appear a shelter, an asylum, a relief, as contrasted with the Hell of this world.

^51:2 This was a method in high favour for compelling the Jews to disgorge. John Lackland, King of England, had frequent recourse to it.

^51:3 Toledo would seem to have been the Holy City of the Sorcerers and Sorceresses, a countless host in Spain. Their relations with the Moors, highly civilised as was this people, and with the Jews, a wise folk and in those days masters of all Spain (as agents of the Royal Exchequer), had given the Sorcerers a high culture, and they formed at Toledo a sort of university of their own. By the sixteenth century they had been Christianised, changed and modified, reduced to mere white magic. See the Deposition du sorcier Achard, sieur de Beaumont, medecin en Poitou (Evidence of the Wizard Achard, Sieur de Beaumont, a leech in Poitou), in Lancre, Incredulite, p. 781.

^52:4 Such is the monstrous and cruel outrage we find quite commonly employed in those rough times. In the Gallic and Anglo-Saxon laws it is laid down as the [p. 54] penalty for immodesty (Grimm, 679, 711; Sternhook, 19, 325; Ducange, iii. 52; Michelet, Origines, 386, 389). Later on, the same affront is shamefully and unjustly inflicted on honest women, tradesmen's wives beginning to show overmuch spirit, whom the nobles wish to humiliate. The snare is familiar into which the  Hagenbach enticed the honourable dames of the superior bourgeoisie of Alsace, probably in mockery of their rich and royal costume, all of silk and cloth of gold. Again, I have mentioned in my Origines (p. 250), the extraordinary right which the Sire de Pace, in Anjou, claimed over the fair (honest) women of the neighbouring lands. These were bound to bring him to his castle four deniers and a rose wreath, and to dance with his officers. A perilous enterprise for them, one in which they had much reason to fear meeting with some such dire insult as that of Hagenbach. To force them to come, the threat is added that the recalcitrant will be stripped and branded with the Baron's arms on their naked flesh.

     The Sorceress, by Jules Michelet, [1939], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 55]

  

6

  

The PACT with SATAN

ONLY the victim lacked. All knew the most acceptable gift they could offer the chatelaine was to deliver the unhappy creature into her power. Right tender the gratitude she would have shown the man who had given her this proof of devotion, handed over to her mercy the poor bleeding limbs of her rival.

But the prey was on the alert. A few moments more and she would have been spirited away, imprisoned for good and all within the stone walls of a dungeon. She snatched up a tattered cloak lying in the cattle-shed to cover her nakedness, took wings, so to speak, and before midnight struck, found herself leagues away, far from any thoroughfare, on a desert heath all thistles and brambles. The heath skirted a wood, where, under the glimpses of an uncertain moon, she was able to scrape together a few acorns, which she munched and bolted like a wild beast. Centuries seemed to have passed since yesterday; she was another woman altogether. The proud beauty, the queen of the village, was no more; her very soul and its every outward manifestation was utterly changed. She pounced on the acorns like a famished wild boar, sat squatted at her food like an ape. Thoughts, scarcely human, were crowding through her brain, when she hears, or thinks she hears, a screech-owl's hoot, followed by a shrill peal of laughter. She is startled; but there! 'tis perhaps only the mocking jay that can imitate every sound, and delights in these deceptions.

The weird laugh is heard again. Where it comes from she cannot tell. It seems to issue from an old hollow oak.

But now she hears words plainly articulated, "Ah, ha! so you

[p. 56]

are come at last. . . . Very unwilling you were to come; you never would have come at all had you not found yourself in the extremity of direst straits. . . . You must needs, proud lady, be whipped to the enterprise, and cry and whine for mercy, mocked, scorned, an outcast and a byword to your own husband. Where would you be this night, if I had not pitied you and shown you the in pace, the dungeon they were making ready for you in the castle crypts? . . . Late, late in the day, you come to me,--old woman, old witch, they call you now. . . . You were young once, and you treated me ill then, me your little Robin Goodfellow that was so eager to serve you. . . . Your turn now (if I will have you) to serve me, and kiss my feet.

"You were mine from your birth up; the roguery you hid so well, the diabolic charm you could not hide, made you mine. I was your lover, your husband. Your own has shut the door in your face. But I will be kinder; I welcome you to my domains, my free and open plains and spreading forests. . . . What do I gain, you ask? Have I not long had you in my power at propitious seasons? Have I not overwhelmed, possessed you, filled you with the flame of my desire? I have changed, renewed the very blood in your veins. There is not an artery in your whole body I do not circulate through. You cannot tell yourself how completely and entirely you are my bride. But your wedlock has not yet been solemnised with all the formalities due. I am a stickler for propriety, a gentleman of scruples. . . . We must be made one for all eternity."

"Great sir, situated as I am, what can I, what should I say? Oh, indeed I have felt, I have felt only too plainly, since many a day, that you are my destiny, my only and inevitable destiny. Artfully have you caressed and favoured and enriched me, to bring me to ruin at the last. Yesterday, when the black hound bit my poor naked limbs, his teeth burned in my flesh . . . and I cried, 'It is he!' The same evening, in the Castle Hall, when that Herodias debauched and overawed the board, someone was there

[p. 57]

ready to pander to her hate and promise her my blood . . . and it was you again!"

"True enough! but 'tis I likewise that saved you, and led you hither. And why did I so? Because I would fain have you all my own, with none to interfere between us. Frankly, your husband was an offence to me. And you, you would be for ever bargaining, making terms. Quite other is my way; my maxim is, all or nothing! That is why I have tormented you a trifle, disciplined, chastened you, to ripen you for my embraces. . . . I am particular, and pick and choose; I do not, as folk think, accept every silly soul that may be ready to give itself to my power. I am for select souls, at the right toothsome crisis of fury and despair. Look you! I must needs tell you, I like you well, as you are today; you are more desirable than ever before, you are a delectable soul for Satan. . . . Ah! how long, how long I have loved you! . . . But to-day I am hungry, hungry for you! . . .

"I will deal largely and liberally with you. I am not one of those husbands who make bargains with their future bride. If you would merely be rich, rich you should be on the instant. If you would merely be a queen, step into the place of Queen Jeanne of Navarre, it should be done, and none should say me nay--and verily the King would lose little in the pride and wilfulness of his spouse. 'Tis a greater destiny to be my wife. But there, say what you would have yourself."

"Great sir, I want nothing but the power of working ill."

"Ah, a charming, a right charming answer! . . . How well you merit my love! . . . Truly that comprehends everything, both the Law and the Prophets. . . . Seeing you have chosen so wisely, you shall be given into the bargain all the rest to boot. You shall know all my secrets. You shall see the foundations of the earth. The world shall come to you, and pour out gold at your feet. . . . More, here I give you the true diamond, my bride, the brilliant of first water, Revenge. . . . I know, you gipsy, I know your most hidden wish; our two hearts beat as one in this. . . .

[p. 58]

[paragraph continues] That is the thing will ensure me final and certain possession of you. You shall see your lady enemy on her knees before you, asking mercy and beseeching, happy if only you would hold her pardoned, doing the same she did once to you. Yes, she shall weep . . . and you shall say No! with a condescending smile, and hear her cry in her agony, 'Death and damnation, ah me l' . . . Then comes my turn to act."

"Great sir, I am your servant. . . . I was ungrateful once, I confess. For indeed you have always been over good to me. I am yours, I am yours, my master and my god! I want no other. Gracious is the light of your countenance, and your service a sweet service of delight."

With this she falls grovelling, and adores him from the ground! . . . First she does him homage according to the Templars' rite, symbolising the utter abnegation of self and self-will. Her master, the Prince of this World, the Prince of the Gales of Heaven, breathes himself into her being like a rushing mighty wind. She receives at once and together the three sacraments, reversed and desecrate,--Baptism, Priesthood, and Marriage. In this new church, the exact opposite of its counterpart, the Church of God, everything is reversed. Patient and submissive, she bore the cruel initiation, [*1] her spirit borne up and comforted by the one word, "Revenge!" Far from the infernal levin exhausting her energies, making her weak and ailing, it made her more strong and terrible, and brought fire from her eyes. The moon, that had modestly veiled her face an instant, shuddered to see her now. Swollen out horribly with the hellish vapour, with fire and fury, and (a new circumstance) with an unholy longing of desire, she showed for a moment enormous in her excessive proportions, and of an awe-inspiring beauty. She gazed around her, . . . and nature itself seemed changed. The trees had found a language of their own, and told her tales of ages long ago. The

[p. 59]

herbs were simples now. Plants that yesterday she kicked away contemptuously like hay, were become beings that spoke to her of healing.

Next day she woke in full security, far, far out of her enemies' reach. They had sought her fruitlessly, finding only a few fluttering rags of the fatal green robe. Had she in her despair leapt into the torrent? Had she been carried off bodily and alive by the Demon? None knew. In either case she was damned, there could be never a doubt of that. The Lady of the Castle was comforted not a little they had not found her.

Had they met her, they would hardly have known her, so mightily was she changed. Her eyes alone remained the same, not bright and flashing, but filled with a strange, appalling, sombre glow. She was afraid, herself, of terrifying others; she did not drop them, but she looked askance, to mask their sinister effect by the obliquity of her gaze. Suddenly grown dark of skin, she might to all appearance have passed through the flames. But such as gazed more heedfully, felt that the flame was rather an internal one--that an unclean and consuming fire glowed in her bosom. The flaming bolt Satan had driven through her, still glowed within, and threw, as if from a sinister, half-veiled lamp, a grim, but still perilously enticing, reflection. Men drew back shuddering, but did not quit her, and their senses were stirred and troubled.

She found herself at the entrance of one of those caves of the troglodytes that occur in such numbers in certain hills of the centre and west of France. It was the border marches, then a wild stretch, between the land of Merlin and the land of the Faery Queen. Open heaths, stretching limitless on every side, bore present witness to old-time wars and everlasting forays, the terrors of plunder and violence that kept the countryside yet unpeopled. There the Devil was at home; of the scattered inhabitants, the most part were his fervent disciples, his devotees. For all the fascination the rugged brushwoods of Lorraine, the dark pine forests of the Jura, the salty wastes of the Burgos, may have exercised

[p. 60]

over him, his favourite haunt was perhaps these western borderlands of France. It was not merely the home of the dreamy shepherd, of the satanic accoupling of she-goat and goat-herd, but the scene of a close conspiracy with Nature deeper than elsewhere, of a more intimate comprehension of healing drugs and noxious poisons, of mysterious relations, the connecting link of which has never been fathomed, with Toledo the learned, that university of diabolic arts.

It was the beginning of winter. His cold breath, stripping the trees, had piled up heaps of leaves and twigs of dead wood. All this she found ready at the mouth of her gloomy shelter. Traversing a stretch of forest and a quarter of a league of heathy waste, one came down within hail of a group of hamlets a runlet of water had brought into existence. "Behold your kingdom," the voice within her whispered. "A beggar-woman to-day, tomorrow you shall be queen of all this countryside."

Footnotes

^58:1 This will be found explained later. We must beware of the pedantic additions of the moderns in the seventeenth century. The tinsel ornaments fools tack on to so awful a reality only serve to lower Satan to their own poor level.

     The Sorceress, by Jules Michelet, [1939], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 61]

  

7

  

KING of the DEAD

AT first she was not greatly touched by these promises of future greatness. A hermitage without God, torturing memories that assail her in the deep solitude, the losses she had borne and the insults she had endured, her sudden, cruel widowhood, her husband who had left her alone to her shame and humiliation, all this saddened and overwhelmed her. A plaything of destiny, she saw herself like the wretched weeds of the waste, without root, beaten and buffeted by the north wind, tormented, cruelly battered this way and that; she seemed a poor fragment of coral, dull, grey, and angular, that possesses only coherence enough to be the better shattered. Children stamp on it, and men in mockery call it "The wind's wife."

She laughs wildly and bitterly, as she likens herself to these things. But from the recesses of the darkling cave comes a voice, "Ignorant and foolish, you know not what you are saying. . . . This weed that thus goes fluttering down the wind has good right to scorn all the fat, common herbs of the field. It has no abiding place or root, but 'tis complete, sufficient to itself, bearing everything, flower and seed within itself. Be you like it; be your own root, and in the very face of the whirlwind, you shall yet blossom and bear flowers, our own flowers, such as spring from the dust of tombs and the ashes of volcanoes.

"The first flower of Satan, I give it you this day, that you know my earliest name, the token of my antique might. I was, I am the King of the Dead. . . . How have I been traduced! . . . 'Tis I alone (an infinite boon that should have won me altars of

[p. 62]

thanksgiving), I alone, that bring the Lost Ones back to earth. . . ."

 

To penetrate the future, to call up the past, to anticipate or to resuscitate the days that fly so fast, to enlarge the present by what has been or what will be, two things these sternly proscribed in the Middle Ages. In vain; in this Nature is irresistible and prohibition unavailing. To offend against such law is to be a man. He would be none, who should stay for ever bound to his furrow, with downcast eyes and gaze confined to the next pace he takes behind his plodding oxen. No! we men must always, as we go, be looking inquiringly higher, and farther, and deeper. This earth, yes! we measure it painfully and meticulously, but we spurn it too and cry constantly, "What have you in your bowels? What secrets? What mysteries? You give us back duly the grain we entrusted to you; but you never return us that human harvest, the dead loved ones we have lent you. Shall they not germinate too, our friends, our lovers, that we have planted there? If only for one hour, one instant, they might come back to us!"

Ourselves too shall soon be of that terra incognita, whither they have already gone. But shall we see them again? Shall we be with them? Where are they? What is their life yonder?--They must indeed, my dead dear ones, be close captives not to vouchsafe even a sign! And what shall I do to make them hear? My father, whose only joy I was and who loved me so exceedingly, why, why does he never come to me? . . . On this side and on that, only sore constraint, and bitter captivity and mutual ignorance! A gloomy night where we look for one ray of light in vain! [*1]

These never-ceasing ponderings of human nature, which in Antiquity were merely sad, became in the Middle Ages cruel, bitter, demoralising, making men's hearts to grow faint within

[p. 63]

them. It would seem as though the world had set itself deliberately to degrade the soul and render it "cribbed, cabined, and confined" to the measure of a coffin. The servile mode of burial between four planks of deal is well adapted to accomplish this, suggesting as it does an uneasy sense of suffocation. The dear one who has been coffined thus, if he comes back in dreams, is now no light, radiant shadow, centred in the aureole of a better and lighter place, but a tortured slave, the unhappy prey of a horrid, clawed hell-cat,--bestiis, the text itself says, Ne tradus bestiis, etc. ("Deliver us not to the beasts"). Hateful and impious thought, that my father, so good and so lovable; my mother, so looked up to by all, should be the playthings of this horror! . . . You laugh at this to-day. But for a thousand years it was no laughing matter, but one for bitter burning tears. To this day one cannot write of these blasphemies without the heart swelling, and the very pen and paper grating a protest of fierce indignation!

 

Another truly cruel innovation was to have displaced the Feast of the Dead from Spring-time, to which Antiquity assigned it, to fix it in November. In May, where it stood originally, the dead were buried in flowers. In March, where it was put later, it marked, with the commencement of ploughing, the first awaking of the lark; the dead man and the living seed were put in the earth simultaneously, with the same hope of revivification. But, alas! in November, when all field work is ended for the year, the weather overclouded and gloomy for months to come, when mourners returned to the house, and a man sat down by his fireside and saw the place opposite for ever empty . . . what an aggravation of sadness was here! . . . Plainly by choosing this period already mournful enough in itself, this period of the obsequies of dying nature, the fear was that else man would not have grief enough of his own to make him properly mournful! . . .

The calmest of us, the busiest, however much distracted by

[p. 64]

the activities and anxieties of life, have strange moments at times. In the twilight of dark winter mornings, at nightfall, coming down so fast to engulf us in its gloom, ten years, twenty years afterwards, feeble, mysterious voices sound in your heart of hearts, "Greeting, dear one; 'tis we! . . . So you are still living and working on, as always. . . . It is well! You are not bowed down with the grief of losing us; you can do well without us. . . . But we, we can never forget you. . . . The ranks are closed up again, the vacant place obliterated. The house that was ours is full of life, and we bless its prosperity. All goes well,--better than in those far-off days when your father carried you in his arms, when your little girl in her turn asked you, 'Carry me, father, carry me!' . . . But there, you are weeping. . . . Enough,--farewell to meet again."

Woe is me! they are gone, after uttering this gentle, heartbreaking plaint. But is it a just one? Not so! a thousand times rather would I forget myself than forget them! And yet, cost what it may to say it, we must allow that certain characteristics escape us, are already less perceptible; certain features of the dear face are, not effaced indeed, but darkened, faded. A hard thing, a bitter and a humiliating, to feel oneself so fugitive and feeble, as quick to lose impressions as the unremembering waters; to realise that at long last we are losing that treasured grief it was our hope to keep intact for ever! Give it back, give it back, I implore; I value so fondly that gracious source of tears. . . . Restore, I beseech you, those cherished images. . . . If nothing else, make me at least dream of them by night!

 

Many a one says so in drear November. . . . And, while the bells are tolling, and the dead leaves raining down, they disperse from the church door, whispering low to each other, "Do you know this, neighbour? There lives up yonder on the moors a woman they speak both good and ill of. For my own part, I dare not say; but she has strange powers over the under-world. She calls up the dead, and they answer her summons. Ah! if only she

[p. 65]

could (innocently, mind you, without offending God), if only she could bring back my loved ones that are dead! . . . I am all alone, you know; I have lost all I had to live for in this world. But who is this woman? Who knows her? Whence she is, from heaven or from hell? I will never visit her,"--yet all the while he is dying to go. "I will never risk my immortal soul by going near her. Those woods, besides, are haunted; many a time men have seen in the heath things that were not there to see. . . . Remember poor Jacqueline, who wandered there one night to search for a strayed sheep of hers. She came back a mad woman. I will never go."

Nevertheless, hiding the fact one from the other, many of the men do go. Scarce as yet do the women dare to confront the risk. They think of the dangerous road, ask many questions of such as have been there already. The pythoness is not like the Witch of Endor, who called up Samuel at Saul's bidding; she shows no shadowy forms, but she gives the cabalistic words and beverages of might that will compel the dead to come back once more in dreams. How many sorrows come to her. Even the old grandmother of eighty, frail and tottering, would fain see her little grandson once again. By a supreme effort, not without remorse for committing such a sin when so near the tomb, she drags herself to the witch's hut. The savage-looking place, rough with its yews and briars, the bold, dark beauty of the implacable Proserpine she finds there, all frightens her. Prostrate and trembling on the earth, the poor old woman weeps and prays. No answer is vouchsafed; but when at length she dare raise her head a little, she sees hell itself has been weeping in sympathy.

 

This simple impulse of pure natural feeling set poor Proserpine blushing. Indignant at her own weakness, "Degenerate creature, weakling soul," she ejaculates, "you that came hither in the fixed design of working ill and only ill. . . . Is this the result of your master's teaching? Ah! how he will laugh me to scorn!"

"Nay, not so. Am I not the great shepherd of shades, to bid

[p. 66]

them come and go, to open them the gate of dreams? Your Dante, when he paints my portrait, forgets my true attributes. Adding a grotesque and superfluous tail, he never sees how I hold in very deed the shepherd's rod of Osiris, and have inherited his caduceus from Mercury. They thought to build an impassable wall to block absolutely the road from one world to the other; but my feet are winged, and I flew lightly over the obstacle. Vilely calumniated, called a ruthless monster, I have yet felt the prick of pity, succoured the afflicted, and consoled sorrowing lovers and mothers bereaved of their little ones. Spirit of evil, I have yet felt compassion and pitiful revolt against the harshness of the new God."

The Middle Ages and its chroniclers, Churchmen to a man, have been careful not to avow the hidden, but profound, changes taking place in popular sentiment. It is plain that Pity now appears ranged on the side of Satan. Even the Virgin, the ideal of grace, makes no appeal to this need of every feeling heart, nor the Church either. Evocation of the Dead is indeed expressly forbidden. While all the books go on dilating glibly either of the swinish Satan of the earliest conceptions or else of the clawed demon, king of torments, of a later age, the Devil has taken quite another aspect for the unlearned, who write no books. He has something of the classical Pluto, but pale and majestic, by no means deaf to prayers, granting to the dead return and to the living to see their dead once more, he approximates closer and closer to his sire or grandsire, Osiris, the shepherd of souls.

This change involves many others. Men confess with their lips the official hell of the Churches, the fiery furnaces and boiling cauldrons; but in their hearts do they really believe it all? Is it possible to reconcile a hell thus complacent towards sorrowing hearts with the awful traditions of a place of torment? One conception neutralises the other, without entirely obliterating it, the resultant being a compound picture, vague and shadowy, destined to assimilate more and more nearly to the Virgilian idea

[p. 67]

of the infernal regions. An incalculable relief this to the overburdened spirit; above all a sweet alleviation for unhappy women, whom this terrible dogma of the torture of their loved ones kept for ever weeping and uncomforted, their whole life one long-drawn moan of horror.

 

The Sibyl was pondering the master's words when a small, light step makes itself heard. The day is barely dawning yet,--after Christmas Day, getting on for the New Year. Tripping over the crackling, frosty grass, a small woman, with fair face and yellow hair, draws near with trembling limbs; reaching the door, she sinks fainting on the threshold, scarce able to breathe. Her black dress proclaims plainly enough she is a widow. Medea's piercing look strikes her nerveless and speechless; yet is her story manifest, no mystery left unrevealed in all her shrinking form. Then the Sorceress in confident tones, "Dumb, little one? Yet, what need to speak,--and you would never find words to tell. I will say it for you. . . . Well, then, you are dying for love!" Recovering some little presence of mind, clasping her hands, all but falling to her knees, she makes her confession, avowing everything. She had suffered and wept and prayed,--and all without a word. But those Christmas merry-makings, those family reunions at the festive season, the ill-concealed satisfaction of happy wives pitilessly flaunting a sanctioned love, brought back the old cruel smart to her heart. . . . Alack! what should she do? . . . If only he could come back to comfort her for an instant! "I would give my life for the boon . . . let me die, if I may but see him once again!"

"Go back to your house, and shut the door close. Draw the shutter too against prying neighbours. Quit your mourning weeds and put on your wedding dress. Lay his place at table; yet he will not come. Sing the song he made for you, and sang so often; yet he will not come. Draw from the chest the coat he wore last and kiss it, and say, 'The worse for you, the worse for you, if you

[p. 68]

refuse to come!' And without an instant's tarrying, drink this wine ('tis bitter, but a sovran sleeping-draught) and lay you down in the bridal bed. Then, have no fear, he will come."

She would not have been a woman, if she had not next morning, glowing with soft happiness, whispered the miracle softly in the ear of her bosom friend. "Not a word of it to any, I beseech you. . . . But he told me himself, if I wear this dress, and sleep without once waking, every Sunday night he will come back to me."

A happiness not without sore risk! What would happen the venturesome woman, if the Church found out she was a widow no longer? that, raised up by love, the spirit of her mate comes back to comfort his forlorn wife?

A most unusual thing, the secret is well kept! The word goes round among her friends and neighbours never to betray a mystery so tender. Indeed, it concerns them one and all; for who is there has not suffered, who is there has not wept tears of bereavement? Who but sees with joy unspeakable this bridge built to connect the two worlds of life and death?

"Oh, good, kind Sorceress! . . . Good Spirit of the Depths! blessings, blessings on you both!"

Footnotes

^62:1 This ray does shine to some extent in the Immortalite and the Foi Nouvelle of Dumesnil; Ciel et Terre by Reynaud, Henri Martin, and others.

     The Sorceress, by Jules Michelet, [1939], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 69]

  

8

  

PRINCE of NATURE

THE winter is hard, long, and dismal in the gloomy north-west. Even after it seems well ended, it suffers relapses, like a pain that has been stifled, yet stings afresh and rages intermittently. One morning, and all Nature awakes bedecked with sparkling ice-needles. In this bitter, ironical beauty of a day that sets all living things a-shivering, the vegetable world seems turned to stone, losing all the soft charm of its mobile variety and stiffening in rigid crystals.

Our poor Sibyl, sitting benumbed at her wretched fire of dead leaves, buffeted by the cutting wind, feels her very heart cower under the cruel lash of the weather. Her loneliness oppresses her, but is a tonic too. Her pride is roused, and with it comes a strength that warms her heart and kindles her spirit. Alert, bright, eager, her sight grows keen as the ice-needles themselves; and the world, that world that makes her suffer so, is as transparent to her as glass. She triumphs over it as over a conquered province.

Is she not its queen? Has she not courtiers in plenty to pay her reverence? The ravens are manifestly obedient to her service. In solemn, dignified array they come, like augurs of old times, to tell her the news of the day. The wolves slink by timidly, greeting her with furtive, sidelong looks. The bear (not so uncommon then) will now and then take his seat ponderously, with his heavy, good-natured mien, at the threshold of the cave, like a hermit paying visit to a brother hermit, as we see so often pictured in the Lives of the Thebaid Fathers.

All, birds and beasts that man scarce knows except in connection

[p. 70]

with killing and the chase, all are outlaws like herself. There is a mutual understanding. Is not Satan the outlaw of outlaws? and he gives his followers the joy and wild liberty of all free things of Nature, the rude delight of being a world apart, all-sufficient unto itself.

 

Fierce, keen joys of solitude, all hail! . . . The whole earth seems shrouded in a white winding-sheet, imprisoned under a load of ice, chained down by relentless icicles, all alike, and all sharp and cruel. Especially after 1200 the world was close shut like a transparent sepulchre, where everything stands horribly motionless and, as it were, petrified with cold.

It has been said that "a Gothic church is a complex crystallisation,"--and it is true. About 1300, architecture, sacrificing all it possessed of living variety and graceful caprice, enters into rivalry with the monotonous prisms of the Spitzberg. 'Tis a true and terrible image of the dead city of adamantine crystal, within which a dreadful dogma thinks it has succeeded in burying human life.

But, no matter how strong the supports and buttresses and abutments that sustain the edifice, one thing sets it tottering. Not the noisy batterings from without, but a something soft and yielding in the foundations, something that affects the seemingly unyielding crystal with a gradual, almost imperceptible, thaw. What is it?--the flood of warm human tears a lowly, pitiful world has shed, a sea of weeping? What?--a breath of the future, a mighty, invincible resurrection of the natural life. The fantastic pile, crumbling already in many a joint, groans to itself in tones not devoid of terror, "'Tis the breath of Satan, the breath of Satan."

Picture a glacier on the flank of Hecla, and we shall see a like process. The ice lies over a volcano, not one receding to make sudden and fierce eruption, but for all that a centre of slow heat, gradual, gentle, stealthy in its operation, which warms the icy

[p. 71]

mass caressingly from beneath, whispers it softly to come down,--and down it comes.

 

The Sorceress has good cause for laughter, if from her shade she sees yonder, in the full light of day, how profoundly ignorant of the true facts are Dante and St. Thomas Aquinas. They make out that Satan progresses by dint of terror or cunning. They represent him a grotesque and coarse-minded being, such as he was in his earliest days, when Jesus could still drive him to enter into the herd of swine. Or else, as an alternative, they show him a subtle reasoner, a scholastic logician, a phrase-mongering jurist. If he had been nothing else, only a beast, or else a rhetorician, if his only alternatives had been the mire of the sty, or the vain distinctions of empty logic, he would soon have perished of sheer hunger.

The triumph is too easy a one when they show him us in Bentolo, pleading against the Virgin, who soon has him nonplussed, condemned, and cast in costs. It is presently discovered that here on this earth precisely the opposite is what really happens. By a supreme effort and final success he wins over his adversary herself--his fair adversary, woman--seducing her by an argument that is no mere play of words, but a living reality, entrancing and irresistible. He lays in her hand the precious fruit of Science and of Nature.

No call for so much disputation, no need for special pleading; he has only to show himself, the embodiment of the "gorgeous East," a veritable Paradise Regained. From Asia, that men thought they had abolished, rises a new dawn of incomparable splendour, whose rays strike far, very far, till they pierce the heavy mists of the West. Here is a world of nature and art that brute ignorance had called accursed, but which now starts forth to conquer its conquerors in a peaceful war of love and maternal charm. All men yield to the spell; all are fascinated, and will have nothing that is not from Asia. The Orient showers her

[p. 72]

wealth upon us; the webs, and shawls, and carpets of exquisite softness and cunningly blended colours of her looms, the keen, flashing steel of her damascened blades, convince us of our own barbarism. But far more than this, the accursed lands of the infidel, where Satan holds domain, possess, in sign manifest of Heaven's blessing, the best products of all Nature, the very elixir of the creative powers of God, the first of vegetables and the first of beasts,--coffee and the Arab steed. Nay! beside this, a whole world of treasures,--silk, and sugar, and all the best of wonder-working herbs that cheer men's hearts, and console and soften their woes.

Towards the year 1300 all this comes to a head. Spain herself, won back by the barbarous Goths, yet ever dreaming of the Moors and Jews of old, testifies for her heathen conquerors of an earlier day. Wherever the Mussulmans, those sons of Satan, are at work, all is prosperity, water-springs bursting from the soil, and the earth all carpeted with flowers. Under the stimulus of good, honest, happy work, the land is glorified with those wondrous vines that make men forget their griefs and recover their serenity, seeming to drink in with the noble liquor happiness itself and Heaven's sweet compassion.

 

When Satan offers the brimming cup of life and happiness, in all this world of fasting mankind, is there one being of sanity strong enough, where sanity is so rare, to receive all this without giddiness, without intoxication, without a risk of losing self-control?

Is there a brain, that not being petrified, crystallised in the barren dogmas of Aquinas, is still free to receive life, and the vigorous sap of life? Three Wizards [*1] essay the task; by innate vigour of mind, they force their way to Nature's source; but bold and intrepid as their genius is, it has not, it cannot have, the adaptability, the power, of the popular spirit. So Satan has re-

[p. 73]

course to his old ally, Eve. Woman is the one thing left in the world most replete with nature. She has never lost certain aspects of roguish innocence that mark the kitten and the precocious child. In virtue of this side of her character, she is better adapted, more congruous, to the comedy of human life here below, more fitted for the great game the universal Proteus is about to play.

But how light-minded, how fickle-hearted is woman, so long as she is not struck serious, steadied by grief! Our lady of the heath, outlaw from society, rooted in her savage waste, at any rate gives us something to take hold of. Remains to be seen whether chafed and embittered, her heart full of hate and venom, she will back to nature and the soft pleasant ways of life? If she does, it will for sure be harshly and inharmoniously, often by round-about ways of ill. She is wild and fierce and rough, from the very fact of her utter helplessness amid the welter of the storm.

When from the genial warmth of springtide, from the air, from the depths of earth, from flowers and their voiceless tongues, the new revelation rises round her on every side, she is at first seized with giddiness. Her bosom swells nigh to bursting; the Sibyl of knowledge has her ordeal, as her sisters had, the Cumaean, the Delphic Sibyl. Pedants may declare, "It is the Aura, the air merely that fills her to bursting, and that is all. Her lover, the Prince of the Air, puffs her out with fancies and lies, wind, smoke, and infinite emptiness," but they are wrong and their simile absurdly mistaken. The truth is just the opposite; the cause of her intoxication is that no emptiness at all, but reality, actuality, definite form and substance, have taken shape over-suddenly in her bosom.

 

Have you ever seen the Agave, that rude, harsh native of the African plains, spiky, bitter, sharp-thorned, with pointed spears instead of leaves? This Aloe  and dies every ten years. One morning, the wondrous flower-shoot, so long growing silently and

[p. 74]

voluptuously within the rude exterior of the plant, bursts forth with a sound like a gunshot and soars heavenward,--a veritable tree in itself, full thirty feet high, encrusted with sad-looking blossoms.

Something analogous is experienced by the gloomy Sibyl, when one morning of spring, a late, and for that very reason a more vigorously fecundating spring, all round her burst the infinite explosion of new life.

And all this reacts on her, is done for her sake. For each creature whispers low, "I am for that being that has comprehended me."

The contrast! . . . She, bride of the desert and black despair, fed on hate and vengeance, lo! she finds all these innocent creatures inviting her to smile. The trees, bending before the south wind, do her gentle reverence. All the grasses of the field, with their divers virtues, perfumes, healing drugs or poisons (more often than not one and the same thing), offer themselves, murmuring, "Gather me, gather me!"

Everything speaks manifestly and by invisible signs of love. "'Tis all a mockery surely! . . . I had been ready prepared for Hell, but not for this strange festival. . . . Spirit, dread Spirit, are you indeed the Spirit of terror I have known, the cruel trace of whose passage I can still feel (though I scarce know what it is I really feel), the wound that burns still within me? . . .

"Nay! it is no more the Spirit I longed for in my frenzied rage, 'He that pronounces the everlasting No.' Here I find him cooing a soft Yes of love and sweet intoxication and giddy joy. . . . What means it? Can he be the wild, the reckless, startled soul of life and its delights?

"They said great Pan was dead. But lo! he is here, living in Bacchus, in Priapus, grown impatient at the long tarrying of desire,--menacing, burning, fecundating. . . . No! no! away with the cup from my lips. Mayhap I should but be drinking the troubled dregs therein; mayhap but a bitter despair the more to add to my fixed despair!"

[p. 75]

Meanwhile, wherever the woman appears, she is the sole and only object of love. All follow her, all for her sake scorn the females of their own kind. Why speak in particular of the black he-goat, her so-called favourite? The feeling is universal, common to one and all. The stallion neighs for her, breaks from all restraint, imperils her safety. The dreaded lord of the plains, the black bull, if she passes him, bellows his right to see her vanish in the distance. Nay, the very birds of the air swoop to her feet, and deserting their kind, with fluttering wings make her overtures of their love.

Her grim lord and master's domination has taken a new and unexpected form. By a fantastic transformation he is changed of a sudden from King of the Dead, as men deemed him, to King of Life.

"Nay!" she cries; "leave me my hate. I asked this, and nothing more. Let me be feared, an object of dread. . . . Fear is the stigma of my beauty--the beauty that accords best with the snaky blackness of my elf-locks, with my features furrowed by anguish and blasted by the lightning flash. . . ." But here sovereign Evil hisses in her ear in low, insidious whispers, "All! but you are more beautiful than ever, more moving in your frenzied passion! . . . Shout, curse! 'Tis a spur to desire. Deep calls to deep. Steep and slippery and swift is the path from rage to voluptuous delight!"

 

Neither anger nor pride were to save her from these seductions. Her safety came from the immensity, the infinitude of her desire. No single passion would suffice. Each single life is limited, weak and impotent. Away, courser of the plains! away, bull of the prairies! away, ardours of the feathered tribe! Away, feeble creatures! of what avail are ye to one that craves the infinite?

She feels a woman's overmastering caprice. And what is the object of her caprice? Why, the All, the great, the illimitable All of the universe at large.

Satan had failed to foresee this prodigious longing, a longing

[p. 76]

that could find appeasement with no single living creature.

This was something beyond even his powers, a mysterious impulse without a name, without a possibility of realisation. Yielding to these vast, unbounded aspirations, deep and limitless as the ocean, she falls softly asleep; losing all memory of past wrongs and suffering, all thoughts of hate and vengeance, in involuntary, as it were reluctant, innocence, she lies wrapt in slumber on the herbage, as any other tender creature--a lamb, a dove--might have done, her limbs relaxed, her bosom open to the heaven,--loved, but I cannot, I dare not, say loving.

So she slept and dreamed . . . a beautiful, a wonderful dream. She dreamed--'tis a thing hard to set down in words--how a wondrous monster, the genius incarnate of life universal, was absorbed in her; she dreamed that henceforth Life and Death and all Nature were shut within her body, that at the cost of, oh! what infinite travail, she had conceived in her womb great Nature's self.

Footnotes

^72:1 Albertus Magnus, Roger Bacon, Arnold of Villeneuve--the last-named discoverer of the art of distilling spirit from the grape.

     The Sorceress, by Jules Michelet, [1939], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 77]

  

9

  

SATAN the HEALER

THE silent, sombre drama of the Bride of Corinth is repeated literally and exactly from the thirteenth to the fifteenth centuries. In the gloom of night which still broods over the world, the two lovers, Man and Nature, meet again and embrace with transports of joy; and lo! at the self-same instant, to their horror, see themselves smitten with appalling scourges! Still, as of old, we seem to hear the bride telling her lover, "All is over. . . . Your locks shall be white to-morrow. . . . I am a dead woman, and you shall die."

Three horrid afflictions in three successive centuries. In the first, the loathsome disfigurement of the outward form,--skin diseases, leprosy. In the second, an inward curse,--weird nervous excitations, epileptic dances. These die down, but the blood grows tainted, chronic ulcerations pave the way to syphilis, that scourge of the sixteenth century.

 

The diseases of the Middle Ages, so far as we can get vague and unsatisfactory glimpses of them, were predominantly hunger, languor, and poverty of blood, the emaciation men admire in mediaeval sculpture. The blood was thin as water, and scrofulous complaints were bound to be all but universal. With the exception of Arab or Jewish physicians, hired at great cost by the rich, medical treatment was unknown,--the people could only crowd to the church doors for aspersion with holy water. On Sundays, after Mass, the sick came in scores, crying for help,--and words were all they got: "You have sinned, and God is afflicting you. Thank Him; you will suffer so much the less torment in the life

[p. 78]

to come. Endure, suffer, die. Has not the Church its prayers for the dead?" Feeble, fainting, neither hoping nor caring to live, they followed this advice to the letter, and dropped into the grave in sheer indifference to life.

A fatal despair, a wretched death in life, that could not but prolong indefinitely these times of lead, and constitute a fatal bar to all progress. What could be worse than this facile resignation, this docile acceptance of death, this impotence and total absence of energy and aspiration? Better far the new epoch, those last years of the Middle Ages, which at the price of atrocious sufferings, at last inaugurates for mankind the possibility of renewed activity,--the resurrection of desire.

 

The Arab philosopher Avicenna maintains that the prodigious outbreak of diseases of the skin which marks the thirteenth century resulted from the use of those excitants whereby men at that period sought to awake, or to revive, the flagging energies of love. No doubt the hot, inflammatory spices, imported from the East, were not without effect; while the newly discovered art of distillation and various fermented liquors then first coming into use may likewise have exerted an influence in the same direction.

But another and a mightier fermentation, and a much more general one, was taking place. From the bitter internal conflict of two worlds and two spirits a third survived which silenced them both. Waning Faith, nascent Reason were in the death grip; between the two combatants another intervened and mastered mankind,--the unclean, fierce spirit of their eager, passionate appetites, the cruel emanation of their furious ebullition.

Finding no outlet, whether in bodily gratifications or in a free play of mind, the sap of life is dammed back and putrefies. Without light or voice or speech, it yet spoke in pains of body, in foul eruptions of the skin. Then a new and terrible thing follows; baulked desire, unsatisfied and unappeased, sees itself checked

[p. 79]

by a cruel spell, a hideous metamorphosis. [*1] Love that was drawing nigh, blindly, with arms thrown wide, steps back shuddering. Yes! love may fly; but the fury of the tainted blood persists, the flesh burns in agonising, itching torments, while more agonising still, the inward conflagration rages, fanned by the breath of despair.

What remedy does Christian Europe find for this double evil? Death, captivity; nothing else is better. When bitter celibacy, hopeless love, fierce thwarted passion, bring you to an unhealthy, morbid state; when your blood grows corrupt, down with you into an in pace, or build your lonely cabin in the desert. You shall live, warning-bell in hand, that all may flee your presence. "No human being must see you; no consolation can be yours. If you approach too near, death is the penalty!"

 

Leprosy is the last degree, the apogee, of the scourge; but a thousand other terrible and cruel ills only less hideous abound everywhere. The purest and the fairest of womankind were stricken with detestable eruptions that were looked upon as the visible sign of sin or a direct punishment from God. The men had recourse to means mere loss of life would never have led them to adopt; prohibitions were forgotten, and the old consecrated medicines forsaken, and the holy water that had proved so useless. They visited the Witch, the Sorceress. From force of habit, as

[p. 80]

well as from fear, they still frequented the churches; but the true church was henceforth her hut, her haunt in heath, in forest, and in desert. Thither it was they now carried their prayers.

Prayers for healing, prayers for some joy of life. At the first symptoms that showed the blood corrupted, they would away in great secrecy, at furtive hours, to consult the Sibyl: "What must I do? What is this I feel within me? . . . I am burning; oh! give me something to calm my blood. . . . I am burning; give me something to appease my intolerable longing."

A bold, guilty step they repent them of when evening comes. It must indeed be pressing, this new and fatal constraint; the fire must indeed be agonising, to make all the saints so utterly of no avail. But then the trial of the Knights Templars, the trial of Pope Boniface, have unmasked the Sodom that lurked under the altar stones. A Pope a Sorcerer, a friend of Satan, and finally carried off by the Foul Fiend: this turns all men's notions upside down. Not without the Devil's help surely could the Pope, who is no longer Pope in Rome, in his city of Avignon, Pope John XXII., a cobbler's son of Cahors, amass more gold than the Emperor himself and all the kings of the earth! Like Pope, like Bishop; did not Guichard, Bishop of Troyes, win a boon of the Devil, the death of the King of France's daughters? . . . It is not death we ask for, but pleasant things, life, health, beauty, pleasure,--things of God, that God refuses us. . . . Well, then, suppose we were to get them by the favour of the Prince of this World? 

 

That great and puissant doctor of the Renaissance, Paracelsus, when he burned the wise books of ancient medicine en masse, Greek, Jewish, and Arab, declared he had learned nothing at all but from popular medicine, from the good women, [*2] from shepherds, and hangmen. The latter were often clever surgeons,--setters of broken or dislocated bones, and accomplished farriers.

I have little doubt but that his admirable book, so full of

[p. 81]

genius, upon the Diseases of Women, the first ever written on this important, profound, and touching subject, owed its special merits to the experience of women themselves, those women whose help their sisters were used to appeal to,--I mean the Sorceresses who in every country fulfilled the office of midwives. No woman in those days would ever have consulted a male physician, trusted to him, or told him her secrets. Sorceresses were the only observers in this field, and, for women in particular, were the sole and only practitioners.

 

The most certain fact we know as to their methods is that they made great use, for the most various purposes, as calmants and as stimulants, of a wide family of herbs, of doubtful repute and perilous properties, which proved of the most decided advantage to their patients. These are appropriately known as the Solanaceae (herbs of consolation). [*3]

A profuse and familiar family of plants, the majority of whose species are to be found in extreme abundance, under our feet, in the hedgerows, in every field. So numerous a family, that a single one of its genera embraces eight hundred species. [*4] Nothing in the world easier to detect, nothing commoner. Yet these herbs are for the most part very risky to employ. Audacity was required to determine the doses, it may well be the audacity of genius.

To begin at the bottom of the ascending scale of their

[p. 82]

potency. [*5] The first to be named are simply pot-herbs, good to eat, and nothing more,--aubergines, tomatoes, inappropriately called love-apples. Others of these harmless varieties are the quintessence of all that is calming and soothing,--the mulleins (shepherd's club), for instance, so useful for fomentations.

Next in the scale you will find a plant already open to suspicion--one that many believed a poison; a herb honey-sweet at first, afterwards bitter, that seems to say in the words of Jonathan, "I have tasted a little honey, and behold! for this I die." Yet this death is useful--it is the deadening of pain. The bittersweet, that is its name, was bound to be the first essay of a bold homoeopathy, which by slow degrees aspired to the most dangerous poisons. The slight irritation, the pricking sensations it produces, sufficed to point it out as a remedy for the predominant maladies of the period, viz. diseases of the skin.

The fair girl, in despair at seeing herself marked with hateful blotches, carbuncles, spreading eruptions, came weeping for succour in her affliction. With married women the scourge was still more cruel. The bosom, the most delicate thing in all nature, and its vessels, which form an interlaced flower of incomparable perfection below the skin, [*6] is, by virtue of its liability to congestion and blocking of the veins and arteries, the most exquisite instrument of pain,--pain keen, pitiless, and never ceasing. How willingly would she have welcomed any and every poison to gain relief! No stopping to bargain with the Witch who promised a

[p. 83]

cure, and between whose hands she was ready at once to place the poor painful, swollen organ.

After the bitter-sweet, too feeble a medicament for such a case, came the black mulleins, possessing a somewhat greater activity. This would afford relief for a day or two. But at the end of that time the poor woman would be back again with tears and supplications. "Well, well! you must return once more this evening. . . . I will find you something. You decide to have it; but 'tis a deadly poison."

 

The Sorceress was running a terrible risk. Nobody at that time had a suspicion that, applied externally or taken in very small doses, poisons are remedies. All the plants which were confounded together under the name of Witches' herbs were supposed ministers of death. Found in a woman's hands, they would have led to her being adjudged a poisoner or fabricator of accursed spells. A blind mob, as cruel as it was timid, might any morning stone her to death, or force her to undergo the ordeal by water or noyade. Or, worst and most dreadful fate of all, they might drag her with ropes to the church square, where the clergy would make a pious festival of it, and edify the people by burning her at the stake.

She makes the venture for all that, and starts in search of the fearsome herb, slipping out late at night or early in the morning, when she is less afraid of being observed. But a little shepherd lad was there, who tells the village, "If you had seen her as I did, gliding among the fallen stones of the old ruin, glancing from side to side, muttering some unintelligible gibberish to herself the while! . . . Oh, I was rarely frightened, I tell you. . . . If she had caught me, I should have been done for. . . . She might have turned me into a lizard, or a toad, or a bat. . . . She gathered a villainous-looking herb, the ugliest I ever saw,--a pale, sickly yellow, with stripes of black and red, like flames of hell-fire. The dreadful thing was that all the stem was hairy, like a man's hair,--long, black, snaky hair. She tore it up roughly,

[p. 84]

with a groan,--and in an instant I lost sight of her. She could not have run so fast, she must have flown away! . . . What an awful woman! What a danger for all the countryside!"

Doubtless the plant looks terrifying. It is the henbane (hyoscyamus), a cruel and deadly poison, but at the same time an excellent emollient, a soothing, sedative plaster, that relaxes and softens the tissues, relieves the pain, and often cures the patient.

Another of these poisons, the belladonna, doubtless so named out of gratitude, was sovran for calming the convulsions that sometimes occur in childbirth, superadding peril to peril and terror to terror at this supreme crisis. But there! a motherly hand would slip in this soothing poison, [*7] lull the mother to sleep, and lay a spell on the door of life; the infant, just as at the present day when chloroform is administered, worked out its own freedom by its own efforts, and forced its way to the world of living men.

 

This belladonna cures the convulsive dancing of the limbs by setting up another dance,--a venturesome homoeopathy that could not but be terrifying at the first blush. In fact it was Medicine spelt backwards, as a rule the exact opposite of that which the Christians knew and thought the only efficacious kind, the medicine of the Jews and Arabs.

How came the great discovery? No doubt by simple application of the great satanic principle that everything should be done backwards, precisely in the reverse way to that employed by the world of religion. The Church had a holy horror of all poisons; Satan utilises them as curative agents. The Priest thinks by spiritual means (Sacraments, prayers) to act even upon the body. Satan, acting by contraries, employs material means for acting even on the soul; he gives potions to secure forgetfulness, love, reverie, any and every state of mind. To priestly benedictions he

[p. 85]

opposes magnetic passes by dainty female hands that lull pain and anguish to sleep.

 

Through change of treatment, and still more of clothing (no doubt by the substitution of linen for wool), skin diseases lost much of their virulence. Leprosy diminished, but at the same time seemed to strike inwards and produce more deep-seated mischief. The fourteenth century oscillated between three scourges, epileptic convulsions, the plague, and those ulcerations which, if we are to believe Paracelsus, paved the way for syphilis.

The first named was by no means the least formidable danger. It broke out about the year 1350, under the appalling form of St. Guy's dance (St. Vitus's dance, chorea), having this strange peculiarity, that the complaint was not, so to speak, individual; those suffering from it, as if carried away by one and the same galvanic current, would grasp each other by the hand, group themselves in huge, endless chains, and whirl, and whirl, like Dervishes, till they died of exhaustion. The spectators would roar with laughter at first, then presently caught by the contagion, would give in and join the mighty stream, and swell the awful band of dancing maniacs.

What would have happened if the malady had persisted in the same way as leprosy did for a long period, even in its decline?

The answer is, it was a first step, an approximation, towards epilepsy; and if this first generation of sufferers had not been cured, it would have produced a second definitely and distinctly epileptic. The imagination shudders at the thought! all Europe packed with madmen, maniacs, idiots! We are not told how the complaint was treated, and finally arrested. The particular remedy recommended at the time, the expedient of falling on the dancers with kicks and fisticuffs, was infinitely well adapted to aggravate the cerebral disturbance and lead to actual epilepsy.

We cannot doubt there was another treatment practised that was never voluntarily mentioned. At the period when Sorcery and Witchcraft were at their point of highest activity and repute,

[p. 86]

the very extensive employment of the Solanaceae, and especially of belladonna, was the most marked general characteristic of the remedial measures taken to combat this class of disease. At the great popular gatherings, the Witches' Sabbaths, we shall describe later, the Witches' herb, infused in hydromel, beer, as well as in cider [*8] and perry, the strong drinks of the West, set the crowd dancing,--but in wanton, luxurious measures, showing no trace of epileptic violence.

 

But the greatest revolution the Sorceress brought about, the chief movement of all in contradiction, in direct contradiction to the spirit of the Middle Ages, is what we might well call a rehabilitation of the belly and its digestive functions. They boldly proclaimed the doctrine that "nothing is impure and nothing unclean." From that moment the study of physical science was enfranchised, its shackles loosed, and true medicine became a possibility.

That they carried the principle to mischievous lengths no one can deny; indeed, the fact is self-evident. Nothing is impure but moral evil. Everything physical is pure; nothing physical can properly be excepted from examination and study, prohibited in deference to an empty idealism, or worse still a silly feeling of repulsion.

Here above all had the Middle Ages displayed their most essential characteristic, what we may call anti-Nature, splitting up the unity of created things, and drawing distinctions, constituting castes, classes, hierarchies. Not only according to this is the spirit noble, the body not noble,--but there are actually particular parts of the body which are noble, and others not,--plebeian it would appear. Similarly, Heaven is noble, the Abyss not. Why? "Because heaven is high." But heaven is neither high nor low; it is above us and beneath us at once. And the Abyss, what is it? Nothing; a figment of the imagination. The same

[p. 87]

foolish conceptions as to the macrocosm of the universe and the microcosm of the individual human being.

All is of a piece; solidarity rules throughout. The belly is the servant of the brain, and feeds it; but it is no less true that the brain, working ceaselessly to make the sugar required in the processes of digestion, [*9] is no less active to assist the belly.

 

Abuse was lavished upon them; filthy, indecent, shameless, immoral, were only some of the epithets levelled at the Sorceress. For all that it can confidently be affirmed her first steps in the direction indicated were a happy revolution in all that is most moral, in kindness and human charity. By a monstrous perversion of ideas, the Middle Ages regarded the flesh, in its representative, woman (accursed since Eve), as radically impure. The Virgin, exalted as virgin, and not as Our Lady, far from raising actual womanhood to a higher level, had degraded it, starting men on the path of a barren, scholastic ideal of purity that only led to ever greater and greater absurdities of verbal subtlety and false logic.

Woman herself even came eventually to share the odious prejudice and to believe herself unclean. So she lurked in hiding at the hour of childbirth, blushed to love and give happiness to men. Woman, so sober as a rule in comparison with the opposite sex, who in almost every land is a vegetarian and an eater of fruits, who sacrifices so sparingly to the natural appetites, and by her milk and vegetable diet wins the purity of the innocent substances that are her food, she of all others was fain to ask pardon almost for existing at all, for living and fulfilling the conditions of life. A submissive martyr to false modesty, she was for ever torturing herself, actually endeavouring to conceal, abolish, and annul the adorable sign of her womanhood, that thrice holy thing, the belly of her pregnancy, whence man is born in the image of God everlastingly from generation to generation.

[p. 88]

Mediaeval medicine concerns itself exclusively with the superior, the pure being (to wit, man), who alone can be ordained priest, and incarnate the living God upon the altar.

Animals, too, occupy some of its attention; indeed, it begins with them. But does it ever think of children? Very seldom. Does it pay any heed to women? Never!

The Romances of those days, with their subtle refinements, represent the exact opposite of the everyday world. Apart from the courts of kings, and high-born adultery, the main subject-matter of these tales, woman is always the poor, patient Griselda, born to exhaust every sort of pain and humiliation, often beaten, never properly cared for.

The Devil only, woman's ally of old and her confidant in the Garden, and the Witch, the perverse creature who does everything backwards and upside down, in direct contradiction to the world of religion, ever thought of unhappy womanhood, ever dared to tread custom underfoot and care for her health in spite of her own prejudices. The poor creature held herself in such lowly estimation! She could only draw back blushing shyly, and refuse to speak. But the Sorceress, adroit and cunning, guessed her secrets and penetrated her inmost being. She found means to make her speak out at last, drew her little secret from her and overcame all her refusals and timid, shamefaced hesitations. Submit to treatment! She would sooner die, she said. But the barbarous Witch knew better, and saved her life.

Footnotes

^79:1 Leprosy was supposed due to the Crusades, to be an importation from Asia; but as a matter of fact Europe had only herself to thank for the scourge. The war persistently waged by the Middle Ages against the flesh and against cleanliness was bound to bear fruit. More than one female saint is commended for having never washed even the hands;--how much less the rest of the body! An instant's nakedness would have been a mortal sin. The worldling faithfully follows these precepts of the cloister. The society of those days, so subtle and refined, which makes sacrifice of marriage and appears animated only by the poetry of adultery, retains singular scruples on this simple point of personal ablutions, dreading every form of purification as a defilement. Never a bath known for a thousand years! We may be quite certain not one of those knights, those fair and ethereal ladies, the Percivals, Tristrams, Iseults, ever washed. Hence a cruel accident, highly unpoetical in such romantic surroundings,--the furious itches that tortured our thirteenth-century ancestors.

^80:2 The polite, flattering name fear conferred upon the Sorceresses.

^81:3 It is cruel to note the ingratitude of mankind. A thousand other plants have usurped their place, a hundred exotic herbs have been preferred by fashion, while these poor, humble Solanaceae that saved so many lives in former days have been clean forgotten with all the benefits they conferred. Who indeed has any memory for such things? Who recognises the time-honoured obligations men owe to innocent nature? The Asclepias acida, or Sarcostemma (flesh-plant), which for five thousand years was the consecrated host of Asia, the palpable god-made flesh of all that continent, which gave five hundred millions of the human race the blessedness of eating their god, the same plant that the Middle Ages knew as the Poison-killer (Vincevenenum), has never a word of recognition in our books of botany. Who knows but two thousand years hence mankind will have forgotten the virtues of wheat? See Langlois, on the soma of India, and the hom of Persia (Mem. de l'Academie des Inscriptions, xix. 326).

^81:4 Dict. d'Histoire Naturelle of M. d'Orbigny; article Morelles (Nightshades), by M. Duchartre, after Demal, etc.

^82:5 I have not been able to find this scale detailed in any work I have consulted. It is the more important, inasmuch as the witches who undertook this series of experiments, at the risk of being branded as poisoners, undoubtedly began with the weakest, and advanced little by little to the more powerful. Thus each degree of potency gives a relative date, and allows us to establish in this very obscure subject an approximative chronology. I propose to say more of this in the following chapters, when I come to speak of the Mandragora and the Datura. I have followed particularly Pouchet, Solanees et Botanique generale (Solanaceae and General Botany). In this important monograph M. Pouchet has not disdained to draw from the ancient writers, Matthiole, Porta, Gessner, Sauvages, Gmelin, etc.

^82:6 See plate in that excellent and quite inoffensive work, the Cours de Physiologie of M. Auzouz.

^84:7 Madame La Chapelle and M. Chaussier have returned to these practices of old-fashioned popular medicine with great advantage to their patients (Pouchet, Solanees, p. 64).

^86:8 Then quite a new beverage. It first began to be manufactured in the twelfth century.

^87:9 This is the great discovery that makes Claude Bernard's name immortal.

     The Sorceress, by Jules Michelet, [1939], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 89]

  

10

  

CHARMS and LOVE POTIONS

DO not conclude too hastily from what I have said in the preceding chapter that my purpose is to whitewash, to clear of all blame whatever, the gloomy bride of the Evil One. She often effected good, but was equally capable of grievous mischief. Great and irresponsible power is always liable to abuse; and in this case she queened it in a very true sense for three long centuries during the interregnum between two worlds, the old dying world and the new one whose dawn was still faint on the horizon. The Church, destined later on to recover something of its vigour (at any rate as a fighting force) in the struggles of the sixteenth century, is still wallowing in the mire in the fourteenth. Read the convincing picture of its condition given us by Clemangis. The nobility, swaggering in novel and sumptuous forms of defensive armour, meets only the more dismal disaster at Crecy and Poitiers and Agincourt. The French nobles prisoners in England! What an opportunity for the scoffers! Bourgeoisie, even peasantry, are dissolved in mocking laughter, and shrug contemptuous shoulders. This general and compulsory absenteeism of the seigneurs afforded no small encouragement, in my opinion, to the Witches' Sabbaths. These had always existed, but under the new conditions they grew into huge popular festivals.

Think of the power wielded by Satan's Chosen Bride! She can heal, prophesy, predict, conjure up the spirits of the dead, can spell-bind you, turn you into a hare or a wolf, make you find a treasure, and most fatal gift of all, cast a love charm over you there is no escaping! Awful attribute, more terrible than all the

[p. 90]

rest put together! How should a headstrong spirit, more often than not a wounded spirit, sometimes one altogether soured by disappointment, fail to use such a weapon for the satisfaction of hatred and revenge, and sometimes for the indulgence of perverse and foul proclivities?

The secrets of the Confessional were no secrets to her,--secrets of sins committed and of sins to come. Every man is her slave by her knowledge of some shameful incident of his past, and his still viler aspirations for the future. She is the confidante of deformities of body and of mind, and of the lascivious ardours of a poisoned and heated blood, of morbid, overmastering longings that fiercely torment the flesh with a thousand needle-pricks of concupiscence.

All come to her and make her their shameful avowals with a reckless and brutal candour. They seek the boon of life, of death, of healing medicines and poisonous drugs. To her comes the poor weeping girl who has been betrayed, to ask means for procuring abortion. To her the stepmother (an incident of the commonest in the Middle Ages) to complain how her first husband's brat eats and eats and will not die. To her the woe-begone matron, worn out year after year with children that are only born to die. Appealing to her compassion, she is told the way to paralyse pleasure at the supreme instant and make it barren. On the other hand, there comes a stripling, ready at any cost to buy the sovran brew that will trouble a high-born lady's heart, and making her forget distinctions of rank and place, turn her gentle looks towards her little page.

 

The marriage of the period has only two types or forms, both of them extravagant and outre.

The proud "heiress of broad lands," who brings a dowry, a throne, or a rich fief, an Eleanor of Guyenne, will maintain under her very husband's nose, her court of lovers, and will do very much what she pleases. Leaving on one side romance and poetry,

[p. 91]

let us look the facts in the face. The reality is terrible enough, culminating in the wild orgies of the daughters of Philippe le Bel, and the excesses of the cruel Isabella, who had her husband, Edward II., impaled by her lovers' hands. The effrontery of the feudal dame comes out in a devilish fashion in the two-horned headdress of state occasions, and other shameless modes of dress.

But in this century when the classes begin to intermix to some degree, the woman of inferior origin who wedded a baron had good reason to fear harsh treatment. This is shown in the story, perfectly true and authentic, of Griselda, the lowly, gentle, patient Griselda. The tale, quite serious and historical in my own belief, of "Blue Beard" gives the popular form of the same legend. The wife he kills so often and so often replaces can only have been a vassal. There would have been a different tale to tell with the daughter or sister of a baron, in a position to avenge her wrongs. If I am not mistaken in this highly probable conjecture, we must conclude this story to be of the fourteenth century rather than to belong to an earlier period, when a great lord would never have stooped to take a wife beneath him in consequence.

One very remarkable thing in the touching story of Griselda is that under all her trials she appears not to have the consolation either of religion or of another lover. She is manifestly faithful, chaste, and unsullied. It never occurs to her to find comfort in fixing her love elsewhere.

Of these two types of mediaeval women--the Great Heiress on the one hand, Griselda on the other--it is exclusively the former that has her cavalieri servente, that presides at Courts of Love, that favours the humblest of lovers, and (like Eleanor) pronounces the famous dictum, regarded as undisputable in those days: "No love possible betwixt married folk."

Hence a secret hope,--secret, yet ardent and masterful, that springs in many a young heart. End as it may, even in his giving his soul to the Evil One, the young lover will rush head down into the bold emprise. Be the keep guarded ever so well, there will

[p. 92]

always be a loophole for Satan to creep in. The game is perilous indeed; is there the shadow of a chance? Why, no! says Prudence. Ah! but if Satan says "Yes"?

Nor should we forget how great the distance feudal pride set between noble and noble. Words are deceptive; knights were very far from being all alike.

The Knight Banneret, who led a whole army of vassals to join the King in the field, looking down his long table, saw with unmitigated contempt the poor lackland knights who sat at its lower end. This epithet of "lackland" was a mortal insult in mediaeval times, as in the instance of John Sans Terre, John Lackland, of England. How much more so the common varlets, squires, pages, etc., who fattened on the leavings from the high table! Seated at the lower end of the Great Hall, close to the door, they scraped the platters the great folks, sitting by the warm hearth, sent down to them,--often empty. It never even entered the head of the lordly Seigneur that these humble inferiors could have the hardihood to lift their eyes to the fair lady mistress, the proud heiress, sitting there on the dais by her mother's side, "under a chaplet of white roses." While surprisingly ready to condone the advances of some stranger lover, who was the fair chatelaine's avowed champion and wore her colours, he would have punished cruelly one of his own dependants who should have had the audacity to aim so high. This is the explanation of the savage jealousy shown by the Sire de Fayel, angered beyond all bounds, not because his wife had a lover, but because the said lover was one of his own domestics, the seneschal (common caretaker) of his castle of Coucy.

The deeper, the more impassable the gulf fixed between the Lady of the Fief, the great heiress, and squire or page, who had only a shirt to call his own, for his very coat he received from his lord and master,--the stronger, it would seem, was the temptation for Love to overleap the abyss.

The gallant's imagination was fired by the seeming impossibility of success. At length, one day he found himself free to leave

[p. 93]

the fortress; he hurried to the Witch's dwelling to ask her advice and aid. Would a philter avail,--a charm to fascinate the senses? If not, must he make an express pact with the Devil? The awful thought of selling himself to Satan had no terrors for him. "It shall have our best consideration, young sir. Meantime return; you will find there is some change come about already."

 

The change is in himself. A vague, mysterious hope stirs within him; everything shows it in his own despite, the deep glances of his lowered eyes that flash with an uneasy flame. Someone--easy to guess who--is quick to note the symptoms before others; her gentle heart is touched, she throws him a passing word of pity. . . . Oh, joy ineffable! Oh, kind-hearted Satan! charming, adorable Witch-wife! . . .

He cannot eat or sleep till he has been to see her again. He kisses her hand with deepest respect, almost grovels at her feet. Let her ask him what she will, order him what she please, he will obey. Would she have his gold chain, the ring he wears on his finger--his dying mother's gift,--he will give them without an instant's hesitation. But she is naturally spiteful, full of malicious hate for the Baron, and finds it only too delightful to stab him in the dark.

An undefined feeling of impending trouble haunts the castle. A voiceless tempest, without lightning or thunder, broods over it, like an electric cloud on the surface of a swamp. Not a sound to break the silence; but the Lady Chatelaine is overwrought, she is sure some supernatural power has been at work. Why this youth more than another, perhaps handsomer and better bred, and already renowned for noble exploits? There is something surely underneath all this. Has he thrown a spell over her, used a love-charm? . . . The question only stirs her heart to wilder emotion.

 

The Sorceress's spite finds good stuff to feed on. She was always queen of the village; now the castle comes and puts itself

[p. 94]

in her power,--and that just where its pride runs the direst risk of humiliation. For us, the interest of such an intrigue is the gallant effort of a generous heart to attain its ideal, its protest against social barriers and Fate's injustice. For the Sorceress it is the pleasure, deep and keen, of degrading her proud neighbour, perhaps avenging slights of her own, the pleasure of paying back to the Seigneur in the same coin the wrongs he has inflicted on her sister vassals, to indemnify herself, by a lad's audacity, for the outrageous right the Lord of the Soil possesses,--the jus primae noctis. There can be no doubt whatever, in these intrigues where the Sorceress played her part, that she was many a time actuated by an underlying grudge, natural enough to the peasant, who is invariably a leveller at heart.

It was always something gained, and something considerable, to have humiliated the great lady to the love of a domestic. Jean de Saintre and Cherubino must not mislead us. The youthful dependant in a mediaeval castle performed the basest offices of the household. The chamber servant or valet, properly so called, did not yet exist, while on the other hand few serving-women, or none at all, were to be found in fortified places. Every office is performed by these young hands, which are in nowise degraded thereby; service, particularly corporal service, rendered their liege lord and lady only honours and exalts. Nevertheless it could not but place a young nobleman at times in situations decidedly melancholy, prosaic, and we may go as far as to say ridiculous. Little recked the Lord of the Castle. His good lady must verily and indeed have been bewitched by the Devil not to see what her eyes rested on day after day,--her favourite engaged in filthy and menial offices.

 

It is characteristic of the Middle Ages, this bringing face to face of the sublime and the ridiculous. Where poetry is reticent we may glimpse the truth from other quarters. Mingled with these ethereal passions much coarseness of circumstance is very plainly to be seen.

[p. 95]

Everything we learn about the charms and love-potions employed by Witches and Sorceresses shows how fantastic these were,--often wilfully fantastic, shamelessly compounded of substances one would suppose least likely to awake the sentiment of love. These women went to extraordinary lengths, without the infatuated being they were making a plaything of ever having his eyes opened to the truth.

Philters were of many and very different sorts. Some were intended to excite and trouble the senses, like the aphrodisiacs so freely abused to the present day by Eastern peoples. Others were dangerous, and often treacherous, drugs administered to cloud the wits and deprive the victim of all power of self-control. Some, again, were tests or proofs of passion, defiances to try how far the greediness of desire was capable of carrying the senses, making lovers accept as the most supreme of favours, as a sort of mystic communion, the least agreeable of matters coming from the loved one's person.

The rude structure of mediaeval castles, made up as these were of great halls and little else, made a public function of domestic life. It was only reluctantly, as it were, and at a much later date that privacy was consulted by the contrivance of bower and oratory in some tower of the vast pile. It was easy to watch the chatelaine's daily habits; then, on some day chosen for the purpose, after careful observation, the bold pretender, acting on the Witch's suggestion, could strike his blow with every hope of success, drugging the posset and slipping the love-potion in the cup.

Still, it was at best a rare and perilous undertaking. A far easier course was to filch some trifle the fair lady would never miss or give a thought to,--to gather with scrupulous care the almost invisible parings of a nail, to collect reverently the combings of her hair, a strand or two from her lovely head. These were carried to the Sorceress, who would often demand (as do somnambulists of the present day) such and such an article of the most intimate nature, imbued, as it were, with the wearer's

[p. 96]

personality, but which she would never have given of her own free will; for instance, a fragment torn from a garment long worn and soiled which she had moistened with the sweat of her body. All this, remember, smothered with adoring kisses and wistfully regretted. But it must be ruthlessly burned and reduced to ashes to serve the required purpose. One day or another, looking at the garment again, the keen-sighted fair one would notice the tiny rent, would guess its meaning with a tender sigh, but say never a word to betray her knowledge. . . . The charm had taken effect!

 

One thing is certain, that if the lady hesitated, felt some lingering respect for her marriage vow, this life lived within such narrow bounds, where each saw the other so continually, and dividing distances were so short, though so all-important, must soon have grown into a veritable torture. Even where she had yielded, still, in presence of so many observers, her husband and others not less jealous, happiness was doubtless rarely secured. Hence many a piece of frenzied folly, the result of unsatisfied desire. The less actual intercourse was possible, the more profound the longing for a symbolic union. This a morbid fancy sought to find in all sorts of extravagances, equally unnatural and unreasonable. Thus, to create a means of secret intercommunication between two lovers, the Witch would prick out on the arm of each the shapes of the letters of the alphabet. When one wished to transmit a thought to the other, all he had to do was to revive, restore, by sucking the blood to them, the letters forming the word desired. Simultaneously the corresponding letters, so it was believed, on the other's arm were suffused with blood.

Sometimes in these outbursts of mad folly lovers would drink each other's blood, to effect a mystic communion which, it was supposed, made their two souls one. Coucy's heart, devoured by his widow, and which she "found so good, she never ate more in her life," is the most tragic instance of these monstrous sacraments of cannibal affection. But when the absent lover did not

[p. 97]

die, but it was love died within him, then the lady would away to consult a Witch and beseech her for means to bring him back and bind him to her.

The magic incantations of Theocritus and Virgil continued to be used even in the Middle Ages, but were rarely efficacious. The attempt was tried to bring back the recreant lover by another charm, also apparently imitated from an Antique model. Recourse was had to the magic cake, the confarreatio, which from furthest Asia to furthest Europe was ever the sacrament of love. But the aim here was to bind more than the soul,--to bind the flesh, to create an identity of substance, so that, dead to all other women, he should live and breathe for one and one alone. The ordeal was no trifle. "Take it or leave it," was the Witch-wife's answer to all remonstrances; and her proud client grew instantly submissive, and suffered her to strip her to the skin, this being an indispensable condition in all these ceremonies.

What a triumph for the Sorceress! And above all, if the lady was one who had treated her despitefully in former days, what a fine piece of revenge and retaliation! The woman has her lying stark naked under her hands. Nor is this all. On her loins she lays a board, and on it a miniature oven, in which she bakes the magic cake. . . . "Sweet friend, I can bear no more. Quick, quick, I cannot stay like this!" "Nay, madam, 'twas bound to be so; you must needs burn. The cake is a-baking; 'twill be heated of your very body, the hot flame of your passion!"

The rite is ended, and we have the magic cake of antiquity, of Hindoo and Roman marriage, seasoned and hotly spiced with the lewd spirit of Satan. She does not say, like Virgil's sorceress: "Come back, Daphnis, come back to me! Oh, bring him back to me, my songs!" But she sends him the cake, all impregnated with her pain, and heated with her love. . . . Scarce has he bitten it when a strange tumult, a giddiness, confuses his senses. . . . His heart beats wildly, his blood boils, his face is suffused with blushes, his whole body burns. Love's madness seizes him once more, and inextinguishable desire.

     The Sorceress, by Jules Michelet, [1939], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 98]

  

11

  

COMMUNION of REVOLT
 WITCHES' SABBATHS
 The BLACK MASS

WITCHES' Sabbaths. We must use the plural, for it is obvious the word has denoted very different things at different epochs. Unfortunately, we possess detailed accounts of such scenes only of quite late date,--reign of Henri IV. [*1] By that time it had degenerated into little more than a huge carnival of lust, under pretence of magic rites. But even in these descriptions of an institution so far gone in decay are to be found certain marks of extreme antiquity that bear witness to the successive periods and divers forms through which it had already passed.

We may start with one fact that admits of no doubt, that for many centuries the serf lived the furtive life of the wolf and the fox, that he was a nocturnal animal, meaning by this, exhibiting the least activity possible by day, being really alive only at night.

Still, up to the year 1000, when the people is still busy canonising its saints and framing its legends, the life of daylight continues to be of interest to him. His nocturnal Sabbaths are merely

[p. 99]

an unimportant relic of Paganism. He honours and fears the moon, exerting as she does an influence over the productions of the soil. Old women are her devotees, and burn little candles in honour of Dianom (Diana-Luna-Hecate). Goat-footed Pan still chases women and children, under a mask, it is true, the black face of the ghostly Hallequin (Harlequin). The festival of the Pervigilium Veneris is scrupulously observed on May 1st. On St. John's day the he-goat of Priapus-Bacchus-Sabasius is slaughtered in celebration of the Sabasia. All this without a thought of mockery. It is the serf's harmless carnival.

But, as we approach the year 1000, the Church is all but closed against him by difference of language. In 1100 her officers become unintelligible to him. Of the mysteries performed at the church doors, what he remembers best is the comic side, the ox and the ass, etc. He makes carols out of this material, but with an ever-increasing spice of mockery in them--true "Sabbatic" literature.

 

We may well believe the great and terrible revolts of the twelfth century were not without influence on these mysteries and this nocturnal life of Werewolf and Moonrakes, of the Wild Game of the Woods, as the cruel barons style it. These revolts may likely enough have often begun in such moonlight festivals. The Holy Sacraments of insurrection among serfs--drinking each other's blood, or eating earth by way of host [*2]--were doubtless often celebrated at the Witches' Sabbath. The Marseillaise of the period, sung more by night than by day, is perhaps a "Sabbatic chant:--

Nous sommes hommes comme ils sont
 Tout aussi grand coeur nous avons!
 Tout autant souffrir nous pouvons! [*3]

[p. 100]

But the ponderous coffin lid falls back again in 1200. The Pope sits atop, and the King, both exerting enormous pressure, and poor mankind is immured within without hope of escape. Does the old nocturnal life survive? Undoubtedly, and more vigorous than ever. The old Pagan dances are revived, more fast and furious than ever. The Negroes of the Antilles, after an intolerable day of heat and exhausting labour, forgot all their sorrows in moonlight dances. The serf did likewise; but with his revelry were inevitably mingled fierce anticipations of the delights of vengeance, sarcastic buffooneries, mockeries, and caricatures of the lord and the priest. A whole literature of the dark side of nature, that knew never a word of that of its brighter aspects, and little even of the fabliaux of the intermediate bourgeois classes.

 

Such was the essence of the "Sabbath" before 1300. For it to assume, as it did later, the astounding character of an open war against the god of those times, much more was needed, two things in fact, that the lowest depths of despair should be sounded, and that all sense of revenge should disappear.

This consummation is only reached in the fourteenth century, during the Great Schism when the Papacy had migrated to Avignon, and the two-headed Church seemed no longer a Church at all, when all the nobility of France and the King himself are crestfallen prisoners in England, squeezing the uttermost farthing out of their vassals to provide their ransom. Then it is the Sabbaths adopt the imposing and grimly terrible ceremonial of the Black Mass, the Holy Sacrament turned inside out, so to speak, when Jesus Christ is defied, called up to strike his impious worshippers dead--if he can. This devilish piece of play-acting would have been impossible in the thirteenth century, when it would have raised a shudder of pious horror. Later again, in the fifteenth, when every sentiment was outworn, even that of suffering, an outburst of the sort could never have taken place; men's spirits were unequal to so monstrous a creation. It belongs essentially to the century of Dante.

[p. 101]

It was, I hold, the invention of a moment,--the frenzied outbreak of a maddened brain, lifting impiety to the level of popular indignation. To realise what this indignation was, we must remember how the people, brought up by the clergy themselves in the firm belief of the credibility and possibility of miracles, so far from supposing God's laws immutable, had for centuries expected and hoped for a miracle,--that never came. In vain men called for this miraculous intervention in the day of their despair and utmost need. From that hour forth Heaven seemed but the ally of their savage tyrants and oppressors, itself a tyrant as blood-thirsty as any.

Hence the Black Mass and the Jacquerie.

The original framework of the Black Mass was elastic and could find room for a thousand variations of detail; nevertheless it was strongly put together, and in my opinion all of a piece.

I was enabled to retrace the course of this grim drama in 1857 in the Histoire de France, where I recomposed its four successive Acts,--an easy enough task. Only, at that date, I was too lavish in leaving it a superfluity of those grotesque ornaments and after-growths the primitive Witches' Sabbath borrowed from modern times, and failed sufficiently to indicate how much belongs to the old framework, so gloomy and so terrible in its grim simplicity.

 

The date of this general framework is fixed beyond a doubt by sundry abominable characteristics of an accursed age,--as also by the dominant place woman holds in it, a marked peculiarity of the fourteenth century.

It is the special note of this century that woman, very far from being enfranchised as she is, yet reigns as its queen, and this in a hundred rude forms. She inherits fiefs in those days, brings a dowry of kingdoms to the Sovereign. She sits enthroned in this world, and still more in the skies. Mary has supplanted Jesus. St. Francis and St. Dominic beheld the three worlds lying in her gracious bosom. In the immensity of her grace she drowns the

[p. 102]

guilt of sin; what do I say, she abets sin. Read the legend of the nun whose place in choir the Virgin keeps for her, while she goes to see her lover.

In the sublimest heights, in the lowest depths, it is woman, always woman. Beatrice is in heaven, ringed about by the stars, while Jean de Meung, in the Roman de la Rose, is preaching the indiscriminate enjoyment of women. Pure, degraded, woman is everywhere. We may say of her what Raymond Lulle says of God: "What part is He of the Universe? The whole."

But in the skies, in the realm of poetry, the woman that is exalted is not the fertile mother, the parent glorified with children. It is the virgin,--Beatrice, sterile, and dying young.

A fair English damsel, they say, visited France about 1300, to preach the redemption of women, who deemed herself the Messiah of that creed.

 

The Black Mass, in its primary aspect, would seem to be this redemption of Eve from the curse Christianity had laid upon her. At the Witches' Sabbath woman fulfils every office. She is priest, and altar, and consecrated host, whereof all the people communicate. In the last resort, is she not the very God of the Sacrifice as well?

 

There are many popular elements in it all, and yet it does not come solely and entirely from the people. Your peasant respects force and force alone; he holds women in light esteem. This is seen only too plainly in all the old French "Coutumes" (see Michelet's Origines). He would never have given woman the dominant place she here occupies, had she not taken it of her own initiative.

I should be quite ready to believe the Sabbath, in its contemporary shape, was the creation of woman's efforts, of a woman driven to desperation, such as was the Sorceress of those days. In the fourteenth century she sees opening before her a long and terrible career of punishment and torments--three hundred,

[p. 103]

four hundred years lighted up with blazing faggots! Subsequently to the year 1300 her medicines are adjudged to be mischievous, her remedies condemned as poisons. The harmless spells where-by the lepers of that time thought to alleviate their lot lead to the massacre of these unhappy beings. Pope John XXII. has a bishop flayed alive on suspicion of sorcery. Under such a system of blind and indiscriminate repression, to venture little, to venture much and far, is all one, and the risk the same. The very danger incurred increased the Sorceresses' recklessness, and led them to do and dare everything.

 

Fraternity of man with man, defiance of the Christians' heaven, worship of Nature's God under unnatural and perverted forms,--such the inner significance of the Black Mass.

The altar was raised to the Spirit of the revolted serf, "to Him who has suffered wrong, the Proscribed of ancient days, unjustly driven out of Heaven, the Great Creator of the earth, the Master that makes the plants germinate from the soil." Under such titles as these the Luciferians, his adorers, did him honour, and, if we are to credit a not improbable conjecture, the Knights of the Temple likewise.

The great marvel of all, in those times of utter poverty, is that means were forthcoming for the nocturnal feast of fraternity which could never have been provided by day. The Sorceress, at her own sore peril, induced those in better circumstances to contribute, and collected the offerings they made. Charity, as a satanic virtue, being at once crime and conspiracy, and assuming the aspect of revolt, exercised a mighty influence. Men stinted their meals by day to contribute to the nocturnal feast where rich and poor met at a common table.

 

Imagine the scene,--a wide heath, often in the neighbourhood of an old Celtic dolmen, at the edge of a wood. The picture is twofold,--on one side the heath brightly lighted up, and the crowds of people feasting; on the other, towards the wood, the

[p. 104]

choir of this church whose vault is the open heaven. The choir I speak of is a knoll rising somewhat above the surrounding country. Midway between the two, resinous fires burn with yellow tongues of flame and ruddy embers, making a vague, fantastic veil of smoke.

In the background the Sorceress set up her Satan, a great wooden Satan, black and shaggy. In virtue of his horns and the he-goat that stood by his side, he might have passed for Bacchus; but his virile attributes unmistakably proclaimed him Pan and Priapus. A darkling countenance, that each saw under a different aspect. While some beheld only an incarnate terror, others were moved by the haughty melancholy that seemed to enfold the Exile of Eternity. [*4]

 

Act the First. The superb Introit Christianity borrowed of antiquity,--usual at all ceremonies where the people wound in and out in long-drawn file under the temple colonnades, before entering the sanctuary,--this the ancient god, come back to his own again, appropriated for his services. Similarly, the lavabo was copied from the old Pagan rites of purification. All this Satan claimed as his own by right of ancient use.

His Priestess is always The Aged, this being a title of honour, but she may as an actual fact be quite young. Lancre speaks of a Sorceress of only seventeen, a pretty woman and atrociously cruel.

The Devil's Bride must not be a mere child; she should be full thirty years of age, with the face of a Medea and the beauty of Our Lady of Sorrows; her eye deep-set, tragic, and restless, her hair a dark untamable torrent, falling round her shoulders wildly like writhing snakes. Perhaps to crown all, the vervain crown above her brow, the funereal ivy, and the violets of death.

She bids the children stand aloof,--till the feast. The office begins.

[p. 105]

"I will enter in, to this altar. . . . But, Lord, preserve me from the Traitorous and the Overbearing" (the Priest and the Seigneur) .

Then comes the denial of Jesus, homage to the new Master and the feudal kiss, as at the receptions of neophytes by the Templars, where all and everything is yielded without reserve, shame, dignity, or choice,--with this outrageous aggravation of insult added to the repudiation of their God "that they love Satan's backside better."

It is his turn now to consecrate his priestess. The wooden god welcomes her as of old Pan and Priapus did their female adorers. Agreeably to the Pagan ceremonial, she gives herself to him, sits a moment on him, like the Pythia on the tripod of the Delphic Apollo. She thus absorbs breath, soul, life from him by way of this mimic impregnation. This done, with equal solemnity she purifies her person. Henceforth she is the living altar of the shrine.

 

The Introit is ended, and the office interrupted for the banquet. In contrast with the nobles' merrymakings, where they sit sword by side, here at the feast of brothers not a weapon is to be seen, not so much as a knife.

To safeguard the peace, each has a woman with him. Without a woman no guest is admitted. Relation or no, wife or no, old, young, makes no matter; but a woman each must have.

What liquors went round the board? Mead? beer? wine? heady cider, or perry? Who can say? The last two, at any rate, first came into use in the twelfth century.

Beverages to delude the mind, with their dangerous admixture of belladonna, did these appear at the board as yet? The answer is undoubtedly No! Children were present. Besides, excessive disorder of the faculties would have hindered the dance that was to follow.

This dance, this whirling frenzy, the notorious "Witches' Round," was amply sufficient by itself to complete the first stage

[p. 106]

of intoxication. The performers danced back to back, arms behind the back, without seeing their partner, though back often came in contact with back. Little by little each man lost all knowledge both of self and of her he had beside him. Old age and ugliness were abolished by a veritable satanic miracle; she was still a woman, still lovable and confusedly loved.

 

Act the Second. At the moment when the crowd, united in one and the same giddy madness, felt itself drawn into a single personality as well by the subtle influence of the feminine element as by a vague, undefinable emotion of fraternity, the service was resumed at the Gloria. Altar and host came on the scene. Under what form? That of woman incarnate. By her prostrate body and humiliated person, by the vast silken net of her hair, draggled in the dust, she (that proud Proserpine) offered up herself a sacrifice. On her loins a demon performed Mass, pronounced the Credo, deposited the offertory of the faithful. [*5]

In later times all this was an exhibition of indecency. But in the fourteenth century, that period of calamity, the dread epoch of the Black Death, and famine after famine, the days of the Jacquerie, and the robberies and cruelties of the Great Companies,--for a people exposed to so many perils, the effect was nothing if not serious. The whole assemblage had the worst to fear in case of surprise. The Sorceress herself ran the extremest risk, and in this act of defiant daring was in a very true sense giving away her life. Nay! worse, she was facing a perfect hell of possible torments,--tortures one dares scarcely so much as speak of. Torn with pincers and broken on the wheel, the breasts amputated, the skin flayed off little by little (as was done to the

[p. 107]

[paragraph continues] Sorcerer Bishop of Cahors), roasted before a slow fire and limb by limb, she might have to endure an eternity of agony.

All present must indeed have been deeply stirred, when over the body of the devoted being thus submitting to voluntary self-humiliation, prayer and offering were made for the harvest. Wheat was presented to the Spirit of the Earth, who makes the crops grow. Birds let loose--no doubt from the woman's bosom--bore the God of Liberty the signs and supplications of the unhappy serfs. What was the boon they craved? That we, we their far-away descendants, might win enfranchisement. [*6]

What was distributed by way of host at this strange eucharist? Not the burlesque and abominable stuff we shall find so used in Henri IV.'s day; but most probably the same confarreatio we have met with in philters, the sacrament of love, a cake baked on her body, on the victim who to-morrow might as likely as not pass through the fire herself. It was her life, her death, they ate. The morsel was impregnated already with the savour of her burning flesh.

 

Last of all, they laid on her two offerings apparently of human flesh, representations of the last dead and the last born respectively of the community. They shared the merit of the woman who was at once altar and sacrifice, and the assemblage (symbolically) communicated in both these novel elements. Triple the sacrifice, and human in all three; in Satan's dim and gloomy rites the people was the sole object of adoration to the people.

Here was the true sacrifice, and it was accomplished at last. Woman, having given her very flesh to the crowd to eat, had ended her task. She rose to her feet again, but did not leave the spot till she had firmly established and as it were ratified the authenticity of it all by appeal to the lightning, a defiance cast in the face of the God whose empire she had usurped.

[p. 108]

In ribald mockery of the words: Agnus Dei, etc., and the breaking of the wafer in the Christian Eucharist, she had a skinned toad brought to her which she then tore in pieces. With eyes rolling horribly and looks upturned to heaven, she decapitated the toad, repeating these strange words: "Ah! Philip, [*7] if only I had you between my hands, I would treat you the same!"

 

Jesus making no reply to her defiance, no lightning stroke ensuing, He was deemed vanquished. The nimble troop of demons would seize this moment for astonishing the crowd with small miracles that impressed and terrified the credulous. Toads--perfectly harmless creatures, but which were believed to be deadly poisonous--were bitten and freely mangled between their teeth. Unharmed they would leap over blazing fires and red-hot embers, to amuse the populace and set them laughing at the fires of hell.

Laughing? was the people moved to laughter, the ceremonial so tragic, so bold, and reckless as it was? Impossible to say; but there can be no doubt whatever hers was no laughing mood who first did and dared it all. The bonfires could not fail but call up the image of those that might ere long blaze round the stake of her own doom. Hers, too, the weighty responsibility of safeguarding the succession of satanic sovereigns, of training up the Sorceresses of the future.

Footnotes

^98:1 The least unsatisfactory is that given by Lancre. He is a man of wit and perspicacity, and being manifestly in relations with certain young witches, was in a position to know the whole truth. Unfortunately, his Sabbath is confused and overloaded with the grotesque ornaments of the age. The descriptions of the Jesuit Del Rio and of the Dominican Michaelis are ridiculous, impossible portraits of a pair of silly, credulous pedants. In that of Del Rio are found an incredible number of platitudes and absurdities. Still, taking the thing as a whole, it contains some interesting and valuable traces of antiquity, which I have been able to turn to account.

^99:2 At the battle of Courtrai. See also Grimm, and Michelet's Origines.

^99:3

"We are men as much as they!
  We have a heart as big as they!
  We can suffer no less than they!"

^104:4 This comes from Del Rio, but is not, I should suppose, exclusively Spanish. It is an antique trait and characteristic of primitive inspiration. Farcicalities come later.

^106:5 This highly important point, that woman was herself the altar, and that the office was performed on her, we know from the trial of La Voisin, published by M. Ravaisson, senior, among the other Bastille Papers. In these imitations, of recent date, it is true, of the Witches' Sabbath, carried out for the amusement of the great nobles of the Court of Louis XIV., there is no doubt that the antique and classical forms of the primitive Sabbath were reproduced, even in respect of a point such as this, where the ancient ceremonial may very likely have been discontinued during the intermediate period.

^107:6 This charming offering of wheat and birds is peculiar to France (Jaquier, Flagellans, 57; Soldan, 225). In Lorraine, and no doubt in Germany also, black animals were offered up,--black cats, black goats, black bulls.

^108:7 Lancre, 136. Why the name Philip, I have no idea. It is as impossible to give a reason as to say why Satan, when he names Jesus, calls him little John, or Janicot. Can it be she says Philip here, from the odious name of the King who gave France a hundred years of English wars, who inaugurated at Crecy the series of national defeats and cost the country the first invasion of her soil? The long, almost uninterrupted, period of peace that had gone before made war all the more horrible to the masses. Philippe de Valois, author of this interminable war, was held accursed, and perhaps left behind him in this popular ritual a never-forgotten word of malediction.

     The Sorceress, by Jules Michelet, [1939], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 109]

  

12

  

BLACK MASS Continued
 LOVE and DEATH
 SATAN DISAPPEARS

THE people is enfranchised and emboldened. The poor serf, free for once, is king for a few hours' space. But his time is short; already the night is passing, the stars verging to their setting. Very soon the cruel dawn will send him back to slavery, set him once more, under the malignant eye of his taskmaster, under the shadow of his lord's castle and that of the Church, to the monotonous labour, the everlasting weary round regulated by the two bells, whereof the one says Ever and the other says Never. Each peasant among them, with glum, submissive looks and an air of jog-trot habit, will be seen sallying forth to his day's work.

At least let them enjoy their momentary respite! Let each one of earth's disinherited sons be fully happy for once, and find his utmost dreams fulfilled! . . . What heart so miserable, so dead and withered, as not to have some day-dreams, some wild aspirations,--to say sometimes, "Ah! if only such or such a thing could happen"?

 

The only detailed descriptions we possess are comparatively modern, as I have already mentioned, dating from a period of peace and prosperity, viz. the last years of the reign of Henri IV. when France was once more flourishing. These were years of luxury and plenty, altogether different from the black days when the Witches' Sabbath was first organised.

[p. 110]

If we were to trust implicitly to M. Lancre and his fellows, we should picture this Third Act to our mind's eye as a sort of Rubens' kermesse, a wild, confused orgy, a vast masked ball, giving licence to every sort of illicit intercourse, and particularly to incest between closely connected relatives. According to these authors, whose only wish is to inspire horror and make their readers shudder, the chief end of the whole festival, its main lesson and express doctrine, was incest; they would have us believe that at these huge gatherings (sometimes as many as twelve thousand souls were present) the most monstrous acts were openly committed before the assembled spectators.

This is hard to believe. The very same writers tell us other facts which seem diametrically opposed to such cynicism. They say the folk only came there in couples, that they only sat at the feast two by two, that supposing an individual arrived unaccompanied, a young demon was actually told off on purpose to shepherd the lonely visitor and do the honours of the festival. They inform us that jealous lovers were not afraid to attend and bring with them their fair companions, curious to see the strange sight.

Again we have seen how the great majority attended by families, their children accompanying them. These they sent away only for the First Act, not for the banquet or the religious (or rather anti-religious) ceremonial, and not even for the Third Act here in question. This proves the existence of a certain degree of decency. Besides, the performance was twofold. The family groups remained on the brilliantly lighted heath. It was only beyond the fantastic curtain of pitchy smoke clouds that a darkling outer region began, to which those who wished could slip away.

Judges and inquisitors, bitterly hostile as these were are forced to admit that a noble spirit of gentleness and peace prevailed generally. Of the three things that shocked decorum so much at the feasts of the nobles nothing was found here. No brawling, no duels, no tables stained with blood. No vile treachery

[p. 111]

in the name of gallantry to outrage the brother in arms. Lastly, the foul promiscuity of the Templars, for all that has been said to the contrary, was unknown, indeed unneeded; at the Sabbath woman was everything.

With regard to incest, we must distinguish. Then every connexion with relations, even such as are held the most legitimate in our days, was reckoned a crime. Modern law, which is charity personified, understands the human heart and the good of families. It permits the widower to marry his wife's sister,--in other words, to give his children the best and kindest of new mothers. It permits the uncle to afford his niece necessary protection by making her his wife. Above all, it permits marriage with a female cousin, a trusty and familiar bride, often the object of affection since childhood, companion of youthful sport, and an acceptable daughter-in-law to the mother, who has long ago taken her to her heart. In the Middle Ages all this was incest!

The peasant, whose affections never go beyond his own family circle, was driven to sheer desperation. In the sixth degree even, it would have been held monstrous to wed his cousin. Impossible to marry in his own village, where the ties of relationship imposed so many barriers; he was bound to look elsewhere, further away. But in those days intercommunication was of the slightest, mutual knowledge non-existent, and neighbours cordially detested. Different villages, on fete days, would fight each other without a notion why they did so,--as is the case to this hour in countries ever so little removed from each other. A man would hardly dare to go look for a wife at the very spot where the battle had occurred, and the peril of wounds and death confronted.

Another difficulty. The feudal lord of a young serf would not allow him, if he wished, to marry in the fief of a neighbouring baron. He would have become the serf of the wife's over-lord, and so been lost to his own.

Thus while the priest barred the cousin, the feudal forbade the stranger; and so many men never married at all.

[p. 112]

The result was precisely what they most wished to guard against. At the Witches' Sabbath the natural affections had their way in double force. There the young man encountered once more the girl he knew and loved already, who when he was a lad of ten had been called his little wife. Be sure he liked her best, and treated the canonical objections with supreme indifference.

A thorough study of mediaeval family life throws entire discredit on all those rhetorical declamations we hear about a wide general promiscuity affecting crowds of human beings. The exact opposite is perceived to be the case,--that each separate little group, constituted on the narrowest basis and in the most concentrated form, is to the last degree averse to admit any foreign element whatever.

The serf, anything but jealous--towards his own kinsfolk, but miserably poor and wretched in his circumstances, is excessively apprehensive of worsening his lot yet further by multiplying a long family he cannot possibly feed. The priest and the baron both would have him augment the number of their serfs, would like to see his wife everlastingly with child; and the strangest sermons were preached on this subject, [*1]--occasionally savage recriminations and murderous threats indulged in. All this only made the husband more obstinate in his precautions. As for the wife, who poor creature could never hope to rear children under such conditions, and found only cause for tears in their arrival, she dreaded nothing so much as pregnancy. She only ventured to attend the nocturnal festival on the express assurance repeated again and again that "no woman ever returned therefrom heavier than she came." [*2]

[p. 113]

They came no doubt, but drawn to the ceremony by the banquet, the dance, the gay lights, and the love of amusement; in no way by the incitements of the flesh. Some indeed found only pain and suffering there; while others abhorred the icy purification that followed instantly on the act of love to nullify its effects. No matter; they were ready to undergo anything rather than increase their poverty, bring another unfortunate into the world, give the over-lord another serf.

Strong was the common determination, trusty the mutual agreement that limited love to the family and excluded the stranger from all participation. No reliance was felt but in kinsfolk united in the same serfdom, who, sharing the same burdens, were duly careful not to increase these.

Hence no general movement of population, no mixing and mingling confusedly of divers elements; but, on the contrary, only a series of narrow and mutually exclusive family groups. This very fact was bound to render the Witches' Sabbath powerless as an instrument of revolt, ineffectual as a means of stirring and combining the masses. The family, careful above all things to avoid a prolific offspring, secured its object by strict limitation in matters of love to very near relations, in other words, to those pledged to the same interest. A sad, depressing, unhallowed state of things, darkening and degrading the sweetest moments of life. Alas, alas! even in love and marriage all was mere squalid wretchedness and revolt against untoward circumstance.

 

Society was very cruel. Authority kept on saying, "Marry"; but it made marriage next door to impossible, as well by excess of abject poverty as by the senseless rigour of canonical prohibitions.

The result was the exact opposite of the purity the Church was for ever preaching. Under a Christian disguise, the old patriarchal system of Asia was the only existing reality.

The eldest son only could marry. The younger brothers and

[p. 114]

the sisters all worked under him and for him. [*3] In the isolated mountain farmsteads of the south, far removed from all intercourse with neighbours or other women, the brothers lived with their sisters, who were their servants and belonged to them body and soul,--a state of morals corresponding to that described in the Book of Genesis, and analogous to the marriage customs of the Parsees and the usages subsisting to this day among some of the pastoral tribes of the Himalayas.

What was even more shocking was the lot of the mother of the family. She found herself unable to marry off her son; she could not unite him with a kinswoman and so make sure of a daughter-in-law who would have some consideration and respect for her. Her son would marry, if marry he could, a girl from a distant village, often a hostile one; then her arrival was a veritable and terrible invasion, whether to the children of the first bed or to the poor mother, who often found herself turned out of doors by the stranger. It will scarce be credited, but there is no doubt about the fact. At best she was ill treated,--driven ignominiously from the fireside and the domestic board.

A Swiss law expressly forbids depriving the mother of her place at the chimney corner.

She dreaded above all things the event of her son's marrying. Yet her lot was not much more tolerable supposing he did not. She was just as much an inferior--servant of the young master of the house, who succeeded to all his father's rights, even to that of beating her. I have myself seen instances at the present day in the south of France of this horror,--a son of twenty-five chastising his own mother when she got drunk.

How much more in these ruder times! . . . It was more likely to be the son that would return from village merrymakings in a condition of semi-intoxication, scarcely knowing what he was after. Same bedchamber, same bed--for two was an absolutely unknown luxury. The mother was far from feeling secure. He

[p. 115]

had seen his friends married, and the sight had roused his evil passions. Hence floods of tears, extreme prostration, the most deplorable self-abandonment. The unhappy woman, thus threatened with violence by her only god, her son, wounded in her fondest affections, reduced to such a hideous, unnatural plight, was in despair. She would try to sleep, to feign unconsciousness. Then there happened, without either quite realising the enormity, what so often happens to this day in the poor quarters of great cities, where some poor creature, constrained by terror or perhaps by blows, submits to the last indignity. Submissive henceforth, and spite all her scruples, far too readily resigned, the mother became the victim of a piteous servitude. A shameful and an agonising, anxious life, for year by year the discrepancy of age would increase, and more and more tend to separate them. A woman of thirty-six could still hold the affections of a boy of twenty; but at fifty, alas! and at a more advanced age still, what then? From the Great Sabbath, when distant villages met together, he might any day bring home a strange woman to be the young mistress of the house--an unfamiliar, hard outsider, without heart or pity, who would rob her of her son, her fireside, her bed, all the household gods she had got together by her own labour.

By what Lancre and others tell us, Satan held it a great merit on the son's part to remain faithful to his mother, made this particular crime into a virtue. If this is true, we may easily guess the reason how one woman naturally stood up for another, how the Sorceress was a ready partisan on the mother's side, to help her hearth against the son's wife, who, stick in hand, would have turned her out to beg her bread.

Lancre goes further and declares, "never was thoroughpaced Witch yet but was the child of incest, born of mother and son." The same rule held good in Persia for the birth of the genuine Mage, who must be the offspring, so men said, of this odious mystery of iniquity. In this way the lore of the Wise Men, the magic of the East, was confined to the narrowest limits,

[p. 116]

within a family that was renewed perpetually from its own blood.

By an impious misreading of Nature, they believed themselves to be copying in this hateful ritual the innocent mystery of the rustic year, the ever-renewed cycle of vegetation growth, whereby the corn, reaped and again sown in the furrow, comes up once again as corn.

Less monstrous forms of union (of brother and sister), common among the Jews and Greeks, were unloving and very seldom fruitful. Very wisely they were abandoned before long, and would never have been resorted to again, but for the spirit of revolt which, exasperated by ridiculous prohibitions, drove men recklessly into every extreme most violently contrasted with use and wont.

In this way unnatural laws, acting on the evil passions, the hate, of mankind, produced unnatural crimes.

A hard, an accursed time! and the inevitable mother of despair!

 

So far so good,--or rather so bad; but lo! the dawn of a brighter day is all but come. In a moment, the hour strikes that puts all evil spirits to flight. The Sorceress feels the gloomy flowers of sin withering on her brow. Farewell her royal state! her very life, it may be! . . . What would happen if the dayspring found her still exposed to its beams?

What will she make of Satan? a flame of fire? a heap of ashes? He asks nothing better. He knows very well, the wily schemer, that to live, to be born again, the only way is to die.

Shall he die, the mighty evoker of the dead, he who gave weeping friends the only joy they knew in this world, the dream, the image of their vanished dear ones? Nay! he is very sure to live.

Shall he die, the mighty spirit who finding Creation accursed and Nature lying rejected in the mire, that Nature which the Church had tossed disdainfully from her lap like an unlovely,

[p. 117]

unloved foster-child, took her up again and laid her softly in his bosom? Nay! the thing cannot be.

Shall he die, the sole and only healer of the Middle Ages, that age of sore disease, who saved the people by his poisons and told them to "Live on, foolish folk, love on"?

As he is assured of life, the sturdy rogue, he dies quietly and comfortably enough. He "slips off this mortal coil" like a conjuring trick, dexterously burns his fine black goat-skin, and vanishes in a flash of fire and the brilliant light of the coming dawn.

But she, she who made Satan, who made everything, good and ill alike, who fostered and favoured so many causes,--love, self-devotion, crime! . . . What is her fate? Behold her all alone on the deserted heath!

She is far, very far, from being, as represented, the horror of all mankind. Many will bless her name. [*4] More than one has found her fair, more than one would sell his share of Paradise if he dared but approach her. . . . But round about her is a great gulf,--the admiration she excites passes all bounds, and the terror is excessive of this all-puissant Medea, of her wondrous deep-set eyes and the voluptuous snaky ringlets of coal-black hair that flood her shoulders.

Alone for ever; for ever loveless and alone! Who and what is left her? Naught but the dread Spirit who stole away from her side but now.

"Well, then, good Satan, let us away. . . . I am in haste to be in those regions down below. Hell is better than earth. Farewell this world and all its shows!"

She who first invented, first played the awful drama, could hardly survive her companion long. Satan, submissive to her behest, had near by and ready saddled a gigantic black horse, whose eyes and nostrils shot fire. She sprang to his back with one bound,--and away. . . .

[p. 118]

The eyes of the bystanders followed her vanishing form. . The good folks asked in terror, "Oh, what, what will become of her?" As she went she laughed, a horrid peal of fiendish mirth, and disappeared from sight like an arrow from a bow. Men fain would know, but know they never shall, what was the unhappy creature's final doom. [*5]

Footnotes

^112:1 It is only a very short while ago that my witty and accomplished friend, M. Genin, brought together a mass of most curious information on the point in question.

^112:2 Boguet, Lancre, all the authorities are at one on this point. A flat contradiction on Satan's part, but a state of things entirely agreeable to the serf, the peasant, the poor man. The Devil makes the harvest sprout, but renders woman barren; wheat in abundance, but never a child.

^114:3 A very common condition of things in France, I have often been told by the learned and accurate M. Monteil.

^117:4 Lancre speaks of Sorceresses who won both love and adoration.

^118:5 This is almost exactly the end of an English Witch whose history is told by Wyer.

     The Sorceress, by Jules Michelet, [1939], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 119]

  

PART TWO

  

13

  

The SORCERESS in HER DECADENCE
 SATAN MULTIPLIED and VULGARISED

Now we have another type altogether,--a delicate Devil's plaything, the little Witch-wife, child of the Black Mass; she has quite superseded the grim Sorceress of an earlier day, blossoming into being, with all the wily ways and sportive grace of a kitten. The very opposite of her predecessor, she is soft and silky, stealthy of approach and shy, treading so softly, softly, and loving, above all things, to be caressed. Nothing Titanic about her, that is very clear; on the contrary, she is a low-minded, tricky creature, a wanton from her very cradle, bursting with every naughty, dainty caprice. Her whole life will be but the expression of a certain midnight hour, a dark and evil moment, when a vile reverie that would have excited a mere horror of disgust by daylight, took form in the licence of dreams.

Born with such a secret in her very blood, possessing an instinctive knowledge of evil, with looks that pierce so far and so low, she will respect neither thing nor person in this world, and barely so much as think of religion. Satan himself will not move her hugely, for after all he is a Spirit, and her tastes are pronounced, confined exclusively to material pleasures.

[p. 120]

As a child, she loved dirt. Grown a big girl and a pretty, she was a wonder of nastiness. In her Sorcery will become the strange laboratory of a strange, mysterious alchemy. From a very early period she handles, by predilection, repulsive matters, drugs and medicaments to-day, to-morrow nauseous intrigues. This is her element, love and disease; she will turn out an apt go-between, a clever, bold experimenter. She will be persecuted for alleged murders, for the concoction of poisonous brews; but unjustly. Her instinct by no means lies in that direction; she has no hankering after death. Malevolent as she is, she yet loves life, prefers to heal the sick, and prolong existence. She is dangerous in another way,--in two other ways. She will sell recipes to produce sterility, perhaps abortion. On the other hand, with her wild, reckless wantonness of fancy, she will be only too ready to help women to their ruin by her accursed potions, and find a cruel joy in crimes of the sort.

What a contrast to the other! She is a mere trafficker after all; while the other was Antichrist, the Demon, the Spirit of Revolt, the wife of Satan, and, in a sense, his mother. For did he not wax great from her and her inward might? But the latter Witch is, at most, the Devil's daughter, inheriting two attributes from him--her uncleanness and her love of handling life. Such is her lot; she is an artist in this line, and a successful one--and mankind is her raw material!

 

They say of her she will perpetuate her race by incest, whereof she sprang herself. But there is no need; without intervention of any male, she will bear an innumerable breed. In less than fifty years, by the beginning of the fifteenth century, under Charles VI., a prodigious contagion spreads far and wide. Whoever believes himself to possess secret remedies, mysterious recipes; whoever thinks he can divine the future, whoever has dreams and waking reveries, dubs himself the favourite of Satan. Every light-headed, silly woman adopts as her own the imposing name of Witch.

[p. 121]

A dangerous title, but a lucrative one, readily enough given by the hatred of the populace, which assails with alternate insults and prayers her unknown powers. It is no less readily accepted, often actually claimed. When children pursue her in the streets with gibes, and women shake their fists at her, and hurl the word at her as if it were a stone, she turns upon them and says proudly, "Yes! you say true; a Sorceress I am!"

The trade is improving, and men are taking it up,--a new comedown for the art and mystery. The humblest of Witch-wives still retains something of the Sibyl. But these self-styled Wizards, sordid charlatans, commonplace jugglers, mole and rat catchers, casting spells over cattle, selling secrets they do not possess, infect the age with a foul, black, smothering smoke of fear and foolish terror. Satan becomes common, his vogue enormously increased, but in what low, sordid conditions! A poor triumph indeed, for he only grows dull and tiresome. Yet the people flock to him, will scarce endure any God but him; but his old self, his old dignity, are gone for ever.

 

The fifteenth century, for all its two or three great discoveries, is yet, I take it, a tired, outworn, exhausted century, lacking in ideas.

It starts grandly enough with the Royal Sabbath of St. Denis, the mad, wild, gloomy festival Charles VI. gave in the Abbey of St. Denis to celebrate the reinterment of Duguesclin, who had been in his grave many a long year. For three days and three nights Sodom caroused over the tombs of the dead. The mad King, not yet the imbecile he afterwards became, forced all the kings, his ancestors, their dry bones dancing in their coffins, to share his revel. Grim Death, whether he would or no, was made a  and added a horrid spur to the wanton pleasures of the Court. There in all their effrontery flaunted the base fashions of the period, when great ladies, their height exaggerated by the "devil's coif," or double-horned headdress of the day, threw the belly into unnatural prominence, so that one and all seemed

[p. 122]

pregnant--an admirable device, by-the-by, for concealing the fact if it were really so. [*1] The mode was dear to women, and lasted a good forty years. The young nobles on their side were just as shameless, and exposed their persons in an equally disgusting fashion. Whilst women wore Satan on their brows in the twin-peaked cap, knights and pages displayed his symbol on their feet in those pointed shoes that turned up like so many angry scorpions. Under the guise of animals, they disported themselves in brazen travesty of the basest lusts of beasts. It was there Gilles de Retz, the infamous kidnapper of children, himself a page at the time, first learned his monstrous vices. These great ladies and mistresses of broad fiefs were bold-faced Jezebels every one, more shameless even than the men; they would not so much as deign to wear a mask, but exposed their bold faces quite unveiled. Their sensual rage, their mad ostentation of debauch, their outrageous defiance of all decency, were for King, for all,--for reason, life, body, soul, the sheer abyss and bottomless pit of hell.

And what was the result? The whipped curs of Agincourt, that poor etiolated generation of nobles who in miniatures make us shiver to this day to see beneath their tight-laced doublets their wretched, thin, shrunken limbs. [*2]

 

I commiserate the Sorceress from the bottom of my heart, who on the Great Dame's return from the King's feast will have to be her confidante and the minister of her pleasures, for be sure she will demand mere impossibilities of her.

In her castle, it is very true, she is alone, the only, or almost

[p. 123]

the only woman there, in a whole houseful of unmarried men.

By what the romances tell us, the Lady Chatelaine would seem to have delighted in collecting round her a court of pretty girls; but history and our own common sense say just the contrary. Queen Eleanor was not so silly as to set the Fair Rosamond as a counterfoil to her own beauty. These queens and great ladies were as abominably jealous as they were licentious--instance the story related by Henri Martin of one who had a maid her husband admired overmuch, outraged to death by the common soldiery. The high-born dame's power over men, we repeat, depended on her being alone and without rivals. Let her be as old and ugly as you please, she is the dream of one and all. The Sorceress enjoys fine sport in rousing her to abuse this divinity of hers, to make mock of this herd of besotted and submissive males. She makes her dare every extreme, and treat them like brute beasts. Her will lays a spell on them; down they go on all fours, cringing apes, lumbering bears, nasty dogs, swine, ready to obey every caprice, to welcome every outrage of their mistress Circe.

All this only moves her to pity--and sick disgust! She spurns away the crawling animals with her foot; they are base and foul enough, but too innocent for her. Then she finds a grotesque remedy for her satiety; as they are all so impotent to please her, she chooses a lover more impotent still, a little lad to lavish her caresses upon. The idea is worthy of the Witch who suggested it,--to blow into precocious flame the spark of naughtiness lurking in the innocent child slumbering in the pure sleep of boyhood. This is the ugly story of Jehan de Saintre, type of the Cherubinos and other miserable dolls and playthings that women have corrupted in times of decadence.

Under so many pedantic ornaments and trappings of sentimental morality, the sordid cruelty that underlies the proceeding is evident enough. It is killing the fruit by nipping the flower in the bud. It is, in a sense, the very thing often cast up against the Sorceresses, that "they ate children." At any rate, it is drinking

[p. 124]

their life blood. With all her tender ways and motherly affectations, the fair lady whose caresses are so soft is a vampire to drain the blood of her weakling victim,--nothing more nor less! The result of the horrid process the romancer tells us himself. Saintre, the story says, grows up a very perfect knight, yes! perfectly frail and feeble, so that eventually he is braved and defied by the lout of a peasant abbe, in whom the fair lady, coming at length to a better mind, finds what suits her wishes best.

 

These vain caprices serve only to augment her ennui, to set an edge to the empty feeling of satiety. Circe, surrounded by her beasts, utterly bored, utterly jaded, would fain be a beast herself. She feels wild impulses working, and shuts herself up in a lonely tower of the castle keep. Thence she throws sinister, questioning looks over the gloomy forest. She is a prisoner, and knows all the savage fury of a she-wolf kept chained. "Hither instantly, the Witch-wife! I want her, I want her. Come, quick!" and before two minutes have gone by, "What! is she not here yet?"

Ah! here she is. "Now listen carefully. . . . I have a caprice (an irresistible hankering, you understand), a hankering to strangle you, to drown you, or deliver you up to the bishop, who has long been wanting you. . . . You have one way of escape, and one only--to satisfy another hankering of mine, to change me into a she-wolf. I am so tired of my life. I cannot sit still any longer; I long, at any rate o' nights, to gallop free in the forest. I would be done with submissive fools that wait on me, and dogs that deafen me, and blundering horses that jib and refuse the woodland paths."

"But, dear lady, suppose they caught you?" . . . "Insolent woman! I tell you, you shall die the death." "But surely you know the history of the werewolf woman whose paw was cut off. [*3] . . . I should be so grieved to see such an accident!"

[p. 125]

"'Tis my affair, I tell you; and I will listen to no excuses. . . . Come, time presses; I have begun to yelp and howl already. . . . Oh! the joy of it, to go hunting all alone, by the light of the moon, and all alone to pull down the hind with my strong jaws--yes! and men too, if they come across my path; to bite little tender children,--and women too, women best of all! to make my teeth meet in their flesh! . . . How I hate them all. . . . But none of them as bitterly as you. Never start back, I won't bite you; you move my disgust too sorely, and besides, you have no blood in your veins. . . . Blood, blood! I must have blood!"

No way of refusal is open, "Nothing easier, my lady. Tonight, at nine o'clock, you shall drink the brew. Then lock yourself up in your chamber. While they think you there, you will be another creature, flying through the woods."

So said, so done; and next day the lady finds herself worn out and utterly exhausted, at the very end of her powers. She must have covered, last night, a full thirty leagues. She has hunted and killed. She is all covered with blood; but perhaps this only comes from the brambles she has torn herself against.

A great source of pride, and no less of danger, to her who has done this miracle. Nevertheless her mistress, who demanded it, receives her very gloomily. "Sorceress! Sorceress! what an awful power you possess! I should never have thought as much!

[p. 126]

[paragraph continues] But now I am terrified and horror-struck. . . . Ah! they do well to hate you! 'Twill be a good day when you are burned. I will be your death, when so I please. My peasants this very evening would whet their scythes on you if I said one word of the night's doings. . . . Away with you, you vile, black, ugly wretch."

 

She is hurried by the great folks, her patrons, into strange adventures. Having only the castle to rely on to guard her from the priest, and be some surety against the stake, how can she refuse aught her formidable protectors ask? Suppose, for instance, the Baron, just back from the Crusades and from Nicopolis, and an amateur of Turkish ways, calls her to him, and entrusts her with the charge of kidnapping children for him, what is she to do? These razzias, carried out on such a large scale in Greek lands, where on occasion two thousand pages would enter the seraglio at one time, were by no means unknown to the Christians,--to the English barons from the twelfth century onwards, at a later date to the knights of Rhodes and of Malta. The infamous Gilles de Retz, the only one who was brought to trial, was punished not for having carried off his serfs' little boys to his castle (not an uncommon occurrence in those days), but for having sacrificed them to Satan. The Sorceress who acted as agent in these crimes, though she could hardly know the fate reserved for the victims, found herself between two dangers. On one side the peasants' pitchfork and scythe, on the other the tortures of the Baron's tower, which a refusal would inevitably have brought down on her head. De Retz's myrmidon, that terrible Italian of his, [*4] was as likely as not to have pounded her to death in his mortar.

[p. 127]

On all sides danger, and gain to compensate the danger. No situation could well be more full of temptations. The Sorceresses themselves often did not deny the ridiculous powers the populace credited them with. They admitted that by means of a doll or mannikin pierced with needles, they could bewitch anyone they pleased, making them get thinner and thinner till they pined away and died. They confessed that with the mandragora, torn up by the roots at the gibbet's foot (by the tooth of a dog, they declared, which invariably died of the effects), they could overthrow the reason, change men into beasts, turn women lightheaded and insane. Even more terrible was the frenzied delirium produced by the thorn-apple or Datura, which sets men dancing till they die, [*5] makes them unhesitatingly submit to a thousand shameful horrors, of which they have no present consciousness, and no subsequent recollection.

 

Hence savage excesses of hate on the one hand, and no less violent extremities of terror on the other. The author of the Marteau des Sorcieres (Hammer of the Sorceresses), Sprenger, records with horror how he saw, at a season of heavy snow, when the roads were all broken up, a whole population of wretched beings, frantic with fear and cursed with calamities only too real, crowding all the outskirts of a small German town. You never saw, he says, pilgrimages nearly so numerous to Our Lady of Grace, or Our Lady of Eremites. All these poor folks, foundered in the deep ruts, stumbling, blundering and falling, were on their way to the Witch's hut, to implore pity of the

[p. 128]

[paragraph continues] Devil. What feelings of pride and transport must have filled the Witch-wife's heart to behold all this multitude grovelling at her feet! [*6]

Footnotes

^122:1 Even in a painting representing the most mystical of subjects, in a work of genius, the Holy Lamb of Van Eyck (known as John of Bruges), all the virgins look as if they were in child. Such was the grotesque mode of the fifteenth century.

^122:2 This excessive thinness of persons worn out and enervated by excesses is enough to spoil, in my eyes, all the superb miniatures of the Court of Burgundy, the Duc de Berry, etc. The subjects are such deplorable creatures that no beauty of execution can make these pictures really pleasing and successful works of art.

^124:3 This dreadful idea was not unfamiliar to the great ladies of those days, the high-born prisoners in mediaeval castles. They were hungry and thirsty [p. 125] after freedom, and the cruelties of absolute freedom. Boguet relates how, in the mountains of Auvergne, a hunter one night fired at a she-wolf, missing a vital spot, but cutting off one of the animal's paws. The beast made off, limping on three legs. Presently the hunter went to a neighbouring castle to ask hospitality of the nobleman who lived there. The latter, on seeing him, asked if he had enjoyed good sport. In answer to the question he was for drawing from his game-bag the wolf's pad he had just shot off; but what was his astonishment to find, instead of an animal's foot, a human hand, and on one of the fingers a ring, which the nobleman instantly recognised as his wife's! He went to her immediately, and found her wounded and concealing her forearm. It was handless; the one the hunter had brought in was fitted to it, and the lady was forced to confess it was indeed she who, under the form of a she-wolf, had attacked the hunter, and afterwards escaped, leaving a paw behind on the field of battle. The husband had the cruelty to give her up to justice, and she was burned at the stake.

^126:4 See my History of France, and above all the learned and precise little book by our lamented Armand Gueraud, Notice sur Gilles de Rais, Nantes, 1855--reprinted in the Biographie Bretonne of M. Levot. From it we see that the purveyors of this horrid supply of children to the monster were more often than not men. There was a La Meffraye mixed up in the business as well,--was this a Sorceress? We are not told. M. Gueraud was to have published the [p. 127] trial. Such a publication is much to be desired, but printed in extenso, in its genuine form and unmutilated. The MSS. are at Nantes and at Paris. My learned friend, M. Dugast-Matifeux, informs me a copy is in existence more complete than these originals in the archives of Thouars.

^127:5 Pouchet, Solanees et Botanique Generale; Nysten, Dict. de Medecine (edit. Littre and Robin), article Datura. Thieves are only too ready to make use of these decoctions. One day they made the hangman of Aix and his wife, whom they wished to rob of their money, take a dose of this nature. The two victims fell into so extraordinary a state of delirium that they passed the whole of one night dancing absolutely naked in a graveyard.

^128:6 This pride and exultation sometimes led her into the most reckless dissoluteness. Hence the German saying, "The Witch in her garret showed her comrade fifteen fine lads in green coats, and bade her 'Choose; they are all for you.'" Her triumph was to exchange the respective parts, and inflict as tests of love the most disgusting outrages on the nobles and grandees she thus degraded. It is well known that queens, as well as kings, and high-born ladies (in Italy as late as in the eighteenth century. Collection Maurepas, xxx. 111) used to receive in audience and hold court at the moment of performing the most repulsive of nature's functions, and made their favourites undertake the most unpleasant offices for them. In a spirit of fantastic worship, these latter adored everything that came from their idol, and fought for the vilest duty about her person. If only she were young and pretty, and disdainful, there was no mark of attachment so humiliating and abominable her domestic pets (her cicisbeo, her chaplain, a love-sick page) were not ready to submit to, under the absurd notion that a philter possessed the more virtue in proportion to its disgusting quality. This is humiliating enough for poor humanity, but what are we to say to the astounding fact that the Sorceress, without being either well-born or pretty or young, a pauper rather, and very likely a serf, dressed in mere filthy rags, by sheer downright cunning and some inexplicable charm of abandoned wantonness and unholy fascination, debauched and degraded so low the gravest personages of the time? Certain monks of a monastery on the Rhine, one of those proud German houses where none could enter without four hundred years of nobility behind him, make this dismal admission to Sprenger: "We have seen her bewitch three of our Abbots one after the other, and kill the fourth, avowing with brazen effrontery, 'I have done it, and I will do it again, and they shall never escape me, because they have eaten . . ." etc. (Comederunt meam--"they have eaten my . . ." Sprenger, Malleus Maleficarum, Hammer of the Sorceresses, quaestio vii. p. 84). The worst of it all for Sprenger and what most made him despair, is the fact of her being so well protected, no doubt by these infatuated devotees, that he could not burn her. "Fateor quia nobis non aderat ulciscendi aut inquirendi super eam facultas; ideo adhuc superest."--"I confess we had no means of insisting on her punishment, or a proper inquiry into her crimes, wherefore the woman is still alive."

     The Sorceress, by Jules Michelet, [1939], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 129]

  

14

  

PERSECUTIONS

THE Sorceresses took small pains to hide their proceedings. They rather boasted of their powers; and it is out of their own mouths Sprenger gathered a large proportion of the strange stories which adorn his Manual. The said Manual is a highly pedantic work, following with grotesque servility the formal divisions and subdivisions in use among the Thomist logicians,--yet at the same time the single-minded, earnest and serious production of a man quite genuinely frightened, a man who in the awful duel between God and the Devil, in which the former generally allows the Evil One to get the best of it, sees no other possible remedy but to pursue the latter firebrand in hand, burning with all practicable speed those mortal frames wherein he chooses to take up his abode.

Sprenger's sole merit is to have compiled a work more complete than any of his predecessors, the compendium of a vast and elaborate system, the crown of a whole literature. The old Penitentiaries, or manuals for the use of confessors in their inquisition into various sins, were succeeded by the Directories for the inquisition of heresy, the greatest of all sins. But for the chiefest heresy of all, which is Witchcraft or Sorcery, special Directoria or manuals were compiled, the so-called Hammers (Mallei) for the detection and punishment of Witches and Sorceresses. These manuals, continually enriched by the zeal of the Dominicans, reached their highest perfection in the Malleus of Sprenger, a work which governed the author himself in the conduct of his great mission to Germany, and for a century remained the guide and beacon-star of the tribunals of the Inquisition.

[p. 130]

What was it led Sprenger to study these questions? He relates how being at Rome, in the refectory where the monks lodged pilgrims, he saw two such from Bohemia,--a young priest namely and his father. The old man was sighing and supplicating for a successful issue to his journey. Sprenger, moved to pity, asks him the cause of his distress. The reason he says is this: his son is possessed by the Devil, and at great trouble and expense he has brought him to Rome, to the tombs of the saints and martyrs. "And this son, where is he?" demands the monk. "There, beside you." "I was startled at the answer, and shrank back. I examined the young priest and was surprised to see him eating his dinner with a quiet, unassuming air and answering very gently any remarks addressed to him. He informed me that having spoken somewhat roughly to an old woman, this latter had cast a spell upon him. The spell was under a tree; but under what tree the Witch absolutely refused to say." Sprenger, still in a spirit of pity and good will, proceeded to lead the patient from church to church and from relic to relic. At each shrine visited, exorcism, frenzy, loud cries and wild convulsions, gibberish in every language under heaven and many uncouth gambols,--all this before the eyes of the public, which followed the pair, wondering, admiring, and shuddering. Devils, common enough in Germany, were less familiar in Italy, and in a few days' time Rome was talking of nothing else. This affair, which caused no small sensation, no doubt drew the general attention upon the Dominican Father concerned in it. He studied the subject, compiled all the various Mallei and other manuscript manuals, and became the great authority on questions of Demonology. His great work, the Malleus Maleficarum, would seem to have been composed during the twenty years intervening between this adventure and the important mission entrusted to Sprenger by Pope Innocent VIII. in 1484.

 

It was highly important to select an adroit personage for this mission to Germany, a man of intelligence and tact, who should

[p. 131]

prevail over the repugnance felt by Teutonic honesty towards the dark, subterranean system he was endeavouring to introduce. Rome had met with a rude check in the Low Countries, which put the Inquisition on its mettle in those regions, and resulted in its being altogether excluded from France. Toulouse, as a former stronghold of the Albigensians, was the only exception, being subjected to all the rigours of the Holy Office. About the year 1460 a Penitentiary of Rome, who had become Dean of Arras, determined to strike terror among the Chambres de Rhetorique (Chambers of Rhetoric), or Literary Unions, which were beginning to discuss matters of religion. He burned one of these Rhetoricians as a Sorcerer, and with him sundry rich citizens, and even knights. The nobility was furious at this attack on its privileges, while the voice of public opinion spoke out loudly and plainly. The Inquisition was scouted, abominated, held accursed, particularly in France. The Parlement of Paris shut the door rudely in its face; and Rome, by her bad management, threw away this opportunity of introducing into the north of Europe the reign of terror inseparable from the methods of the Inquisition.

The moment seemed better chosen in 1484. The Holy Office, which in Spain had assumed such terrible proportions, and overshadowed royalty itself, seemed by this time to have become a conquering institution, well capable of walking alone and bound to penetrate everywhere and subjugate everything to itself. True, it encountered an obstacle in Germany in the jealous opposition of the ecclesiastical princes, who, possessing tribunals of their own, had never shown themselves very ready to revive the Roman Inquisition. But the present situation of these princes, the very grave anxiety which the popular movements of the time occasioned them, made them less recalcitrant. All the Rhine country and Suabia, even the eastern parts towards Salzburg, seemed undermined with sedition. Every instant insurrections of the peasantry were breaking out. Everywhere beneath the surface there seemed to lurk a vast subterranean

[p. 132]

volcano, an unseen lake of fire, which, now here, now there, betrayed its existence by outbursts of fire and flame. The foreign Inquisition, far more dreaded than the native variety, came very opportunely on the spot to terrorise the country and break down rebellious spirits, burning as Sorcerers to-day the very men who would likely enough to-morrow have been insurgents. It formed an excellent popular weapon to overawe the people, an admirable device for drawing off dangerous humours. This time the storm was to be diverted upon the Sorcerers, just as in 1349 and on so many other occasions its fury had been directed against the Jews.

Only a man was indispensable. The inquisitor who was to bell the cat, who before the jealous courts of Mayence and Cologne, before the scoffing populace of Frankfort or Strassburg, was to set up his tribunal, was bound to be a person of intelligence and good sense. His personal tact and dexterity had to counterbalance, to make men forget in some measure, the odious nature of his office. Moreover, Rome has always piqued herself in choosing her men well. Indifferent to abstract questions, anything but indifferent to concrete individualities, she has always believed, and she was justified in believing, that success in practical affairs depended on the particular and special character of the agents accredited to each country. Was Sprenger the right man in the right place? To begin with, he was a German, and a Dominican, assured beforehand, therefore, of the support of that formidable order and all its monastic houses and schools. A worthy son of the schools was indispensable, a good Schoolman, a master of the Summa Theologiae, soundly trained in his Aquinas, never at a loss for a text to clinch the argument. Sprenger was all this,--and more than this, to wit a pedantic fool.

 

"It is often stated, both in speech and writing, that dia-bolus is derived from dia, two, and bolus, a bolus or pill, because swallowing body and soul at one gulp, the Devil makes of the

[p. 133]

two only one pill, one single mouthful. But (he continues with all the gravity of Sganarelle), according to the Greek etymology, diabolus signifies clausus ergastulo (imprisoned in a dungeon), or else defluens (whence Devil?), that is to say falling, because he fell from heaven."

at is the derivation of malefce (sorcery)? "It comes from maleficiendo (ill-doing), which signifies male de fide sentiendo (ill-thinking on matters of faith)." A remarkable piece of etymology, but one of far-reaching consequences. If sorcery is the same thing as heresy, why! every sorcerer is a heretic, and every freethinker a sorcerer; and the Church is justified in burning as sorcerers any and every body who should dare to hold unorthodox opinions. This is precisely what they had done at Arras, and they were for establishing little by little the same good custom everywhere.

 

Here lies Sprenger's real merit, which is beyond dispute. He is a fool, but an intrepid fool; boldly and unflinchingly he lays down the least acceptable doctrines. Another man would have tried to elude, attenuate, soften objections, but this is not his way. Beginning on the first page, he sets down openly and displays one by one the natural, self-evident reasons there are for disbelieving the satanic miracles. This done, he adds coldly, "Merely so many heretic mistakes." And never pausing to refute the reasons given, he copies out the texts on the other side, St. Thomas Aquinas, the Bible, legends, canonists, and commentators. First he shows you what common sense has to say, then pulverises it by weight of authority.

His duty accomplished, he sits down calm, serene, triumphant, and seems to say, "Well! what have you to say now? Would you be so daring now as to use your reason? . . . Can you doubt, for instance, that the Devil amuses himself by interfering between man and wife, when never a day passes but the Church and the canonists allow this as a ground for separation?"

There is no reply to this, and nobody will so much as whisper

[p. 134]

an objection. Sprenger in the first line of this Manual for the use of Judges, formally declaring the smallest doubt as an act of heresy, the judge's hands are tied. He feels there must be no trifling; that supposing he were so unfortunate as to experience some temptation in the way of compunction or tenderheartedness, it would be his bounden duty to begin by condemning himself to a death at the stake.

 

The method is everywhere identical. Good common sense first of all, followed by a direct frontal attack, a downright, unhesitating negation of common sense. It would seem natural enough, for instance, to say that, love being in the soul already, it is hardly necessary to assume the mysterious intervention of the Evil One to be required. Is not this fairly self-evident? Not so, says Sprenger,--distinguo. "The man who splits the wood is not the cause of its burning,--but only an indirect cause. The wood-splitter is love (on this point see Dionysius the Areopagite, Origen, John of Damascus, etc., etc.). Love therefore is only the indirect cause of love."

This it is to be a scholar. It is no second-rate school that could produce such a pupil. Cologne only, Louvain and Paris owned machinery fully adapted to mould the human brain. The School of Paris was strong indeed; for culinary Latin, what could rival Gargantua's Janotus? But even mightier was Cologne, famed queen of darkness that supplied Ulrich von Hutten with the type of the Obscuri Viri of his world-famous satire, the reactionaries and ignoramuses that have always been so fortunate and so fertile a tribe.

This solid, stolid Schoolman, so full of words and so void of sense, sworn foe of Nature no less than of human reason, takes his seat with superb confidence in his books and his learned gown, in the dust and dirt and litter of his gloomy court. On the desk before him he has on one side the Summa Theologiae, on the other the Directorium. This is his library, and he laughs at anything outside its limits. He is not the sort of man to be imposed

[p. 135]

upon, or to waste his time upon Astrology or Alchemy,--follies not so foolish after all, destined in time to lead to genuine observation of Nature's laws. Why, Sprenger is actually a sceptic, and has doubts about the old recipes. Albertus Magnus declares positively that sage in a fountain is sufficient to bring about a great storm; he shakes his head. Sage? don't tell me; I beg you have me excused. It needs only a little experience to see in this a trick of Him who would fain deceive and cajole us all, the wily Lord of the Air; but he will get the worst of it, he has to deal with a Doctor of the Church more cunning than the Prince of Cunning himself.

 

Would I could have seen in the flesh this typical specimen of the judge and the prisoners brought before his tribunal! Were God to take creatures from two different planets and set them face to face, they could not be more sharply contrasted, more unknown one to the other, more completely lacking in a common language. The old Witch-wife, a ragged skeleton of a woman, with haggard eyes alight with malice, a creature thrice tempered in the fires of hell, the grim, lonely shepherd of the Black Forest or the solitudes of the High Alps,--such are the wild beings presented to the cold, dull eye of the pedant, to be judged by the light of his school-bred intellect.

Nor will they, be it said, keep him long sweating in his bed of justice. They will tell all they know without torture. The question will be applied later on, never fear, but only as a complement and ornament, as it were, to the depositions. They readily expound and relate in due order whatever they have done. The Devil is the bosom friend of the shepherd, and the Witch's bedfellow. She says as much, with a conscious smile and a glance of triumph, evidently enjoying the horror of the audience.

The old creature is a mad woman surely, and the shepherd as mad as she. A couple of besotted fools, you say? Not so, neither; far from it. On the contrary, they are keen and subtle-witted, both of them, beings who can hear the grass grow and

[p. 136]

see through stone walls. Another thing they can perceive plainer still is the monumental pair of asses' ears that nod over the learned Doctor's cap. His dominant emotion towards them is fear; for, brave as he pretends to be, he is trembling all the while. He himself allows that the priest very often, unless he takes good heed, when he exorcises the Demon, only determines the evil spirit to change its abode and pass into the body of God's minister himself, finding it a more flattering morsel to inhabit the person of one consecrated to Heaven. Who knows but these simple-minded devils of shepherds and sorceresses might be taken with the ambition to enter into an Inquisitor? He is far from feeling so bold as his confident mien would indicate, when in his biggest voice he asks the Witch-wife, "If your master is so all-powerful, why do I not feel his assaults?" "As a fact," the poor man confesses in his book, "I felt him only too plainly. When I was at Ratisbon, how often he would come and rap at my window-panes! How often he would stick pins in my cap! Then there were a hundred evil visions, dogs, apes, and so forth, without end."

 

But the Devil's greatest delight, for he is nothing if not a logician, is to pose the learned Doctor out of the mouth of the false-hearted hag with embarrassing arguments and tricky questions, from which his only escape is by imitating the cuttle-fish, that avoids his pursuers by troubling the water and making all his neighbourhood as black as ink. For instance, "The Devil is active only so far as God suffers him to be so; then why punish his instruments?" Or else, "We are not free agents; God allows the Devil, as with the Patriarch Job, to tempt and drive us into sin, to force us by blows even. Is it just to punish one who is thus constrained?" Sprenger gets out of the difficulty by saying, "You are free beings,"--here follows a long array of texts. "You are bond-servants only by reason of your pact with the Evil One." To which the reply again would be only too easy, "If God

[p. 137]

allows the Evil One to tempt us to make a pact, it is He makes the said pact possible," and so on, and so on.

"I show over-much good nature," he declares, "in listening to these gentry at all! 'Tis a fool's part to argue with the Devil." The populace agrees with him to a man. All applaud the proceedings; all are eager, excited, impatient for sentence and execution. Hangings are common enough; but this Sorcerer and Sorceress, it will be a tasty treat to see how the pair will sparkle and splutter like brands in the burning.

The judge has the people on his side. There is no sort of difficulty; under the rules of the Directorium, three witnesses were sufficient. How fail to get three witnesses, especially to bear false witness? In every tattling town, in every ill-natured village, witnesses are as common as blackberries. Besides, the Directorium is an old-fashioned book, a century behind date. In this fifteenth century, an age of such enlightenment, everything is improved. If no witnesses are forthcoming, the public voice is enough, the general cry of popular indignation! [*1]

 

This sincere cry of suffering and of fear, the lamentable plaint of the unhappy victims of bewitchment, moves Sprenger strongly. Do not for a moment suppose him a mere unfeeling pedant, a man of dry, unsympathetic hardness. He has a heart, and that is the very reason why he is so ready to kill. He is very pitiful and full of lovingkindness. He pities intensely the weeping wife, a pregnant mother but now, whose babe the Witch stifled in her womb with a look of her evil eye. He pities the poor farmer on whose crops she has brought down the blighting

[p. 138]

hail. He pities the husband who, no Sorcerer himself, is convinced his wife is a Sorceress, and drags her, a rope round her neck, before Sprenger, who promptly has her burned.

With a cruel man there might be means of escape; but this good, charitable Sprenger leaves no room for hope. His humanity is so overpowering, you must just be burned, there is no help for it,--or at any rate an extraordinary degree of address, a presence of mind of the readiest, is needed. One day a complaint is lodged with him by three good ladies of Strassburg, who on the same day and at the same moment felt themselves struck by an invisible assailant. How did it happen? The only person they can accuse is an ill-looking fellow, who has cast a spell over them, it would seem. Summoned before the inquisitor, the man protests, swearing by all the saints he does not even know the ladies in question, has never so much as set eyes on them before. The judge refuses to believe him; neither tears nor oaths are of the slightest avail. His great compassion for the ladies made him inexorable, and the man's denial only roused his anger. He was already rising to order the fellow to the torture-chamber, where he would have confessed no doubt, as the most innocent constantly did, when he got leave to speak and said, "I do indeed recollect how yesterday at the hour named, I struck . . . who was it I struck? . . . no Christian women, but three cats that ran at me savagely biting my legs." Then the judge, like a man of sagacity as he was, saw it all. The poor man was innocent; without a doubt the ladies on such and such days were changed into cats, while the artful Fiend amused himself by setting them at good Christians' legs to work the ruin of these latter and get them taken for Sorcerers.

A less perspicacious judge would never have guessed that. But you could not always count on having a man of such penetration on the bench. So it was highly necessary there should lie always ready on the desk of the tribunal a good guide-book or manual for fools, to make manifest to simpler and less experienced inquisitors the wiles of the Enemy of Mankind and the

[p. 139]

means of frustrating them, in fact the same system of deep and artful strategy which the great Sprenger had employed to such good purpose in his Rhenish campaigns. To this end, the Malleus was printed in a pocket edition, generally of a size then uncommon, viz. small 18mo. It would not have been seemly for the judge to have been seen fumbling over the leaves of a great folio lying on his desk, while all the court gaped at him; but he could quite well and without any fuss consult out of the corner of his eye and thumb furtively under cover his pocket manual of folly.

 

The Malleus, like all the books of this kind, contains a strange admission, namely that the Devil is gaining ground, in other words that God is losing it; that the human race, saved by Jesus Christ, is becoming the conquest and prey of Satan. The latter, only too manifestly, is making progress, as legend after legend proves. What an advance he has made since the times of the Gospel, when he was too happy to take up his abode in the swine, down to the period of Dante, when a Theologian and a Lawyer, he argues with the saints, and pleads his case, and as final conclusion of a victorious syllogism, says, as he carries off the soul in dispute, with a triumphant laugh, "Ah! ha! you did not know I was a Logician."

During the earlier years of the Middle Ages he still waits for the death agony before taking the soul and carrying it off. St. Hildegard (circa 1100) believes "that he cannot enter into the body of a living man, if he did, the members would fall to pieces; it is the shadow and vapour of the Devil only that enter in." This last glimmer of common sense disappears in the twelfth century. In the thirteenth we find a prior so terribly afraid of being taken off alive that he has himself guarded day and night by two hundred men-at-arms.

Then begins a period of ever-increasing terrors, when mankind relies continually less and less on Divine protection. No longer is the Demon a stealthy, furtive Spirit, a thief of the night gliding about in the darkness, but an undaunted foe, the

[p. 140]

bold ape of God, who under God's own sun, in the open light of day, mimics the works of His hands. What authority is there for the statement,--legends, tradition? Not these only, but the gravest Doctors of the Church. The Devil transforms all creatures, Albertus Magnus declares. St. Thomas Aquinas goes further still. "All the changes capable of occurring naturally and by way of genus, these the Devil can imitate." A startling admission truly, which in so grave a mouth amounts to nothing less than the setting up of another Creator in face of the accredited Artificer of the Universe! "But," he goes on, "whatever can come to pass without germination, a changing of man to beast, the raising to life of a dead man, acts like these the Devil cannot perform." This is indeed to reduce God's domain to small proportions; strictly speaking, He has nothing left Him but miracles, events of rare and altogether special occurrence. But that daily miracle, life, is no more his exclusively; the Devil, his imitator, shares the realm of Nature along with Him.

So far as Man is concerned, whose weak vision draws no distinction between Nature as created by God and Nature as created by the Devil, this is a bi-partition of the Universe. Henceforth a dreadful uncertainty must brood over everything. The innocency of Nature is lost. The limpid spring, the white flower, the little bird, are they really of God's making, or merely mocking imitations, so many snares to catch mankind? . . . Retro Satanas! All nature comes under suspicion. Both creations, the good no less than the doubtful, are darkened and degraded. The shadow of the Evil One obscures the light of day, and hangs looming over every department of human life. To judge by appearances and men's apprehensions, he not merely shares the world with God, but has usurped it in its entirety.

Such is the state of things in Sprenger's day. His book is full of the most melancholy admissions with regard to the impotency of God. He allows it, is his phrase, to be so. To allow so complete an illusion, to let it be believed that the Devil is everything, God nothing, is really more than merely to allow; it is to proclaim

[p. 141]

the damnation of a world of unhappy souls utterly defenceless against so grave an error. No prayers, no acts of penitence, no pilgrimages are of any avail; no! not even (he admits the fact) the Sacrament of the Altar. What an admission of weakness, what a loss of prestige! Nuns, after full and free confession, the host actually in their mouths, are forced to own that at that very moment they feel the fiendish lover, shameless and unabashed, troubling their senses and refusing to quit his hold over them. And, cross-questioned, they added with tears and sobs that the Foul Fiend has their bodies, because he possesses their souls already.

 

The Manichaeans of old, the Albigensian heretics of a later time, were accused of believing in the power of Evil which contended against the Good, making the Devil the equal of God. But now he is more than the equal; if God, incarnate in the consecrated host, can avail nothing, why! then the Devil must be the stronger and more effectual of the two.

I no longer wonder at the extraordinary aspect presented by the world at that date. Spain with gloomy ferocity, Germany with the terrified and pedantic rage the Malleus bears witness to, pursue the insolent and victorious usurper in the persons of the wretched creatures whom he chooses to take up his abode in; the stake and the rope are ruthlessly employed against the fleshly tabernacles that have given him shelter. Finding him over-strong for them in the soul, persecutors are fain to drive him out of the bodies of men. But where is the use? Burn one Sorceress, he makes good his hold on another; nay! sometimes (if we are to believe Sprenger) he seizes the very priest who is exorcising him, and wins a special triumph in the actual person of his judge.

The Dominicans, driven almost to despair, recommended intercessions to the Virgin, unceasing repetitions of the Ave Maria. Still Sprenger admits even this remedy to be ephemeral. A suppliant may be whipped off between two Aves. Hence the

[p. 142]

invention of the Rosary, the chaplet of the Aves, by the help of which the devotee can mumble on mechanically for an indefinite time, while the mind is occupied elsewhere. Whole nations adopt this first attempt in the art whereby Loyola will essay to lead the world, and of which his Exercitia are the ingenious if rudimentary beginnings.

 

All this might seem to contradict what we said in the preceding chapter as to the decay of Sorcery. The Devil is now popular, and active everywhere; he appears to have won the day. But does he really profit by his victory? Does he gain in actual, substantial influence? Yes! from the new point of view of that scientific revolt that is to give us the bright, light-bringing renaissance. No! from the point of view of the old darksome spirit of Sorcery. The diabolic legends, in the sixteenth century, both more numerous and more widely diffused than ever, show a marked tendency towards the grotesque. Men tremble, but they laugh at one and the same time. [*2]

Footnotes

^137:1 Faustin Helie, in his learned and instructive Traite de l'instruction criminelle (vol. i. 398), has explained with perfect lucidity the way in which Innocent III., about 1200, abolished the safeguards of accusation, till then held indispensable,--in particular the liability to a charge of slander on the part of the accuser. These safeguards were superseded by various subterranean modes of procedure, Denunciation, Inquisition, etc. See Soldan for instances of the appalling ease with which these latter methods were applied. Verily blood was poured out like water.

^142:2 See my Memoires de Luther, for the Kilcrops and the like.

     The Sorceress, by Jules Michelet, [1939], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 143]

  

15

  

A HUNDRED YEARS' TOLERATION in FRANCE

THE Church always granted the judge and the accuser a right to the confiscated property of those condemned for Sorcery. Wherever the Canon Law remains powerful, trials for Witchcraft multiply, and enrich the clergy. Wherever lay tribunals make good their claim to try such cases, the latter grow fewer and fewer and finally , at any rate for a hundred years in France,--between 1450 and 1550.

A first gleam of light is visible as early as the middle of the fifteenth century, and it emanates from France. The revision of the case against Jeanne d'Arc by the Parlement and her rehabilitation set me thinking about dealings with spirits, good or evil, and the mistakes committed by the ecclesiastical tribunals. A vile Sorceress in the eyes of the English and in those of the wisest Doctors of the Council of Bale, for the French she is a Saint and a divine Sibyl. The rehabilitation of the Maid of Orleans inaugurates in France an era of toleration. The Parlement of Paris likewise rehabilitates the so-called Vauclois of Arras. In 1498 the same body dismisses as a mere madman a wizard brought before its bar. Not a single condemnation for Sorcery was registered under Charles VIII., Louis XII., or Francois I.

Just the opposite in Spain; here under the pious Queen Isabella (1506), under Cardinal Ximenes, they begin burning Witches. Geneva, then governed by its Bishop (1515), burned five hundred in three months. The Emperor Charles V., in his Germanic Constitutions, tries in vain to establish the principle

[p. 144]

that "Sorcery, as causing injury to property and person, is a civil matter, not an ecclesiastical." In vain he abolishes confiscation of goods,--except in the case of High Treason. The smaller Prince Bishops, of whose revenues Sorcery supplied a principal source, go on savagely burning all the same. The microscopic bishopric of Bamberg sends six hundred individuals to the stake in one batch, and that of Wurzburg nine hundred! The procedure is of the simplest. To begin with, apply torture to the witnesses, and build up a travesty, a caricature of evidence, by dint of pain and terror. Then drag a confession from the accused by excruciating agonies, and believe this confession against the direct evidence of facts. For instance, a Sorceress confesses she had recently dug up a child's dead body from the churchyard, to use it in her magic compounds. Her husband says, "Go to the churchyard and look; the child is there now." The grave is opened, and the body found intact in its coffin. Yet the judge decides, against the testimony of his own eyes, that it is only an appearance, an illusion of Satan. He credits the woman's confession in preference to the actual fact,--and the poor creature is burned. [*1]

Things reached such a pass among these worthy Prince Bishops that later on the most bigoted emperor there ever was, the Emperor of the Thirty Years' War, Ferdinand II., is forced to interfere and establish at Bamberg an Imperial Commissioner to see the rights of the empire are not infringed and that the episcopal judge shall not open these trials by tortures which made the result a foregone conclusion and led straight to the stake.

The Witches were very easily convicted on their own confessions, sometimes, without any application of torture. Many were really half-witted. They were quite willing to admit transforming themselves into beasts. The Italian Sorceresses often turned into cats--they said so themselves--and, slipping under

[p. 145]

the doors of houses, would suck children's blood. In the region of great forests, Lorraine and the Jura, women readily became wolves and devoured travellers, if we are to believe their own accounts, even when there were no wayfarers travelling the roads to devour. Anyway they were burned. Young girls would solemnly declare they had sacrificed their maidenhood to the Devil, and on examination be found virgins still. They were burned likewise. Not a few seemed positively to want to go to the stake, and the sooner the better,--the result of insanity, frenzy, sometimes of despair. An English Witch on being led to the stake, tells the crowd not to blame her judges. "I wanted to die. My family shunned me, my husband repudiated me. If I lived, I should only be a disgrace to my friends. . . . I longed for death, and I lied to gain my end."

 

The first avowed plea for toleration against the dull-witted Sprenger, his horrible Manual and his persecuting Dominicans, was advanced by a lawyer of Constance, Molitor by name. He maintains for one thing with excellent good sense the unreasonableness of taking the confessions of Sorceresses seriously, inasmuch as from the nature of the case it was the Father of Lies, and none other, who spoke by their mouth. He made fun of the pretended miracles of the Devil, and asserted they were mere figments of the imagination. Indirectly again the mockers, Ulrich von Hutten and Erasmus, in the Satires they composed upon the imbecility of the Dominicans, dealt a severe blow to the Inquisition. Cardau says straight out, "In order to succeed to the goods of the victims, identically the same persons acted as accusers and judges, condemned the innocent to death, and to bolster up their case were ready to invent a thousand fables."

The Apostle of Toleration, Chatillon, who maintained, against Catholics and Protestants alike, that we should not burn heretics, to say nothing of sorcerers, started men's minds in a better path. Agrippa, Lavatier, Wyer above all, the illustrious physician of Cleves, said very justly that, if these unhappy

[p. 146]

beings, the Sorceresses, are the Devil's playthings, as they are said to be, it is first and foremost the Devil we must deal with, that we should try to cure them rather than burn them off-hand. Before long sundry Parisian doctors push their incredulity as far as to maintain that all the devil-possessed, all the Sorceresses, are nothing more nor less than impostors. This was going too far; the great majority were really sufferers from disease, dominated by a morbid hallucination.

 

The gloomy reign of Henry II. and Diane de Poitiers ended the days of toleration; heretics and Sorcerers alike are sent to the stake under the fair Diane's influence. Catherine de Medicis on the contrary, surrounded as she was by Astrologers and Magicians, was all in favor of shielding these proteges of hers. They multiplied apace; Trois-Echelles, brought to trial under Charles IX., reckons them by the hundred thousand, and declares all France to be bewitched.

Agrippa and others maintain that all Science is contained in Magic--white Magic of course, be it understood. But the terror of fools and the rage of fanatics make small distinction between white and black. Against Wyer, against the genuine men of science, against light and toleration, a violent reaction of darkness and obscurantism arises from a quarter one would least of all have expected. The magistracy, which for nearly a whole century had shown itself just and enlightened, now largely involved in the Catholic Bond of Spain and the fiercely bigoted Ligue, prove themselves more priestly than the priests. While driving the Inquisition out of France, they match it and would fain eclipse it with their own severities. Indeed, they went so far that on a single occasion and single-handed the Parlement of Toulouse burned four hundred human bodies at the stake. Imagine the horror of it; think of the thick, black smoke from all this burning flesh, picture the masses of fat that amid yells and howls melt in horrid deliquescence and pour boiling down

[p. 147]

the gutters! A vile and sickening sight such as had not been since the broilings and roastings of the Albigensians!

But even this is not enough for Bodin, the Legist of Angers, and the furious antagonist of Wyer. He begins by declaring the Sorcerers are so many they could in Europe alone make another host of Xerxes, an army of eighteen hundred thousand men. Then he expresses a similar wish to Caligula's, that all these two millions of men had one common body, so that he, the redoubtable Bodin, might judge them and burn them all at one fell swoop.

 

Presently a rivalry springs up. The lawyers begin to complain that the priest is often too closely connected with Sorcery himself to be a trustworthy judge. And there is no doubt the jurists do for a time seem surer even than the clergy. The Jesuit pleader, Del Rio, in Spain, Remy (1596) in Lorraine, Boguet (1602) in the Jura, Leloyer (1605) in Marne, are incomparable persecutors, men to make Torquemada die of envy.

Lorraine was swept by a dreadful contagion, as it were, of Sorcerers and Visionaries. The populace, driven to despair by the everlasting depredations of marching armies and marauding bands, had long ceased to pray to any deity but the Devil. Many villages, in their terror, distracted between two horrors, the Sorcerers on the one side and the judges on the other, longed, if Remy, Judge of Nancy, speaks truth, to quit their lands and all they possessed and fly to another country. In his book dedicated to the Cardinal de Lorraine (1596), he claims positively to have burned within sixteen years eight hundred Sorceresses. "So good is my justice," he says, "that last year there were no less than sixteen killed themselves rather than pass through my hands."

 

The priests were humiliated. Could they have done any better than this layman themselves? Accordingly the monks, Lords

[p. 148]

of Saint-Claude, when they found their subjects addicted to Sorcery, chose another layman, the worthy Boguet, to act as their judge. In this dreary Jura country, a poverty-stricken district of meagre pastures and barren pine-woods, the serfs were for ever devoting themselves to the Devil out of sheer hopelessness. To a man they worshipped the black cat.

Boguet's book (1602) became an authority of the greatest influence and importance. The lawyers of Parlement studied this golden book of the little judge of Saint-Claude as the manual and mainstay of their practice. Boguet is in very deed a typical Legist, scrupulous even according to his lights. He inveighs against the bad faith displayed in these trials; he will not have the advocate betray his client, nor the judge promise the accused a pardon to lure him on to his death. He disapproves of the very untrustworthy tests to which Witches were still habitually compelled to submit. "Torture," he says, "is both useless and unnecessary. They never give in under it." Lastly, he possesses humanity enough to have them strangled before being cast into the flames, always excepting in the case of the female werewolves, "whom we must take every precaution to burn alive." He refuses to believe Satan willing to make pact with children. "Satan is cunning, and he knows far too well that under fourteen the bargain with a minor would be liable to forfeiture on the ground of insufficient age and discretion." Then children are safe from the stake? Not at all; for he contradicts himself on this point, declaring elsewhere that this leprosy can only be cleansed by burning all, even to babes in the cradle. He would have come to that if he had lived longer. He turned the whole countryside into a desert. Never was judge more conscientious, more thorough, more bent on extermination.

But it was in the Parlement of Bordeaux that the paean of victory of lay jurisdiction rose loudest in Lancre's book, entitled, Inconstance des Demons (1610 and 1613) . The author, a man of intelligence and ability, and a Counsellor of the Parlement named, relates triumphantly the successful battle against

[p. 149]

the Devil he had waged in the Basque country, where in less than three months he has worked off I forget how many Witches and, more important still, three priests. He looks with contemptuous pity on the Spanish Inquisition, which at Logrono, on the frontier of Navarre and Castile, not far from his own district, has had a trial dragging on for two years, ending finally with a poor, miserable little auto-da-fe, from which a whole host of women got off scot-free.

Footnotes

^144:1 See Soldan in confirmation of this true story, and for facts about Germany generally.

     The Sorceress, by Jules Michelet, [1939], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 150]

  

16

  

THE BASQUE WITCHES
 1609

THIS high-handed execution of priests shows plainly enough that M. de Lancre was a man of an enterprising and independent spirit. The same is true of him in politics. In his book Du Prince ("Of the Prince") 1617, he makes no bones about declaring that "the Law is above the King."

Never have the Basques been better characterised than in his work L'Inconstance des Demons, above mentioned. In France no less than in Spain, the privileges they enjoyed really constituted them a virtual republic. The French Basques owed nothing whatever to the King beyond the obligation of serving him under arms; at the first tuck of drum they were bound to put two thousand men in the field, under their own Basque captains. The clergy were of small weight or account, and did little in the way of punishing Sorcerers, being in the trade themselves. The priests used to dance, wear swords, and take their mistresses with them to the "Sabbath." These mistresses were the priests' sacristanesses or benedictes, the female officials who kept the church in order. The cure quarrelled with no one, said his White Mass for God day by day, and a-nights the Black Mass for the Devil,--sometimes actually in the same church (Lancre).

The Basques of Bayonne and Saint-Jean-de-Luz, a reckless and fantastic race, and marked by an incredible degree of audacious daring, accustomed as they were to visit the wildest seas in pursuit of the whale fishery, made many widows. Moreover, they crowded in numbers to the colonies founded by King Henri IV., and formed the empire of Canada, leaving their wives

[p. 151]

behind in the care of God or the Devil, as the case might be. As for the children, these sailors, a very upright and godfearing set of men, would have made more account of them, if they could only have been more sure on the question of fatherhood. Returning after their long periods of absence, they would reckon up the time and count the months,--and invariably found themselves quite out of their calculations.

The women, pretty, bold-eyed and imaginative creatures, would pass the whole day in the churchyards, sitting on the tombs and gossiping of the Witches' Sabbath, which they were going to attend so soon as night fell. This was the passion, the infatuation of their lives.

Nature makes them Sorceresses from the cradle, these daughters of ocean nurtured on weird and fantastic legends. They swim like fishes, every one of them, and sport boldly amid the Atlantic rollers. Manifestly their master the Prince of the Air, king of winds and wild dreams, the same who inspired the Sibyl and whispered the secrets of the future in her ear.

The very judge that burns them is all the while charmed with their fascinations. "When you see them pass," he writes, "their hair flying in the wind and brushing their shoulders, so well adorned and caparisoned are they, as they go, with their lovely locks, that the sun glancing through them as through a cloud, makes a flashing aureole of dazzling radiance. . . . Hence the dangerous fascination of their eyes, perilous for love no less than for witchery."

This worthy citizen of Bordeaux and amiable magistrate, the earliest type of those polished men of the world who ornamented and enlivened the Bench in the seventeenth century, plays the lute in the intervals of judicial business, and even sets the Sorceresses dancing before having them burned. He writes well and in a style of much greater lucidity than any of his fellows. And yet at the same time we discern in his case a fresh source of obscurity, arising inevitably from the circumstances of his day, viz. that among so great a number of Witches, all of whom the

[p. 152]

judge cannot of course condemn to the stake, the greater part are quite clever enough to understand he is likely to show indulgence towards such as shall best enter into his preconceived ideas and feed his peculiar passion. What passion was this? First and foremost, a common failing enough, love of the marvellous and horrible for its own sake, the pleasure of being startled and terrified, and added to this, it must be admitted, the fun of indecent revelations. A touch of vanity besides; the more formidable and fierce these women are artful enough to make the Devil appear, the more is the judge flattered and exalted who can master so fell an adversary. He savours the sweets of victory, gloats over his silly success, poses triumphant amid all this foolish cackle.

The finest example is to be found in the Spanish official report of the Auto-da-fe at Logrono (November 9th, 1610), as given in Llorente. Lancre, who quotes it not without envy, and is by way of depreciating the whole thing, yet admits the unspeakable charm of the fete, its magnificence as a spectacle, and the profound effect of the music. On one scaffold stood the condemned Sorceresses, a scanty band, and on another the crowd of the reprieved. The repentant heroine, whose confession was read out, stuck at nothing, however wild and improbable. At the Sabbaths they ate children, hashed; and as second course dead wizards dug up from their graves. Toads dance, talk, complain amorously of their mistresses' unkindnesses, and get the Devil to scold them. This latter sees the Witches home with great politeness, lighting the way with the blazing arm of an unbaptised infant, etc., etc.

Witchcraft among the French Basques showed a less fantastic aspect. It would seem that with them the "Sabbath" was little more than a fete on a large scale, which everybody, including even the nobles of the country, attended in search of amusement. In the front rank appeared a row of veiled and masked figures, believed by some to be Princes. "In former days," Lancre says, "only the simple, dull-witted peasantry of the

[p. 153]

[paragraph continues] Landes were to be seen at these assemblages. Now people of quality are to be found there." By way of compliment to these local notabilities, Satan would frequently, under such circumstances, elect a Bishop of the Sabbath. Such is the title the young Seigneur Lancinena received from him, with whom the Devil was graciously pleased personally to open the ball.

Thus influentially supported, the Sorceresses reigned supreme, exercising over the country an almost incredible domination by means of the terrors of the imagination. Numbers of persons came to believe themselves their victims, and actually fell seriously ill. Many were attacked by epilepsy, and started barking like dogs. One small town alone, Acqs, counted among its inhabitants as many as forty of these unhappy creatures. Such was the terrible relationship that bound them under the Witch's influence, that on one occasion a lady, called as a witness, at the mere approach of the Sorceress, whom she could not even see, began barking furiously, and was utterly unable to stop herself.

Those who were accredited with so formidable a power were masters of the situation, and no man durst shut his door against them. A magistrate even, the Criminal Assessor of Bayonne, allowed the "Sabbath" to be held at his house. The Seigneur de Saint-Pe, Urtubi, was constrained to celebrate the festival at his castle. But so much were his wits shaken by the event that he became firmly persuaded a Witch was sucking his blood. Terror lending him courage, he and another baron hastened to Bordeaux and appealed to the Parlement there. The latter body obtained the King's orders that two of its members, Messieurs d'Espagnet and de Lancre, should be despatched to judge the Sorcerers and Sorceresses of the Basque provinces. They were given plenary powers, subject to no appeal; and setting to work with unexampled vigour, in four short months tried from sixty to eighty Witches, besides examining five hundred more equally marked with the Devil's stigmata, but who figured in the courts only as witnesses (May to August, 1609).

[p. 154]

It was an enterprise by no means devoid of danger for two men and a few soldiers to proceed to such measures in the midst of a lawless and headstrong population, and a mob of sailors' wives, notoriously a reckless and violent set of women. A second risk came from the priests, numbers of whom were Sorcerers themselves, and whom the lay Commissioners were bound to bring to trial in spite of the fierce opposition of the clergy.

On the judges' arrival many fled with all speed to the mountains. Others put a better face on the matter and remained, declaring it was the judges who would be burned. So undismayed were the Witches, that actually in court they would doze off in the "Sabbatical" sleep, and openly describe on awakening how before the judges' very eyes they had been enjoying the delights of satanic intercourse. Several declared, "Our only regret is that we cannot properly show him how we burn to suffer for his sake."

When questioned they would affirm they could not speak,--that Satan rose in their throats and obstructed their utterance.

The younger of the two Commissioners, Lancre, the same who writes these accounts, was a man of the world, and the Witches were not slow to perceive that with such a judge to deal with there were possible loopholes of escape. The phalanx was broken. A beggar-girl of seventeen, Little Murgin, as she was called (Margarita), who had found in Sorcery a profitable speculation, and who, while scarce more than a child herself, had been in the habit of bringing children and offering them to the Devil, undertook along with her companion--one Lisalda, a girl of the same age--to denounce all the rest. She told everything, and wrote it all down, with all the vivacity, exaggeration, and fiery emphasis of a true daughter of Spain, along with a hundred indecent details, whether true or false. She both terrified and diverted the judges, twisting them round her little finger and leading them whither she pleased like a pair of dummies. They actually entrusted this vicious, irresponsible, passionate girl with the grim task of searching the bodies of young women and boys for

[p. 155]

signs of the spot where Satan had put his mark. The place was recognised by the fact of its being insensible to pain, so that needles could be driven into it without extracting a cry from the victim. A surgeon tortured the old women, Margarita the younger ones, who were called as witnesses, but who, if she declared them marked in this way, might easily find their way to the bench of the accused. An odious consummation truly,--that this brazen-browed creature, thus made absolute mistress of the fate and fortune of these unhappy beings, should go pricking them with needles at her pleasure, and might adjudge, if such were her caprice, any one of their bleeding bodies to a cruel death!

Such was the empire she had gained over Lancre she actually induced him to believe that while he slept in his house at Saint-Pe, surrounded by his serving-men and escort, the Devil entered his chamber at night, and said the Black Mass there; that the Witches forced their way under his very bed-curtains to poison him, but had found him too securely guarded by God. The Black Mass was served by the Baroness de Lancinena, with whom Satan had casual intercourse in the judge's apartment itself. The object of this pitiful tale is pretty plain; the beggar-girl bears a grudge against the Great Lady, who was likewise a pretty woman, and who, but for this slanderous story, might also have gained some ascendency over the gallant functionary.

 

Lancre and his colleague were appalled, but continued to advance from sheer dread of the dangers of drawing back. They ordered the royal gallows to be planted on the very spots where Satan had kept Sabbath, a proceeding well calculated to strike terror and convince all men of the tremendous power they derived from being armed with the King's authority. Denunciations came pouring down like hail. All the women of the countryside came filing in unceasingly to lay accusations one against the other. Eventually the very children were brought and made to give incriminating evidence against their own mothers. Lancre decides with all due gravity that a witness of eight years old

[p. 156]

is capable of affording good, sufficient, and trustworthy evidence.

M. d'Espagnet was unable to give more than a passing moment to the business, being due in a short time in the States of Bearn. Lancre, infected in spite of himself by the fierce energy of the younger Witches who hurried to denounce their elder sisters, and who would have been in sore peril themselves had they failed to get these latter burned, pushed on the trials whip and spur at full gallop. A sufficient number of Sorceresses were condemned to the flames. Finding their fate sealed, they too had spoken out at last, and scattered denunciations right and left. As the first batch were on their way to the stake, a ghastly scene occurred. Executioner, officer, and police all thought their last day was come. The crowd rushed savagely upon the carts, to force the unhappy occupants to withdraw their accusations. Men held daggers at their throats, while many of them almost perished under the nails of their infuriated sisters.

Eventually, however, justice was satisfactorily vindicated. This done, the Commissioners proceeded to a more arduous and delicate task, viz. the trial of eight priests who had been arrested. The revelations of the young Witches had thrown a flood of light on their lives and morals, and Lancre speaks of their dissolute morals as one who has full knowledge at first hand. Not only does he reproach them with their gallant doings at the nocturnal "Sabbaths," but insists particularly upon their relations with their sacristanesses, those church-dames or benedictes, as they were called, mentioned on a previous page. He even condescends to repeat vulgar tales, how the priests sent the husbands to Newfoundland, and imported from Japan the devils who yielded up the wives into their hands.

The clergy were much exercised, and the Bishop of Bayonne would have resisted, if he had dared. Failing sufficient courage, he kept away, appointing his Vicar-General to watch the case for him. Luckily the Devil helped the accused more efficiently than the Bishop. He can unlock every door; so that it happened

[p. 157]

one fine morning that five out of the eight escaped. The Commissioners, without further loss of time, burned the three that were left.

 

All this took place about August, 1609. The Spanish Inquisitors, who were holding their trials at Logrono, did not on their side reach the final Auto-da-fe before November 8th, 1610. They had had far more difficulties to contend with than their French confreres, in view of the prodigious, the appalling number of the accused. Impossible to burn a whole population! They consulted the Pope and the greatest Church dignitaries of Spain, and it was decided to beat a retreat. The understanding was that only obstinate criminals should be sent to the stake, such as persisted in their denials, while all who confessed should be let go. The same method, the application of which had hitherto always saved priests brought to trial for incontinence of opinion or of conduct. Their confession was held sufficient, supplemented by a trifling penance (see Llorente).

The Inquisition, of uncompromising severity towards heretics and cruelly hard on the Moors and Jews was much less harsh where the Sorcerers were concerned. These latter, shepherds in a great many cases, were in no way involved in opposition to Mother Church. The degraded, sometimes bestial amusements of goat-herds occasioned little anxiety to the enemies of liberty of conscience.

 

Lancre's book was composed mainly with the object of demonstrating the vast superiority of the public justice of France, the justice administered by laymen and members of the legal Parlements, to that of the priests. It is written currente calamo, in a light, easy, happy style, clearly manifesting the author's satisfaction at having honourably extricated himself from a serious danger. He is something of a Gascon, boastful and vain of his own achievements. He relates with pride how, on the occasion of the "Sabbath" following the first execution of Witches,

[p. 158]

the children of the latter came to lay complaint of their treatment before Satan. He replied that their mothers were not burned at all, but alive and happy. From the depths of the smoky cloud the children actually thought they heard their mothers' voices declaring they were now in full and complete happiness. Nevertheless, Satan was afraid, and kept away for four successive "Sabbaths," sending as his substitute a quite subordinate imp. He did not put in an appearance again until the 22nd of July. When the Sorcerers asked him the reason of his absence, he told them, "I have been to plead your cause against Janicot (Little John, this is the name he bestows on Jesus). I have won my case; and the Witches still remaining in prison will not be burned."

The Prince of Lies was once more shown to be a liar; and the victorious judge assures us that when the last of them was burned, a swarm of toads was seen to escape from her head. The assembled people fell upon these with stones so furiously that the Sorceress was really more stoned than burned to death. But, in spite of all their efforts, they failed to account for one great black toad, which avoiding alike flames and sticks and stones, escaped, like a demon as he was, to a place where he could never afterwards be discovered.

     The Sorceress, by Jules Michelet, [1939], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 159]

  

17

  

SATAN TURNS ECCLESIASTIC
 1610

WHATEVER the appearance of fanaticism and satanic possession still displayed by the Sorceresses, it is quite plain both from Lancre's account and others of the seventeenth century that by this time the Witches' Sabbath was become primarily a matter of money-making. The levy contributions which are virtually compulsory, demand payment from those present, and fine the absent. At Brussels and in Picardy they pay in accordance with a fixed tariff anyone bringing in a new member to the confraternity.

In the Basque countries there is no attempt made at concealment. Assemblages are held twelve thousand strong, including persons of every class, rich and poor, priests and nobles. Satan, a nobleman himself, over and above his triple horns, wears a laced hat, like a gentleman. By this time he has found his old throne, the Druid stone, too hard a seat, and has given himself a good gilded armchair. Does this mean he is growing old? Nimbler than in his young days, he plays all sorts of pranks and gambols, springs up like a Jack-in-the-box from the depths of a huge crock, officiates, legs kicking in the air and his head downwards.

He is for having everything done decently and in order, and defrays the expenses of the arrangements and decorations. Besides the usual yellow, red, and blue fires that amuse the eyes and alternately reveal and conceal the flying shadows, he entertains the ear with strange music, "in especial certain little bells that tickle" the nerves, like the penetrating vibrations of some

[p. 160]

particular harmonies. To crown his magnificence, Satan has silver plate brought for use at the feast. His very toads display an affectation of refinement and elegance, and like little lords, come to the festival tricked out in green velvet.

The general appearance is that of a huge fair, a vast masked ball, when the disguises are of the thinnest. Satan, who knows his world, opens the dance with the Bishop of the "Sabbath," or else the King and Queen,--dignitaries established on purpose to flatter the bigwigs, the rich or noble personages who honour the assembly by their presence.

All is changed from the old grim festival of revolt, the sinister orgy of serfs, of Jacques as they were nicknamed, communicating by night in love, by day in murder. The frenzied Sabbatical Round no longer forms the one and only dance. It is supplemented by Moorish dances, lively or languishing, amorous and obscene, in which girls trained for the purpose, such as the Murgin and the Lisalda mentioned above, simulate and parade the most lust-provoking actions. These dances, it is said, were the irresistible attraction which among the Basques inevitably drew to the Witches' Sabbath all the world of women, wives, maids, and widows,--the last especially in great numbers.

Apart from these diversions and the feast to follow, it would be difficult to account for the unbounded popularity the "Sabbath" enjoyed. Loveless love was the dominant note; the festival was expressly and avowedly a celebration of female sterility. This Boguet establishes beyond a doubt.

True, Lancre tells a different tale in one place, in order to scare women away and make them afraid of being got with child. But as a rule he is more sincere, and agrees with Boguet. The cruel, indecent examination he undertook of the Witches' persons is good and sufficient proof of his belief in their sterility, and that sterile passive love is the foundation-stone of the "Sabbatical" observances.

This could not but have cast a gloom over the festival, if the men had had hearts. It was the mad women who flocked there

[p. 161]

to dance and feast that paid for all; but they were resigned to their fate, their sole aspiration being not to leave the place pregnant. True enough they bore the burden of wretchedness and poverty far more than men did; and Sprenger tells us the dismal cry that as early as his day would escape them in the very act of love, "May the Devil have the fruit of our embrace!" Yet in his time (1500) living cost but a penny a day, while at the later period here referred to (1600), under Henri IV., it was difficult to keep body and soul together at ten times that expense. Throughout the whole century, the desire, the craving for sterility is for ever on the increase.

This mournful reserve, this fear of mutual love, must have rendered the "Sabbath" a cold, wearisome function, had not the expert mistresses of the ceremonies, who managed the entertainment, exaggerated the burlesque element, and diverted the spectators with many a ludicrous interlude. Accordingly the opening ceremony of the "Sabbath," the world-old scene, coarse and realistic, of the pretended fecundation of the Chief Sorceress by Satan (in former days by Priapus), was followed by another travesty, a lavabo, [*1] a cold purification (to chill and sterilise), which she received not without grimaces expressive of shuddering and mortal chill, the whole forming a broad farce in which the Sorceress usually substituted an attractive-looking understudy for herself, the Queen of the "Sabbath," some young and pretty married woman.

Another distraction, no less abominable, centred round the black wafer, the black radish, the subject of a thousand coarse witticisms in ancient Greek days, when it was used as an instrument of punishment upon the man-woman or puthic and the

[p. 162]

young debauchee who went with other men's wives. Satan sliced it into little discs which he then solemnly swallowed.

The grand finale was, according to Lancre,--which means, no doubt, according to the two hussies who made him believe whatever they pleased,--a very astonishing thing to happen before so numerous an assemblage. Incest would seem to have been publicly, indiscriminately, and ostentatiously indulged in, by way of reproducing the old satanic conditions needed to originate the Sorceress--that is to say, the mother's impregnation by her own son. But this horror was not only unnecessary by this time, when Sorcery had become hereditary in certain fixed and legally descended families, but impossible in fact, a thing altogether too shocking to be endured. Possibly merely a travesty of it was acted, a grotesque kind of miracle-play between a comic Semiramis and a dotard Ninus.

There was another and probably a more serious feature, a comedy of real and actual life, and one that points strongly to the presence of persons of high rank and corrupt morals,--his was an odious sort of practical joke, a cruel and coarse mystification.

They would entice to the festival some ill-advised married man, whom they proceeded to intoxicate with their deadly brews (datura, belladonna, and the like), till he was spellbound and lost all power of motion and speech, but not the use of his eyes. His wife, also spellbound, but in a different way, with erotic beverages and reduced to a deplorable state of self-abandonment, would then be shown him naked and unashamed, patiently enduring the caresses of another before the indignant eyes of her natural protector, who could not stir a finger to help her.

His manifest despair, his unavailing efforts to speak, his violent struggles to move his torpid limbs, his dumb rage, his rolling eyes, all provided the spectators with a cruel pleasure, not dissimilar, be it said in passing, to that afforded by certain comedies of Moliere's. In the present instance the play was all palpitating with actuality, and was easily pushed to the last

[p. 163]

extremities of sin and shame. Doubtless the shame was followed by no after effects, as was the invariable rule at these Witches' Sabbaths, and next day's recollections were but dim in the brains of the now sobered victims; but the spectators, the actors, were they likely to forget?

These criminal doings show plainly the aristocracy is now at work, bearing no resemblance whatever to the old fraternity of serfs, the primitive "Sabbath,"--impious and impure no doubt, but free, open, and aboveboard, where everything was voluntary and done by universal consent.

Satan, always corrupt, is evidently going from bad to worse. The Evil One is growing a polite, adroit, soft-handed gentleman,--and the change only leaves him a more false-hearted and filthy-minded villain than before. What a new and strange departure is this for a Witches' Sabbath, to find him hand and glove with the priests! What of the cure who brings his benedicte, his sacristaness, to the feast, who burlesques the holy offices, says the White Mass in the morning and the Black Mass at night! Satan, Lancre says, recommends him to debauch his penitents, his spiritual daughters. Simple-minded magistrate, who actually seems unaware that for a good century now Satan has well understood and made good profit of the advantages offered by the Church. The Devil has turned Confessor, Director of Consciences; or if you like it better, the Confessor has turned Devil.

Just recall, my worthy Lancre, the series of trials beginning in 1491, which it may well be did something towards teaching the Parlement of Paris toleration. This body discontinues almost entirely the practice of sending the Devil to the stake, realising that he is no more now than a mask, a cloak, to cover priestly offenders.

Not a few nuns fall victims to his new ruse of borrowing the face and figure of a beloved confessor. We may instance the case of Jeanne Pothierre, a nun of Le Quesnoy, a woman of middle age, forty-five years old, but, alas! only too susceptible.

[p. 164]

[paragraph continues] She declares her passion for her father confessor, who takes good care not to listen to her, and runs away to Falempin, a place at some leagues' distance. The Devil, who never sleeps, at once recognises his advantage, and seeing her (in the chronicler's words) "pricked by the thorns of Venus, he cunningly adopts the form of said father, and returning night after night to the convent, enjoys her favours, deceiving her so thoroughly that she declares herself to have been had by him--she had kept count--four hundred and thirty-four times. [*2] . . ." Her subsequent repentance met with no little compassion, and she was speedily relieved from the agonies of shame, a good walled dungeon being at once provided for her in the near neighbourhood, at the Castle of Selles, where she expired in a few days, dying a peaceful, edifying death as a good Catholic should.

What could be more touching? . . . But after all the incident was a trifling thing compared with the notable Gauffridi affair, which occurred at Marseilles while Lancre was still busy at Bayonne.

The Parlement of Provence had no occasion to envy the successes of their confreres at Bordeaux. The lay jurisdiction once more seized the opportunity of a trial for Sorcery to institute a systematic reform of ecclesiastical morals, and undertook a searching scrutiny into the cloistered life and mysterious secrets of the nunneries. The opportunity was a rare and exceptional one, involving as it did, and was bound to do, a remarkable concurrence of circumstances, a series of savage jealousies and acts of reprisal between priest and priest. But for this indiscreet and passionate violence, a passion and violence we shall see breaking out again and again on subsequent occasions, we should possess no information whatever as to the real destiny of the vast population who live and die within these gloomy walls, and never hear one word of what takes place behind

[p. 165]

convent bars and within the portals the father confessor is alone privileged to enter.

The Basque priest Lancre depicts, so volatile and worldly, tripping sword on thigh to dance at the nocturnal "Sabbath," his sacristaness by his side, was not an object of great concern or apprehension to the authorities. He was not of the sort the Spanish Inquisitors took such pains to screen, and for whose peccadilloes that stern conclave showed itself so indulgent. It is clear enough from what Lancre hints, in spite of all his reticence, there is something else behind. The States General of 1614, too, when they lay it down that priests ought not to try priests, are likewise thinking of something else. Here lies the mystery, the veil of secrecy that is rudely torn asunder by the Parlement of Provence. The father confessor of nuns, their tyrant and the irresponsible disposer of soul and body alike, fascinating them by all sorts of sinister acts--such is the figure revealed at the trial of Gauffridi, and at a later date in the dreadful affairs of Loudun and Louviers and others which Llorentz and Ricci and the rest have made us acquainted with.

The tactics adopted were invariably the same--to extenuate the scandal and mislead the public by concentrating its attention on the accidental form and diverting it from the essential substance. When a priest was tried for Sorcery, every pain was taken to lay stress on his doings as a Wizard, and juggle into the background his priestly character, in such a way as to put all the mischief down to the magic arts employed, and ignore the natural fascination exercised by a man occupying a position of absolute domination over a herd of women abandoned to his good pleasure.

The first of these sad affairs, that of Gauffridi, it was impossible to hush up. The thing had broken out in mid-Provence, in that land of light where the sunshine penetrates every crevice. The principal scene of the events that followed was not only Aix and Marseilles, but the well-known locality of La Sainte-Baume

[p. 166]

[paragraph continues] (The Holy Balm), a much-frequented place of pilgrimage, to which a crowd of curious devotees now resorted from every part of France to look on at the duel to the death to be fought out between two nuns afflicted with diabolical possession and between their respective demons. The Dominicans, who interfered in the matter as Inquisitors, deeply compromised themselves on this occasion through the keen attention they drew to the event by the marked partiality displayed by them in favour of one of the two combatants. For all the pains the Parlement subsequently displayed in order to arrive at an early settlement of the affair, the monks found themselves bound in honour to explain and excuse the attitude they had adopted. Hence the important book of the monk Michaelis, a strange medley of truth and myth, in which he exalts Gauffridi, the priest he sent to the stake, as the Prince of Magicians, not only of all France, but of Spain, Germany, England, Turkey, as well; in fact, of the whole habitable world.

Gauffridi appears to have been a man of agreeable manners and many accomplishments. A native of the mountains of Provence, he had travelled widely in the Low Countries and in the East. He enjoyed the best of reputations at Marseilles, where he served as priest at the Church Des Acoules. His Bishop thought highly of him, and the most pious ladies selected him as their Confessor. He possessed, we are told, a singular aptitude for winning the love of all such.

Nevertheless, he would probably have preserved his good repute intact had not a certain noble Provencal lady, a woman blinded by passion, and whom he had already ruined, pushed her infatuation to such lengths as to confide to his care (with a view, perhaps, to her religious education) a charming child of twelve, named Madeleine de la Palud, a pretty blonde of a gentle and affectionate disposition. Gauffridi lost his head, and failed to respect either her tender age or the sweet innocence and utter confidence of his pupil.

But presently she grew into a woman, and realised her calamity;

[p. 167]

how, noble as she was, she was bound to an inferior by an unworthy tie and could now never hope for marriage. In order to keep her, Gauffridi said he could wed her before the Devil, if he could not before God. He flattered her pride by telling her he was the Prince of the Magicians, and that she should be the Queen. He placed on her finger a silver ring, engraved with cabalistic signs. Did he take her with him to the Witches' Sabbath, or did he merely make her think she had been there, clouding her mind with magic potions and magnetic spells? This much at least is certain, that the poor child, torn between credulity and doubt, tormented by anxiety and terror, became from this time liable to fits of insanity and subject on occasion to epileptic seizures. Her overmastering dread was of being carried off alive by the Devil. She dared not stay longer in her father's house, and took refuge at the Convent of the Ursuline Sisters of Marseilles.

Footnotes

^161:1 The instrument employed is thus described by Boguet (p. 69): it is cold, hard, very slender, a little longer than a finger,--evidently a canula. In Lancre (pp. 224, 225, 226) it is much improved, less liable to inflict injury; it is an ell long and bent, part is of metal, the other part flexible, and so on. Satan, on the Basque borders, midway between two great monarchies, is well posted in the progress of this art, already very fashionable among the fine ladies of the sixteenth century.

^164:2 Massee, Chronique du Monde (1540), and the Chronicles of Hainault, Vinchant, etc.

     The Sorceress, by Jules Michelet, [1939], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 168]

  

18

  

GAUFFRIDI
 1610

OF all the Religious Orders, that of the Ursulines seemed the calmest, the least liable to give way to irrational impulses. The Sisters were not idle, employing a portion of their time in the education of little girls. The Catholic reaction, which had started with all the lofty aspirations of the Spanish cloister towards an ecstatic perfection, quite incapable of realisation under existing conditions, and had recklessly built a host of convents--Carmelite, Feuillantine, and Capuchin--had soon found its vigour exhausted. The poor girls they immured so rigorously within monastic walls as a way to get rid of them, died off promptly, and by this rapid mortality showed up the cruelty of families in lurid colours. What killed them was not the mortifications they were called upon to endure, so much as sheer ennui and despair. After the first burst of enthusiasm, that dread disease of the cloister ( as early as the fifteenth century by Cassien), leaden ennui, the gloomy ennui of afternoons, the tenderly melancholy ennui which loses itself in vague languors and dreamy reverie, quickly undermined their health. Others were more like mad women; their blood was so hot and turbulent it seemed to choke them.

A nun, to die decently, without causing her relatives overmuch remorse, should take about ten years to the business,--this is the average duration of life in monastic establishments. Some relaxation of discipline thus became a necessity, and men of sense and experience realised that, to prolong their days, occupation must be found for them and they should not be left

[p. 169]

too much alone. St. Francois de Sales founded the Visitandines, whose business was to visit the sick, always going in pairs. Cesar de Bus and Romillion, who had brought into existence the Doctrinaire Fathers (Priests of the Doctrine), in connexion with the Oratorians, now founded what might be styled the Sisters of the Doctrine, the Ursulines, teaching nuns to whom these priests acted as Confessors. All were under the general supervision of the Bishops, and to a limited, a very limited degree, monastic, not being as yet confined to the cloister. The Visitandines could go freely abroad, while the Ursulines received visitors,--at any rate their pupils' relatives. Both were in intimate communication with the world outside, under the direction of well-reputed Confessors. The underlying danger of all this was mediocrity. Both Oratorians and Doctrinaires had produced men of conspicuous ability, it is true, but the general spirit of the Order was systematically ordinary, moderate, careful to avoid too lofty a flight. The founder of the Ursulines, Romillion, was a man of ripe age, a convert from Protestantism, who had gone through, and seen through, all phases of religious emotion. He believed his young Provencal Sisters to be already as discreet as himself, and hoped to keep his little flock contentedly browsing on the meagre pasturage of a monotonous and unemotional faith, as understood by the good Oratorians. This was opening the door wide to ennui, and one fine morning the mine exploded.

The Provencal mountaineer, the traveller and mystic, the man of disconcerting energy and passion, Gauffridi, who visited the convent as Madeleine's Director, produced a very unlooked-for effect there. The nuns felt his mastery, his inherent power, and no doubt from hints dropped by the silly love-sick child, discovered it was nothing less than a diabolic power. One and all are terror-stricken, several love-stricken into the bargain. Imaginations are heated, heads turned. Presently we have five or six of the Sisterhood weeping, screaming, howling, convinced they are in the Devil's grip already.

[p. 170]

If only the Ursulines had been confined to their cloister, immured within the convent walls, Gauffridi, as their sole Director, would doubtless have found means to bring them to reason. It might have ended, as it did in the Convent of Le Quesnoy in 1491, by the Devil, who is always ready enough to take the shape of the beloved object, constituting himself, under the guise of Gauffridi, lover-general of the nuns. Or else, as happened in the Spanish nunneries Llorente describes, he would have persuaded them that the priest sanctifies by his priesthood those he loves, and that sin with him is a form of consecration. This was a doctrine widespread in France, and prevalent even in Paris, where these priests' mistresses were called "the sanctified." [*1]

Did Gauffridi, finding them all in his power, confine himself to Madeleine? Did he not go on from love to licence? Impossible to say,--though the act of accusation certainly mentions a nun who was not brought forward at the trial, but who reappeared at its conclusion, as having given herself to the Devil and to him.

The Ursulines were a house open to all, where anyone could come and scrutinise whatever was doing. Besides, were they not under the safeguard of their spiritual fathers, the Doctrinaire priests, honourable, and what is more, jealous men?

The founder himself was on the spot, indignant and despairing. What a calamity for the rising Order, which at that very moment was prospering so well and making headway in all parts of France! Its special pride and distinction was discreetness, good sense, placidity; and lo! without an instant's warning sheer midsummer madness! Romillion would fain have hushed up the whole scandal. He had the young women privately exorcised by one of the Doctrinaire Fathers; but the devils made small account of exorcists of that feather. The little fair-haired Madeleine was possessed by no less a fiend than Beelzebub, a high-

[p. 171]

born devil, the demon of pride, who did not deign so much as to open his teeth.

Among the possessed was one girl in particular, the special protegee of Romillion, a young woman of twenty to twenty-five, highly educated and well trained in polemics. Born a Protestant, but having neither father nor mother, she had fallen under the influence of the Father, like herself a converted Protestant. Her name, Louise Capeau, has a bourgeois ring about it. She was gifted, as appeared only too plainly later on, with a remarkable intellect, passionate determination, and, be it added, terrific force of character. For three whole months she sustained, to say nothing of the diabolic storms raging within, a desperate struggle that would have killed the strongest man in a week.

She declared she had three devils,--Verrine, a good-natured Catholic devil, and a volatile, one of the demons of the air; Leviathan, a bad-hearted devil, a freethinker and a Protestant; lastly, one she admits to be the demon of impurity. But there is yet another she forgot to mention, the demon of jealousy.

She hated with a vindictive hatred the little pretty, fair-haired favourite, the proud, well-born Madeleine. This latter, in her mad fits, had claimed to have attended the "Sabbath," and to have been crowned Queen there. She said she had been adored by the others, and had been loved,--by the Prince himself. . . . Prince! what Prince? Louis Gauffridi, Prince of the Magicians.

Louise, whom such an avowal stung like a whip, was too much enraged to doubt its truth. Maddened, she believed the other's mad words, that she might thereby work her ruin. Her demon was backed up by the other demons in all these jealous hearts. With one voice they all chimed in, declaring that Gauffridi was indeed the King of the Wizards. Then it was noised abroad everywhere a great capture had been made, nothing less than a Priest-King of the Magicians, the Prince of Magic in all lands.

[p. 172]

[paragraph continues] Such was the fatal diadem of fire and iron these she-devils forced on his brow.

All men lost their heads, even Romillion. Whether from hatred of Gauffridi, or fear of the Inquisition, he withdrew the matter from the Bishop's hands, and carried his two devil-possessed nuns, Louise and Madeleine, to the Convent of La Sainte-Baume, the Prior of which was Father Michaelis, a Dominican and Pope's Inquisitor in the papal territory of Avignon, claiming to exercise the same office also for the whole of Provence. The primary question was only one of exorcising the evil spirits; but as the two women were bound to accuse Gauffridi, the latter was on the high-road to fall under the disciplinary powers of the Inquisition.

Michaelis was to preach the Advent sermons at Aix before the Parlement there assembled. He at once saw how well these dramatic occurrences would serve to bring him into prominence, and seized the opportunity offered with all the eagerness our modern pleaders at Assizes display when a sensational murder comes their way or a curious case of crim. con.

The correct thing in affairs of this sort was to carry on the drama throughout Advent, Christmas-time, and Lent, and only come to the burning in Holy Week, on the eve of the great festival of Easter Day. Michaelis reserved his chief efforts for the final Act, entrusting the bulk of the work to a protege of his, a Dominican from Flanders, one Doctor Dompt, a Louvain man, who was already practised in exorcism, and well posted in these follies.

Besides, the very best thing the Fleming could do was to do nothing at all. In Louise he had a redoubtable helper, three times as zealous as the Inquisition, endowed with a fierce untiring energy and a burning eloquence, wild indeed and sometimes grotesque, but always terror-striking, a veritable brand of hell.

The matter resolved itself into a duel between the two devils, between Louise and Madeleine, fought out in public.

Simple folk who came there on pilgrimage to the Holy Balm

[p. 173]

[paragraph continues] --a worthy goldsmith, for instance, and a draper, both natives of Troyes in Champagne--were ravished to see Louise's demon belabour the other demons so cruelly and cudgel the Magicians. They positively wept for joy, and wended homewards giving thanks to God.

A terrible sight, for all that (terrible even as depicted in the heavy, colourless, official report as drawn up by the Flemish Doctor), to watch the unequal contest,--to see the stalwart Louise, both an older and a stronger woman than her adversary, a true Provencal, as hard as the stones of her own desert of the Cran, day by day pelt and pummel and demolish her shrinking victim, so young and childish-looking, but already so sore a sufferer, love-sick and shame-sick, writhing in the pains of epilepsy. . . .

The Fleming's volume, together with the additional matter supplied by Michaelis, in all some four hundred pages, is a brief abstract of the invectives, insults, and menaces which the woman vomited unceasingly for five long months, as well as of her sermons, for she would preach on any and every subject,--the sacraments, the coming appearance of Antichrist, the frailty of women, etc., etc. This over, in the name of her devils she would take to raving again, twice every day renewing her torture of poor Madeleine, without ever taking breath, without for one instant checking the awful torrent of her words, till the other, utterly confounded, "one foot in hell," to use her own words, fell into convulsions, knocking the floor with her faltering knees, and fainting body, and drooping head.

Louise is three parts a mad woman, it cannot be denied; no amount of knavery could have enabled her to keep the lists so long. Nevertheless her bitter jealousy teaches her, wherever she can find a chance to stab her victim's heart and wound her feelings, a dreadful lucidity is expressing herself.

All ordinary laws are clean upset. This impious, devil-ridden creature communicates as often and as freely as she will. She rates and rebukes personages of the highest dignity. The venerable

[p. 174]

[paragraph continues] Catherine de France, Lady President of the Ursulines, comes to see the wonder, questions her and instantly convicts her of downright misstatement and silly misconception. Thereupon the woman turns insolent and ends the matter by retorting, in the name of her devil, "Well! is not the Devil the Father of Lies?"

A friar, a man of sense, who is present, takes her at the word, and retorts, "Then you are lying!" and turning to the exorcists, "Why do you not stop this woman's mouth?" he gives them an account of a certain Martha, a woman at Paris who had falsely pretended to diabolic possession. For answer, they make her communicate in his presence. The Devil taking Communion, the Devil receiving God's body in the Sacrament! . . . The poor man is staggered, and humbles himself before the Inquisition. The sight is too much for him, and he dares not say another word.

One of Louise's favourite devices is to terrorise her audience, crying out suddenly, "I can see Magicians there, . . . there!" setting each individual trembling for his skin.

Triumphant at La Sainte-Baume, she extends her efforts to Marseilles. Her Flemish exorcist, now reduced to the extraordinary office of secretary and confidant of Satan, writes to her dictation five letters:

To the Capuchins of Marseilles, urging them to call upon Gauffridi to repent and be converted; to the same Capuchins, directing them to arrest Gauffridi, bind him hand and foot with a stole, and hold him prisoner in a certain house she designates; letters to the moderates, to Catherine de France, to the Doctrinaire Fathers, who themselves were for declaring against her. Eventually, reckless and regardless of consequences, she insults her own Lady Superior. "You told me," she says, "when I left you, to be humble and obedient . . . Well! I give you back your own advice!"

Verrine, Louise's devil, demon of the air and the wind, was for ever whispering in her ears mad words of folly and senseless

[p. 175]

pride, that wounded friends and enemies alike, and even the Inquisition. One day she deliberately made fun of Michaelis, who she said was kicking his heels at Aix preaching in the desert, while all the world was thronging to La Sainte-Baume to hear her. "Preach away, Michaelis! your words are true enough, but fall on deaf ears,--while Louise, who has never studied Theology, has comprehended the summum bonum and attained perfection!"

She was filled with savage self-satisfaction,--above all at her victory over Madeleine, whose spirit she had broken. One phrase had contributed more to this result than a hundred sermons, the cruel, brutal words, "You will be burned!" (December 17th). From that day the poor girl lost all heart, and said whatever the other wished,--became, in fact, her abject and submissive slave. She grovelled to everybody, asked pardon of her mother, of her Superior Romillion, of the audience, of Louise herself. If we are to believe what the latter says, the trembling girl drew her aside and besought her to take pity on her, not to be too harsh upon her.

The other, as gentle as a rock, as merciful as a reef of the sea, felt that she was hers, to do what she would with her. So she seized her victim, enveloped and strangled her, robbing her of the few sparks of vitality still left her,--a second enchantment, the reverse of Gauffridi's, a possession by fear and horror. The poor fainting creature stepped on beneath the rods and whips, and day by day they urged her further along the agonising road of repeated accusations, repeated attempts on the life of the man she still loved.

Had Madeleine shown a firm front, Gauffridi would undoubtedly have escaped; for everybody was set against Louise.

Michaelis, even at Aix, the effect of whose sermons she had quite eclipsed and whose dignity she had treated so lightly, would sooner have quashed the proceedings altogether than leave the prestige with this woman.

Marseilles was ready to defend Gauffridi, terrified as its citizens

[p. 176]

were to see the Inquisition of Avignon pushing its advances so far as actually to seize a native of their town inside their own walls.

The Bishop in particular, and the Chapter, were for defending a priest of their own diocese. Their contention was that the whole affair meant nothing more than a piece of jealousy between rival confessors, another example of the well-known animus of the monks against the secular priests.

The Doctrinaire Fathers for their part would fain have hushed up the whole matter, being bitterly grieved at the scandal. Not a few of their number were so deeply chagrined they came near leaving all and quitting their House altogether.

The ladies were indignant, especially Madame Libertat, the lady of the Chief of the Royalists, who had surrendered Marseilles to the King. All bewailed Gauffridi's fate, and declared none but the Foul Fiend could attack so pure a lamb of God.

The Capuchins, whom Louise so peremptorily ordered to arrest him, were (like all the Orders connected with St. Francis) enemies of the Dominicans. They were jealous of the prominence given the latter by the events which had occurred amongst them. Moreover, their wandering life, which brought the Capuchin Fathers into such frequent contact with women, often involved them in questions of morals. They had an instinctive dislike to people's looking so closely into the private lives of ecclesiastics. They took sides for Gauffridi. Persons possessed of the Devil were not such rare phenomena it was impossible to get hold of one, and they soon found what they required. Their new protegee's devil, under Franciscan influence, said precisely the opposite of what St. Dominic's devil had announced. He said, and they wrote it down in his name, "That Gauffridi was in no sense a Magician, and could not be arrested."

This was quite unexpected at La Sainte-Baume. Louise was nonplussed, and could only say, that apparently the Capuchins had not made their devil swear to speak the truth,--a poor retort,

[p. 177]

which, nevertheless, was backed up by the trembling Madeleine.

This latter, like a whipped hound, trembling in dread of a repetition of the thrashing, was capable of anything, even of biting and tearing. Indeed, it was by her instrumentality that Louise in this emergency bit savagely and cruelly.

All she said herself was that the Bishop was, unknowingly, hurting God's cause, exclaiming likewise "against the Sorcerers of Marseilles," without mentioning any names. But the cruel and fatal words she put into Madeleine's mouth. A woman who had two years before lost her child was denounced by the latter as having strangled it. The accused, fearing torture, fled or kept herself in hiding. Her husband and father arrived in tears at La Sainte-Baume, no doubt hoping to move the Inquisitors. But Madeleine dared not withdraw what she had once said, and only repeated the odious charge.

Who was safe? From the moment the Devil was elected avenger of God's anger, and they started writing down under his dictation the names of those in danger of the flames of ecclesiastical punishment, each man shuddered at every hour at the horrid nightmare of the blazing stake.

Marseilles, confronted with so presumptuous an invasion of its privileges by the Papal Inquisition, should by right have looked for aid from the Parlement of Aix. Unfortunately the Marseillais were only too well aware of their own unpopularity at Aix. The latter city, a small place dominated by officialdom and full of magistrates and nobles, has always looked with jealous eyes on the wealth and magnificence of Marseilles, the Queen of the South. As a matter of fact, it was the adversary of the Marseillais, the Papal Inquisitor, who in order to anticipate Gauffridi's appeal to the Parlement, was the first to have recourse to its assistance. It was an intensely bigoted body, the bigwigs of which were chiefly nobles enriched in the preceding century at the time of the massacre of the Vaudois. Moreover, as lay judges, they were delighted to see an Inquisitor of the

[p. 178]

[paragraph continues] Pope create a precedent of the sort, and admit that where a priest was concerned and a question of alleged Sorcery involved, the Inquisition could only proceed so far as the preliminary examination. It was as good as a formal resignation on the part of the Inquisitors of all their ancient privileges. Another point which pleasantly flattered the vanity of the men of Aix, as it had done in the case of those of Bordeaux, was this, that laymen though they were, they had been set up by the Church herself as censors and reformers of ecclesiastical morals.

In this business, where everything seemed bound to be extraordinary and miraculous, not the least miraculous feature was to see so savage a demon grow suddenly complimentary towards the Parlement, and turn politic and diplomatic. Louise enchanted the King's friends by a panegyric of the late King, Henry IV. who (who would have thought it possible?) was canonised by the Devil. One fine morning, a propos of nothing, she broke out into eulogiums "of that pious and sainted monarch who had but now risen to the skies."

An alliance of this sort between two such old enemies as the Parlement and the Inquisition, the latter henceforth assured of the assistance of the secular arm, of soldiery and executioner, a special commission despatched by the Parlement to La Sainte-Baume to examine the victims of diabolical possession, to hear their depositions and accusations, and draw up lists, was indeed a terrifying eventuality. Louise made no more ado, but denounced the Capuchins, Gauffridi's champions, in so many words, and declared "they would be punished temporally" in their persons and in their flesh.

The unhappy Fathers were quite broken-spirited, and their Devil had not another word to say. They went to the Bishop to tell him they could not really very well refuse to produce Gauffridi at La Sainte-Baume and make a formal act of submission; but this done, that the Bishop and Chapter might reclaim him and bring him once more under the protection of the episcopal jurisdiction.

[p. 179]

Another effect, moreover, had no doubt been calculated upon, namely that the sight of the man they had loved so deeply would shake the equanimity of the two women, that the redoubtable Louise herself would be deeply moved by the promptings of her heart.

As a matter of fact her sensibility was awakened at the approach of her guilty lover, and the Fury would seem to have shown a moment's weakness. I know of nothing more ardent than her supplication to God to save the man she has herself been driving to his death, "Great God, I offer you all the sacrifices ever offered since the beginning of the world, and that shall be offered to the end of time . . . all for Louis! . . . I offer you all the tears of the Saints and all the ecstasies of the angels . . . all for Louis! I would there were more souls yet, that the oblation might be more complete . . . all, all for Louis! Pater de coelis Deus, miserere Ludovici! Fili redemptor mundi Deus, miserere Ludovici!" (O God the Father of Heaven, have mercy upon Louis! O God the Son, Redeemer of the world, have mercy upon Louis! )

Vain compassion!--and sinister, to boot! . . . What she would fain have had, was that the accused should not harden his heart, but plead guilty,--in which case he was certain to be burned under the existing jurisprudence of the country.

Louise herself was at the end of her forces, incapable of further effort. The Inquisitor Michaelis, humiliated at owing his success solely to her, and exasperated with his Flemish exorcist, who had allowed himself to fall so completely under her ascendency and let all the world see into the secret springs of the drama, Michaelis was now coming finally to crush Louise, to rescue Madeleine and, if he could, set her in the other's place in the popular imagination. The attempt was not ill conceived, and implies a certain comprehension of the appropriate mise en scene. Winter and the Advent season had been occupied by the awful Sibyl, the wild Bacchante. In the gentler weather of a Provencal springtide, in Lent, would have figured a more touching

[p. 180]

personality, a soft, feminine demon incarnate in a sick girl and speaking from trembling lips. The child coming as she did of a distinguished family, the nobility took an interest in her case and the Parlement of Provence.

Far from listening to his Flemish colleague, Louise's man, Michaelis, when the former tried to enter the privy council of the Parlement, slammed the door in his face. A Capuchin, another fresh arrival, cried out at the first word Louise uttered in his presence, "Silence, accursed Devil!"

Meantime Gauffridi had arrived at La Sainte-Baume, where he cut a very poor figure. A man of sense and ability, but weak and sinful, he foresaw but too plainly the inevitable termination of a popular tragedy of the sort, and in the cruel catastrophe beheld himself abandoned, betrayed by the child he loved. He gave himself up to despair, and when confronted with Louise, stood before her as if she were his judge, one of those old ecclesiastical judges, cruel and subtle in his inexorable logic. She put doctrinal questions to him, to all of which he answered yes, granting her even the most disputed points,--for instance "that the Devil may be believed in a Court of Justice on his word and oath."

This lasted only a week--from the 1st to the 8th of January; then the clergy of Marseilles claimed him. His friends, the Capuchins, stated they had visited his lodging, and found nothing there connected with Magic. Four Canons of Marseilles arrived armed with authority to take him, and carried him home again.

Gauffridi was brought very low; but neither did his adversaries occupy a particularly proud position. Even the two Inquisitors, Michaelis and the Fleming, were scandalously in disagreement. The partiality of the latter for Louise and of the former for Madeleine went beyond mere words and was embodied in action. All this chaos of accusations, sermons, revelations, which the Devil had dictated by the mouth of Louise, the Fleming, who had written it down, maintained was in its integrity,

[p. 181]

and without exception God's own words, and feared any interference with it. He avowed much distrust of his chief Michaelis, dreading lest, in the interests of Madeleine, he should falsify these papers in such a way as to ruin Louise. He defended them with all his might, shut himself up in his room and stood a regular siege. Michaelis, who had the members of the Parlement on his side, could only get hold of the manuscript by using the King's name and breaking in the door.

Louise, who was afraid of nothing, was for setting up the Pope against the King. The Fleming laid complaint against his chief Michaelis before the Papal Legate at Avignon. But the prudent Papal Court shrunk back terrified before the scandal of seeing one inquisitor levelling accusations against another. The Fleming found no support, and had nothing else to do but to submit. Michaelis, to make him hold his tongue, gave him back the papers.

Those of Michaelis which form a second portfolio, sufficiently dull and uninteresting and not to be compared for an instant with the other, are full of Madeleine and nothing else. They play music to her by way of calming her agitation. They note with the utmost care whether she eats or refuses her food. They fuss round her, in fact to excess, often in not over-edifying particulars. They ask her strange questions about the Magician, and about the localities of her person which might bear the Devil's mark. She was also actually examined. Though it would seem this had been done already at Aix by the physicians and surgeons of the Parlement (p. 70), Michaelis, in his extreme zeal, examined her again minutely at La Sainte-Baume, and gives his observations in detail (p. 69). No matron was called in. The judges, lay and monkish, agreed for once, and having nothing to fear from each other's surveillance, mutually consented, it would seem, to wink at this neglect of the proper formalities.

But they had a stern judge in Louise, who, with her characteristic outspokenness, branded these indecencies with fiery words:

[p. 182]

[paragraph continues] "They that were swallowed up by the Deluge had not done so wickedly as these men! . . . Nothing to equal the enormity was ever related of Sodom and Gomorrah! . . ."

She said further, "Madeleine is delivered over to impurity!" And indeed this was the saddest feature of all. The poor mad creature, blinded by her love of life, her joy at not being burned after all, or perhaps with some confused feeling that it was she now who could influence her judges, sang and danced at times with a shameful, indecent, alluring freedom of mien and gesture. The old Doctrinaire priest, Romillion, blushed for his Ursuline protegee. Shocked at seeing the judges admire her long hair, he said it must be cut off, and this stumbling-block removed.

She was gentle and submissive in her more composed hours, and they would have made another Louise of her if it had been possible. But her devils were vain and amorous; not eloquent and fierce like her rival's. When they should have been preaching they spoke only silly trivialities. So Michaelis was forced to play the piece by himself. As Inquisitor-in-Chief, feeling bound to far outdo his subordinate, the Fleming, he declared he had already drawn out of the child's body an army of six thousand six hundred and sixty devils, only a hundred now remaining. The better to convince the public, he made her bring up the charm or spell she had swallowed, so he said, and extracted it from her mouth in the form of a glutinous, sticky substance. Who could hold out against this? The audience was left dumb-foundered and convinced.

Madeleine was now on the high-road to save her life. The only obstacle lay in her own impudence; she kept continually saying injudicious things likely to rouse her judges' jealousy and exhaust their patience. She confessed that every object reminded her of Gauffridi, that he was constantly before her eyes. She did not try to hide her erotic dreams. "Last night," she would say, "I was at the 'Sabbath,' and the Magicians were adoring my statue, which was gilt all over. In its honour each

[p. 183]

of them made an offering of their blood, which they got by cutting their hands with lancets. He, he was there, on his knees, a rope round his neck, beseeching me to come back to him and not to betray him. . . . But I held back. . . . Then he said, 'Is there any here ready to die for her?' 'Yes, I am,' cried a young man, and the Magician immolated him."

Another time she saw him praying her just for one of her beautiful golden hairs. "And when I refused he said, 'Well, give me half a hair at any rate.'"

Meantime she assured them she was always firm in her resistance. But lo! one day, the door happening to stand open, the virtuous convert is away at top speed to rejoin Gauffridi once more.

She was recaptured,--at least her body was. But her soul?--Michaelis was puzzled how to recapture it. By a happy inspiration, he thought of her magic ring. This he took from her, cut it in pieces, ground it to powder and burned it. Moreover, suspecting that her obstinacy, unaccountable in so gentle a creature, was fostered by invisible Sorcerers who slipped unperceived into the room, he stationed a man-at-arms there, a stalwart fellow armed with a sword, who lashed out in every direction and hacked the invisible tempters into bits.

But the best medicine towards Madeleine's conversion was the death of Gauffridi. On February 5th, the Inquisitor visited Aix to preach the Lenten sermons, saw the judges and stirred them up to action. The Parlement, readily adopting his suggestions, sent to Marseilles to arrest the rash offender, who seeing himself so well supported by the Bishop, the Chapter, the Capuchins and everybody, had never supposed they would venture on so bold a step.

Madeleine from one quarter, Gauffridi from another, arrived at Aix. Such was her excitement they were forced to bind her; her state of agitation was terrible, and anything might happen. A very bold experiment with a girl in her morbid condition was tried, to give her one of those frights that throw a woman into

[p. 184]

convulsions, that are sometimes fatal. A Vicar-General of the Archbishop's mentioned that there was in the Archiepiscopal Palace a dark, narrow charnel-house,--what in Spain they call a pudridero, such as we see at the Escorial. In former days a quantity of old bones of dead men whose names were forgotten had been thrown there to rot. Into this sepulchral vault they brought the trembling girl, and exorcised the demon within her by putting these cold dead bones in contact with her cheeks. She did not die of horror, but from that time she was absolutely at their disposal; they had got what they wanted, the death of conscience, the extermination of all that was left of moral sense and free will.

She became a pliant instrument, ready to do whatever was desired, with a flattering alacrity seeking to guess what would be agreeable to her masters. They showed her Huguenots, and she cursed them. They confronted her with Gauffridi, and she told him by heart the counts of accusation against him more glibly than the King's officers could have done. Nor did this in any way prevent her snarling and snapping like a wild beast when she was taken to church and set to stir up the populace against Gauffridi by making her devil blaspheme in the name of the Magician. Beelzebub would exclaim by her mouth, "I forswear God, in the name of Gauffridi, I forswear God," and so on. Then, at the instant of the elevation of the host, "On me be the blood of the Just One, on me,--in the name of Gauffridi!"

A grim partnership, whereby this twofold devil damned the one out of the mouth of the other; for whatever he said through Madeleine, was surely imputed to Gauffridi. So that this crowd was eager and anxious to see the stake make a speedy end of the blasphemer, whose impiety, dumb though he remained, yet spoke loudly and hatefully by Madeleine's voice.

The exorcists asked her a cruel question, one they could have answered far better themselves than she could: "How is it, Beelzebub, you speak so ill of your bosom friend?" Her answer was in these appalling terms: "If there are traitors among men,

[p. 185]

why not among demons? When I feel myself with Gauffridi, I am his to do whatsoever he bids me. But when you force me, I betray him and make a mock of him."

However, she could not keep up this vein of horrid mockery. The demon of terror and servility seemed to have entered into every fibre of her soul, but there was room left for despair. She could no longer take the least nourishment; and these good folks who for five months had been racking her with exorcisms and who pretended they had relieved her of six or seven thousand devils, are obliged to admit she had no wish left but to die, and eagerly sought any means of suicide. Her courage failed, that was all. Once she pricked herself with a lancet, but had not determination enough to push it home. Another time, she grasped a knife, and when this was taken from her, tried to strangle herself. She drove needles into her flesh, ending by a mad attempt to force a long pin through one ear into her head.

What befell Gauffridi? The Inquisitor, who is so full of details about the two women, has next to nothing to tell us about him, passing lightly over so risky a subject. What little information he does give is strange enough. He relates how his eyes were bandaged while they searched with needles all over his body to find the insensible spot that meant the Devil's mark. On the bandage being removed, he learned with wonder and horror that in no less than three different places the needle had been driven home without his knowing it; so that he was manifestly marked triply with the sign of Hell. And the Inquisitor adds, "If we were at Avignon, the man would be burned to-morrow."

He saw his case was desperate and offered no defence. His only idea now was that some enemies of the Dominicans might perhaps save his life, and he expressed a wish to confess to the Oratorians. But this newly founded Order, which might fairly be called the media via of Catholicism, was too cold and too prudent to take such an affair in hand, to say nothing of its having already gone so far and reached such a desperate pass.

Next he turned again for succour to the Begging Order, and

[p. 186]

making confession to the Capuchins, admitted all, and more than all the truth, hoping to buy his life at the price of infamy. In Spain, he would undoubtedly have been relaxed,--barring a period of penance in some monastery. But the French Parlements were more severe, and made a point, besides, of proving the superior integrity of the lay jurisdiction. The Capuchins, not over-firm themselves on the question of morals, were not of the sort to draw down the lightning on their own heads. They made much of Gauffridi, kept him safe and offered him consolation day and night,--but solely to the end that he might be induced to confess himself a Magician, and so, the practice of magic arts remaining the main count of accusation, a decent veil might be drawn over the crime of seduction by a confessor, an incident so compromising for the clergy.

Thus eventually his own friends, the Capuchins, by persistency, by gentle treatment and soft words, drew from him the fatal admission, which, so they said, was the salvation of his soul,--but which very certainly meant giving his body to the stake.

The man being settled and done with, they made an end with the two girls, who, however, were not to be burned. The finale was a broad farce. Before a great assembly of the clergy and Parlement Madeleine was brought forward; then addressing her, they formally called upon her devil, Beelzebub, to quit the field, or else give satisfactory reasons for his contumacy. He had no reply to make, but departed ignominiously.

Then Louise was produced, with her devil Verrine. But before driving out a spirit so friendly to the Church, the monks regaled the gentlemen of the Parlement, who were novices in these matters, with an exhibition of the savoir-faire possessed by the devil in question, making him go through an extraordinary pantomime. "How do the Seraphim and Cherubim and Thrones do before God?" "Difficult! difficult!" Louise answered; "they have no bodies." However, on the order being repeated, she did her best to obey, imitating the flight of the first,

[p. 187]

the divine ecstasy of the others, and finally the adoration of all, bending low before her judges, and prostrating herself head bowed to the earth. All saw the far-famed Louise, so proud and so indomitable, humiliated, kissing the floor, and with arms outstretched lying her length on the cold stones.

An extraordinary exhibition, foolish and indecent to the last degree, by which she was made to expiate her redoubtable success with the populace! Even now she partially won over the Assembly again by an adroit stab she administered to Gauffridi who was present in chains. "At the present moment," she was asked, "where is Beelzebub, the devil expelled from Madeleine?" "I see him plainly, there at Gauffridi's ear," was her cruel answer.

Enough surely of these horrors and abominations? Why inquire what the unhappy man said under torture? For he was subjected to the question, both ordinary and extraordinary. The revelations he must have made would no doubt throw considerable light on the dark and mysterious history of nunneries. The Parlement greedily collected all such particulars, as weapons that might prove useful, but they kept them to themselves "under seal of the Court."

The Inquisitor Michaelis, much blamed by public opinion for so much animosity that was hardly distinguishable from petty jealousy, was recalled by his Order, which was sitting in Assembly at Paris, and did not see Gauffridi's execution. The latter was burned alive at Aix four days later (April 30th, 1611).

The reputation of the Dominicans, which had suffered in this affair, was not much mended by another case of diabolic possession which they got up at Beauvais (November of the same year) in such a way as to give themselves all the honours of war, and a report of which they printed at Paris. As one chief objection against Louise's devil had been that he could not talk Latin, this new victim of the Fiend, Denise Lacaille, could gabble a few words of that language. They made a great ado, frequently showed the woman in procession, and even took her

[p. 188]

from Beauvais to Notre-Dame de Liesse. But there was no enthusiasm; this Picard pilgrimage had none of the dramatic effects, the terrors of La Sainte-Baume. The Lacaille woman, for all her Latin, did not possess the burning eloquence of her Provencal predecessor, and had neither her fiery spirit nor her savage energy. The only result of the whole thing was to give the Huguenots something to laugh at.

What became of the two rivals, Madeleine and Louise? The first, or rather her shadow, was kept within the papal territory, for fear of her being induced to talk about the dismal and disreputable affair. She only appeared in public to be stared at as an edifying example of penitence, and was employed generally along with a number of poor women in cutting wood to be sold for charitable purposes. Her family were ashamed of her and had cast her off and deserted her.

As for Louise, she had declared during the trial, "I shall win no glory from it all. . . . The trial ended, I shall die!" But she was wrong; she did not die, but went on killing instead. The murderous devil that was in her raged more savagely than ever. She began deliberately to denounce by name, Christian name and surname, all whom she imagined mixed up with Magic and Sorcery,--among others a poor young girl, by name Honoree, "blind of both eyes," who was burned alive.

"Let us pray God," says the good Father Michaelis, in conclusion, "that all may redound to His glory and the glory of His Church!"

Footnotes

^170:1 Lestoile, edit. Michaud, p. 561.

     The Sorceress, by Jules Michelet, [1939], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 189]

  

19

  

THE NUNS of LOUDUN
 URBAIN GRANDIER
 1633, 1634

IN the Memoires d'Etat composed by the renowned Father Joseph, known to us only in fragments, having doubtless been prudently suppressed as too instructive, the worthy Father explained how in the year 1633 he had had the good fortune to discover a heresy, an enormously widespread heresy, affecting a countless multitude of confessors and directors of consciences.

The Capuchins, an admirably organised legion of defenders of the Church, good watch-dogs of the holy flock, had scented out and unearthed, not in the deserts, but in mid-France, in the centre, at Chartres, in Picardy and everywhere, a formidable quarry, the alumbrados of Spain (illuminati or Quietists), who too fiercely persecuted in that country, had taken refuge in France, and who among women, and above all in the nunneries, were instilling the soft poison ticketed later on with the name of Molinos.

The wonder is the thing had not been discovered sooner. It could not very well be hidden, being so widely disseminated; the Capuchins swore that in Picardy alone (a land where the women are weak and the blood more fiery than in the South itself) this mania of mystic love had sixty thousand professors. Was the whole body of clergy involved then? all the confessors, all the directors? It must no doubt be understood that the official directors of consciences were supplemented by a great number of laymen burning with the same zeal for the salvation

[p. 190]

of female souls. One of this class, who was conspicuous at a later date no less for talent than for bold originality, was the author of the Delices Spirituelles (Spiritual Joys), Desmarets de Saint-Sorlin.

 

It is impossible to realise or understand the enormous power exercised by the Confessor over nuns, a hundred-fold more absolute at this time than in any previous age, unless the new conditions of the period are taken into account.

The reforms decided upon at the Council of Trent with regard to the closer seclusion of the inmates of Religious Houses, which had been largely ignored under Henri IV., when nuns entertained their fashionable friends, gave balls and danced at them, etc., these reforms began to be seriously enforced under Louis XIII. Cardinal de la Rochefoucauld, or rather the Jesuits who acted through him, insisted upon a high degree of external propriety. Need we say all entry into convents was prohibited for the male sex? One man, and one man only, went there every day, penetrating not only into the house, but wherever he wished, into each cell,--this comes out clearly in several cases, especially in the evidence given by David at Louviers. This reformation, this close seclusion, shut the door in the face of the world at large and excluded all inconvenient rivals, giving the right of familiar intercourse with Religious Women and the exclusive opportunity of influencing their minds to the Father Confessor.

What was likely to follow? This may be problematical, a matter of speculation, to dreamers; but practical men, and doctors, know better. As early as the sixteenth century the physician Wyer makes it clear enough to us by very plain examples. In his Book IV. he cites numerous cases of nuns having gone mad with love; while in Book III. he mentions a well-reputed Spanish priest, who having gone by chance when at Rome into a convent of nuns, left it a maniac, declaring that as brides of Christ, they were his, those of the priest, Christ's Vicar.

[p. 191]

[paragraph continues] He had Masses said praying that God might grant him the grace to wed soon with the convent in question. [*1]

If a mere passing visit could produce such an effect, we can understand what must have been the state of mind of the regular Director of nunneries of women, when he was alone with them, in the seclusion of the cloister, could spend all day with them, and receive at any hour the perilous confidences of their languors and weaknesses.

Nor are temptations of the senses the only factor to be reckoned with in these cases. We must likewise take account of the ennui and the irresistible craving to vary the conditions of existence, to escape from a monotonous life by the indulgence of some caprice or some fancy. Then what an age of new discoveries, of novelties of all sorts, it was! Travel, the Indies, discoveries of new worlds! Printing! last but not least, Romances! . . . When everything is on the move out of doors, every mind on the stretch, how suppose it possible to endure the crushing uniformity of monastic life, the long, weary services, unrelieved by anything more exciting than a dull sermon intoned through the nose?

 

Even laymen, in the midst of so many distractions, demand insistently of their confessors the pleasing variety of an occasional escapade, absolution for a certain degree of inconsistency of life.

The priest is hurried along by the current, and constrained to concede point after point. A vast, various, and learned literature develops out of Casuistry, or the art of making everything permissible,--a rapidly progressive literature moreover, in which yesterday's leniency would seem stern severity to-day.

Casuistry was for the laity, Mysticism for the cloister.

The complete suppression of individuality and the death of free will, this is the great principle of Mysticism. Desmarets gives us very clearly the true moral purport of it all. The pious

[p. 192]

devotee, he says, sacrificed in and for himself and annihilated, exists henceforth only in God. Henceforth he can do no wrong. His higher part is so divinely perfect, he has no consciousness left of what the other part is doing. [*2]

One would have supposed that the zealous Father Joseph, after uttering so loud a cry of alarm against these corruptors of morals, would not have stopped there, that a full and searching inquiry would have been held, that this countless host, that in one province alone numbered sixty thousand Doctors of the Church, would be made known and minutely scrutinised. But no! they simply disappear, and no news is to be heard of them. Some, it is said, were cast in prison; but no trial was held, nothing done to break the deep silence. To all appearance, Richelieu had no mind to fathom the matter. For all his tenderness for the Capuchins, he was not so blinded by partiality as to follow their lead in a matter which would have put into their hands the duty of making inquiry into the conduct of all the confessors in the country.

As a rule, the monk both envied and hated the secular clergy. He was absolute master of the women of Spain; but was less appreciated by their French sisters on account of the dirtiness of his person; they preferred to call in the priest, or the Jesuit Father, an amphibious director, so to speak, half monk, half

[p. 193]

man of the world. If once Richelieu let loose the pack on Capuchins, Recollets, Carmelites, Dominicans, and the rest, no one would be safe among the clergy either. What director, what priest, however well meaning, had not on occasion used--yea, and abused--the pleasant jargon of the Quietists when dealing with his penitents?

Richelieu took good care not to worry the clergy at a time when he was already preparing for the General Diet at which he asked for a contribution for the war. One prosecution was allowed the monks, and only one, against a cure,--but a cure accused of Magic, which made it competent to confuse issues (as in the Gauffridi affair) to such good purpose that no single confessor, no single director, recognised the case as being like his own, and each could say in perfect security, "I have nothing to do with it."

 

Thanks to these judicious precautions, a certain degree of obscurity really envelopes the case of Urbain Grandier. [*3] The historian of the affair, the Capuchin Tranquille, proves conclusively and satisfactorily he was a Sorcerer, and more than a Sorcerer, a Devil, and he is entitled in the documents of the trial (as they might have said of the goddess Ashtoreth) Grandier of the Dominations! 

Menage, on the contrary, taking a diametrically opposite view, is almost ready to rank him in the list of great men falsely accused of Magic, among the martyrs of liberty of conscience.

To see somewhat more clearly into the affair, we must not

[p. 194]

isolate Grandier, but let him occupy his proper place in the great diabolic Trilogy of those days, of which he and his doings formed only the Second Act; we must seek enlightenment on his case from the First Act, played out in Provence, as we have seen, in the dreadful business of La Sainte-Baume that ruined Gauffridi, and further enlightenment again from the Third Act, the affair of Louviers, which was a copy of Loudun (in the same way as Loudun had copied La Sainte-Baume), and which in its turn produced a Gauffridi and an Urbain Grandier.

The three affairs are one and identical. In all of them the libertine Priest, in all the jealous Monk and the maniac Nun by whose mouth they make the Devil speak,--and all end in the same way, by the death of the Priest at the stake.

One difference throws a strong light on these matters, and lets us have a clearer view than we can ever obtain in the fetid darkness of the Spanish and Italian monasteries,--the fact that while the nuns of these lands of Southern sloth were astonishingly passive and readily submitted to the life of the seraglio and worse things still, [*4] their French sisters were of a very different temper. Their personality was vigorous, ardent, exacting; very devils (in no figurative sense) at once of jealousy and hate, they were equally indiscreet, loquacious, and spiteful. Their revelations were very precise, so extremely so towards the end as to arouse universal shame and disgust, the result being that in the course of thirty years three several scandals, forced into prominence by sheer horror and indignation, eventually died out drearily and ignominiously amid the groans of sick repulsion.

It was hardly at Loudun, in mid-Poitou, among the Huguenots and exposed to their scrutiny and jeers, in the very town where they held their great National Synods, that we should have expected a great scandal for the Catholics to have occurred. But it was just in these old Protestant towns that the latter were accustomed to live like conquerors in a subdued country, allowing themselves a very wide liberty of action, not unnaturally

[p. 195]

supposing that people so often massacred and only recently defeated, would enter no protests. The Catholic inhabitants,--magistrates, priests, monks, a few nobles and a handful of artisans,--lived apart from the rest of the population quite like a colony of conquering aliens. This colony was further subdivided, as might be guessed, by the opposition existing between priests and monks.

 

The monks, a haughty and numerous band, as missionaries among a heretic population took the wall of the Protestant inhabitants, and acted as confessors to the Catholic ladies of the town. Such was the state of things when one day there arrived from Bordeaux a young cure, a pupil of the Jesuits, a cultivated and agreeable man, writing well and speaking better. He made a sensation in the pulpit, and soon afterwards in society as well. He was a native of Mantes and a born dialectician, but by education a Meridional, with the well-oiled tongue of Bordeaux and all the boasting, light-hearted effrontery of a Gascon. In a very short time he had contrived to set the whole of the little town by the ears, having the women on his side, the men against him,--all or very nearly all. He waxed superb, insolent, and insupportable, lost to all sense of proper reverence. He rained torrents of sarcasm at the Carmelites, and held forth publicly in the pulpit against the monks in general. The crowds were suffocating when he preached. Dignified and richly dressed, he paraded the streets of Loudun like a Father of the Church, while by night in a quieter way he would be lurking down back alleys or slipping in by back doors.

The women were at his beck and call. The wife of the "Avocat du Roi" was not insensible to his graces, and far more so the daughter of the "Procureur Royal," who had a child by him. Nor was this enough; this triumphant squire of dames, pushing his advantage farther and farther, began to assail the denizens of the nunneries.

There were to be found everywhere at that period Sisters of

[p. 196]

the Ursuline Order, nuns vowed to the education of the young, lady missionaries in a Protestant land, expert at flattering and winning over the mothers and drawing the little girls under their influence. The Ursulines of Loudun formed a small convent of the daughters of poor but noble houses. The convent itself was ill supplied with this world's goods; the community having been endowed, at its first foundation, with little more than the house itself, a former Huguenot college. The Lady Superior, a person of good family and very well connected, burned with zeal to raise the status of her convent, to increase its numbers, to enrich and make it famous. She would very possibly have chosen Grandier, the man of the hour, for Confessor and Director, if she had not already had in these capacities a priest who possessed influence in the district for quite other reasons, being nearly related to the two principal magistrates. The Canon Mignon, such was his name, had no little influence over the Lady Superior. Both he and she learned in confession (the Ladies Superior of Convents used to confess the inmates) the hateful truth that the younger nuns dreamed of nothing else but this Grandier who was so much talked about.

Thus the Confessor whose authority was menaced, the husband whose honour was attacked, the father whose feelings were outraged, all these united their jealousy and indignation at the wrong done to family life, and swore a great oath to be Grandier's undoing. To attain this object, they had only to give him rope enough, as the saying is, and he would hang himself. Nor was it long before a scandal exploded that made noise enough to shake the town down pretty nearly.

 

The nuns, in the old Huguenot mansion they were settled in, did not feel altogether at their ease. Their boarders, children of the townsfolk, the younger Sisters possibly helping them, had found it a diverting amusement to terrify their companions by playing at ghosts, phantoms, and apparitions. Discipline was not over-strict among this miscellaneous collection of little girls,

[p. 197]

the spoilt children of rich parents. At night they would be scampering up and down the corridors, till they frightened both themselves and each other. Some were really ill with the effects, if not in body, at any rate in mind. But the object of all these terrors and illusions, complicated by the town talk they heard only too much of during the day, the ghost of these agitated nights was always Grandier. Several declared they had seen him, felt him of nights at their side, venturesome and victorious, and that they only awoke to full consciousness when it was too late. Was it all a case of self-deception,--or some trick of the novices? Was it really Grandier, who had bribed the portress or boldly climbed the convent walls? The matter has never been cleared up.

However, from that moment the three champions of family honour felt they had their man in their power. First of all they got from among the number of their humbler protegees two worthy souls to make declaration they could endure no longer to have as cure a debauchee, a sorcerer, a demon, a freethinker, who at church "bent one knee only and not two," a man who laughed at rules and regulations, and granted dispensations contrary to the Bishop's prerogatives. This last cleverly imagined charge set the Bishop of Poitiers against him, otherwise the natural defender of the priest, while giving up the latter to the malevolence of the monks.

The whole case was got up with consummate ability, it must be confessed. While having him accused by a couple of poor parishioners, it was found a further help to get him cudgelled by a nobleman. In this age of duelling the man who took a cudgelling inevitably lost ground with the public and was humiliated in the eyes of the fair sex; and Grandier fully realised the severity of the blow his prestige had received. Loving notoriety as he did, he went straight to the King himself, and throwing himself on his knees, claimed satisfaction for the insult to his cloth. The King was a pious king, and would probably have granted what was asked, had there not been people about him who told

[p. 198]

his Majesty it was a question of intrigue and the reprisals of injured husbands.

Brought before the Ecclesiastical Tribunal of Poitiers, Grandier was condemned to penance and to be banished from Loudun, in other words, degraded and dishonoured as a priest. However, the Civil Tribunal reopened the case, and found him innocent. He had, moreover, on his side the superior ecclesiastical authority to which Poitiers was subordinate, viz. the Archbishop of Bordeaux, Sourdis. This warlike prelate, an admiral and a gallant sailor quite as much as a priest, or more so, merely shrugged his shoulders at the tales of these peccadilloes. He acquitted the cure, but at the same time gave him the very judicious advice to go and live anywhere else rather than at Loudun.

This was just what the proud priest had no sort of mind to do. He was for savouring his triumph on the scene of battle and marching past before the ladies. He re-entered Loudun in broad daylight,--drums beating and flags flying; he carried a laurel brand as he walked, and all the fairest eyes of the city looked at his progress from the windows.

 

Not satisfied with this silly triumph, he now began to threaten and hint at compensation. His enemies, thus driven to bay and now in peril themselves, remembered the Gauffridi affair, in which the Devil, the Father of Lies, had been duly and honourably rehabilitated and accepted in court as a good truth-telling witness, worthy of credit and belief on the part both of the Church and the King's servants. In their desperate strait, they invoked a devil; and he came prompt to command, putting in his first appearance in the Ursuline convent.

The thing was risky, of course, but then, how many were interested in its success! The Lady Superior very soon found her convent, poor and obscure till now, attracting the eyes of the Court, the provinces, the whole world of France. The monks saw in it the triumph of their cause over their rivals the priests;

[p. 199]

and an opportunity for reviving those fights with the Devil so popular in the preceding century, very often (as at Soissons) held before the church doors, and in which the populace with mingled terror and exultation beheld God's victory over his diabolic adversary, the admission "that God is in the elements" dragged reluctantly from the Devil, and the Huguenots convinced and brought to confusion out of the Demon's own mouth.

In this tragi-comedy the exorcist represented Almighty God, or if not quite that, at any rate the Archangel treading down the Dragon. He would step down from the platform, exhausted and dripping with sweat, but triumphant, to be borne shoulder high by the crowd and receive the blessings of the women who wept for joy to see such things.

This was why something of Sorcery must always be an ingredient in legal cases of this sort; the Devil supplied the only really interesting motif. Of course he could not always be shown leaving the accused's body in the form of a black toad, as at Bordeaux in 1610; but at any rate the mise en scene was grand and imposing enough. The grim loneliness of poor Madeleine, the honours of La Sainte-Baume, in the Provence business, were no insignificant factors of success. Loudun had for its part the noisy rout and delirious frenzy of a whole army of exorcists distributed among several different churches. Last but not least, Louviers, as we shall see presently, by way of reviving interest in these rather out-of-date proceedings, inaugurated a series of midnight episodes, where, by the flickering torchlight, the devils, disguised as nuns, dug pits and extracted from them the magic talismans that had been there secreted.

 

The Loudun affair began with the Lady Superior and a lay Sister in attendance upon her,--who fell into convulsions and indulged in long diabolic rigmaroles. Other nuns copied them,--especially one bold spirit who recreated the role formerly played by Sister Louise at Marseilles, representing the same devil, Leviathan, the head demon of all cunning and calumny.

[p. 200]

The little town is shaken to its foundations. The monks of all colours take possession of the nuns, divide them between them, proceed to exorcise them by threes and fours. They partition the churches between them, the Capuchins alone possessing themselves of two. These are crowded to excess, the whole female population flocking thither, and among the frightened, excitable congregation thus formed, more than one woman is heard screaming she also feels devils working within her. Six young women of Loudun are possessed; while the mere recital of these dreadful doings produces a like effect on two more at Chinon.

Everywhere it formed the absorbing subject of conversation,--at Paris, at Court. The Queen of France, a Spaniard by birth and a woman of ardent imagination and enthusiastic piety, sends her own Almoner; more important still, Lord Montagu, the old papal partisan and her Majesty's faithful servant, who saw everything and believed everything, reported everything to the Pope. The miracle was proved and confirmed; with his own eyes he had seen the wounds on a nun's body, the stigmata impressed by the Devil on the hands of the Lady Superior.

What had the King of France to say to it all? All his devotion was turned in the direction of the Devil, to Hell, to religious fear; and it is said Richelieu was delighted to keep it concentrated there. I doubt this myself; the devils were essentially Spanish and of the Spanish faction,--if they had talked politics at all, it would have been against Richelieu. It may be this was what he dreaded; at any rate he paid them the compliment of sending his niece to display a proper interest in the matter.

 

The Court was ready to believe; but it was not so on the spot, at Loudon. The local devils, wretched plagiarists of the demons of Marseilles, merely repeated by rote in the morning what had been taught them overnight from the well-known Manual of Michaelis. They would never have known what to say, had not secret exorcisms, carefully rehearsed every evening

[p. 201]

for next day's comedy, taught them the proper graces of deportment and style for an effective appearance in public.

A firm and determined magistrate, the Bailli of the town, detected the fraud and came in person to expose its perpetrators, threatening and denouncing them. The Archbishop of Bordeaux tacitly coincided, when Grandier appealed to him. He sent an order to regulate the exorcists' zeal at any rate and put an end to their arbitrary proceedings; more than this his surgeon, who visited the young women, declared them not to be possessed at all. According to him they were not mad, not even touched with insanity,--but undoubted impostors and arrant shams.

Thus the century continues the great duel of Doctor against Devil, of Science and Enlightenment against the spirit of Falsehood and Obscurantism. We saw its commencement with Agrippa and Wyer; and now another physician, a man called Duncan, gallantly continued the same struggle at Loudun, and fearlessly printed the statement that the whole affair was only deserving of ridicule.

The Devil, reputed so stubborn, showed the white feather and uttered not another word. But the angry passions of both sides were too much excited for things to stop here. The tide flowed so strong in Grandier's favour that those attacked now became the attacking party. A kinsman of the accusers, an apothecary, was brought to book by a rich and well-born lady of the town, whom he had stated to be the cure's mistress, and was condemned, as a common slanderer, to make proper reparation.

The Lady Superior felt herself on the verge of ruin. It could easily have been proved, what an eye-witness saw later on, that her so-called stigmata were merely painted on, the colouring being freshened up every day. But she was related to a member of the King's Council, Laubardemont, and he saved her. At the moment he was entrusted with a commission to clear the

[p. 202]

ground at Loudun; and he now got himself nominated to bring Grandier to trial. The Cardinal was given to understand that the accused priest was the cure and friend of the Cordonniere de Loudun, one of the numerous agents of Marie de Medicis; that he had constituted himself secretary to his parishioner and had under her name composed a scandalous and unworthy pamphlet.

For the matter of that, Richelieu would gladly have shown himself magnanimous and treated the matter with contempt, but it was hardly possible for him to have done so. The Capuchins and Father Joseph speculated on this; for Richelieu would have given him a fine hold over him with the King, if he had shown a want of proper zeal. A certain M. Quillet, who had kept a careful eye on things, went to see Richelieu and warned him. But the Cardinal was afraid to listen to him, and appeared so ill-disposed towards his would-be benefactor that the latter judged it prudent to take refuge in Italy.

 

Laubardemont arrives on December 6th, 1663, with unlimited discretionary powers,--and his arrival marks the commencement of a reign of terror. He is the King's direct representative, wielding the whole weight of the Government of France,--a grim, ponderous sledge-hammer, to crush a fly.

The magistrates felt the affront; and the Lieutenant Civil notified Grandier of his intention to arrest him on the morrow. The latter paid no heed, and was duly arrested, instantly hurried out of the place without legal formalities of any sort, and thrown into the dungeons of Angers. Subsequently he was brought back again and confined (of all places in the world) in the house and bedchamber of one of his personal enemies, who had the windows walled up in an attempt to suffocate him. The detestable examination carried out on the suspected Sorcerer's person by driving in needles to discover the Devil's mark, was conducted by the very hands of his accusers themselves, who

[p. 203]

thus exacted a preliminary vengeance on him, a foretaste of more deadly penalties to follow.

He is dragged to churches to confront the mad women, to whom Laubardemont's arrival has restored the power of speech. There he finds a band of furious Bacchanals whom the condemned apothecary was busy intoxicating with his potions, throwing them into such paroxysms of rage that on one occasion Grandier came near perishing under their nails.

Unable to vie with the eloquence of the Devil-possessed Louise of Marseilles, they made up for the want of it by impudent cynicism. A vile sight truly!--young girls, taking advantage of the devils supposed to be prompting them to let loose the floodgates of their sensual delirium for the public delectation! For it was this and nothing else that attracted such crowds; they came to hear from women's mouths things that no modest female lips ever dare to utter.

And the absurdity of these scenes increased pari passu with the odiousness. The scraps of Latin that were whispered in their ears they pronounced all wrong. The public said scornfully that the devils had not passed their Fourth Standard. The Capuchins, not in the least disconcerted, replied that if the demons were weak in Latin, they spoke Troquois to perfection and very fine Double Dutch.

 

This ignoble farce, when seen from a distance of sixty leagues, from Saint-Germain or the Louvre, appeared something miraculous, terrifying, and appalling. The French Court wondered and shuddered; while Richelieu (no doubt to win popularity) condescended to a cowardly proceeding, having both exorcists and nuns paid for what they did.

So signal a favour encouraged the cabal, which now lost all sense of decorum and moderation. Words of senseless folly were succeeded by shameful acts. The exorcists, under pretext of the fatigued condition of the nuns, sent them on pleasure excursions

[p. 204]

outside the town, sometimes themselves accompanying them. The result was one of the number became enceinte, or at any rate seemed to be so. At the end of the fifth or sixth month this appearance vanished completely, and the demon that was in her confessed the trick he had played, in order to bring discredit on the poor nun by an illusory pregnancy. It is the learned historian of Louviers who supplies us with this fragment of the history of Loudun. [*5]

It is credibly affirmed that Father Joseph arrived incognito, but seeing the case was hopeless, quietly withdrew again. The Jesuits also came, performed sundry exorcisms without much success, noted which way the wind of public opinion blew, and likewise beat a retreat.

But the monks, the Capuchins above all, were so deeply involved that only one course was left them, to save their own skins by inspiring terror in their neighbours. They laid cunning snares to catch the stout-hearted Bailli and his lady, whom they would fain have ruined and so stifled any retributive measures on the part of justice. Lastly, they urged the Commission to press the case against Grandier to a conclusion. Things were at a standstill, even their allies the nuns failing them at this crisis. After their fearful orgy of carnal frenzy and their shameless cries for human blood, two or three of them had swooned away, and filled with a sick disgust at their own vileness, became a horror and a loathing to themselves. In spite of the awful fate they must expect if they spoke out, in spite of the certainty of ending in a dungeon, [*6] they openly declared within the church walls that they were lost souls, that they had played into the Devil's hands, that Grandier was an innocent man.

They ruined themselves, but did nothing to stop the course of events; and a general protest addressed by the town to the King was equally unavailing. Grandier was condemned to be burned (August 18th, 1634). So savage was his enemies' temper

[p. 205]

that before he went to the stake, they insisted on a second application of the needle to every part of his body in search of the Devil's mark. One of the judges would actually have liked his nails to be torn off, but the surgeon refused.

His persecutors dreaded the final scene and the victim's last words from the scaffold. Having found among his papers a written argument against the celibacy of the clergy, the same men who had pronounced him a Sorcerer, now thought him a freethinker. They remembered the bold words the martyrs of freedom of thought had hurled at their judges' heads, recalling the last, tremendous words of Giordano Bruno [*7] and Vanini's dying defiance. So they arranged a compromise with Grandier. He was told that, if he kept a judicious silence, he should be spared the flames and should be strangled before the pile was kindled. The weak priest, a man of the flesh, yielded yet another and a last concession to the feeble flesh, and promised not to speak. He never opened his lips either on the road to his death or on the scaffold itself. Then when they saw him securely tied to the stake, everything ready and the embers so arranged as to wrap him swiftly in flame and smoke, a monk, his own confessor, without waiting for the executioner, set light to the faggots. The deluded victim had only time to exclaim, "Ah, you have cheated me!" before the rolling smoke rose round him and through the furnace of his torment only his shrieks were audible.

Richelieu in his Memoirs passes lightly over the affair, being evidently ashamed of the whole matter. He leaves it to be understood that he acted according to the reports supplied him, following the voice of public opinion in what he did. But there can be no doubt that by subsidising the exorcists, by giving the rein to the Capuchins' violence and ensuring their triumph throughout the country, he had directly encouraged knavery and imposture. Gauffridi, whose role had been recreated by Grandier, is

[p. 206]

soon to appear once more under still fouler circumstances in the affair of Louviers.

This very year of 1634 the devils, driven out of Poitou, appear in Normandy, copying and recopying the old absurdities of La Sainte-Baume, devoid equally of originality, fresh initiative, and creative imagination. The wild, fierce Leviathan of Provence, as travestied at Loudun, has lost his southern verve, and can only conclude the affair by making nuns and virgins speak volubly the vile language of the Cities of the Plain. Alas! presently, at Louviers, he will lose even this much of his old audacity; we shall find him succumbing to the heaviness of the northern atmosphere and growing a poor, mean-spirited creature of tricks and subterfuges.

Footnotes

^191:1 Wyer, bk. iii. ch. 7.

^192:2 A very old doctrine, which reappears frequently in the Middle Ages. In the seventeenth century it is common in the French and Spanish cloisters, nowhere more clearly and naively expressed than in the lessons of a Normandy angel to a nun, reported in the papers relating to the Louviers affair (see following chapter). The angel teaches the nun in the first place "contempt for the body and indifference to the flesh. So much did Jesus despise the flesh that He exposed it naked to flagellation and open to the eyes of all men. . . ." He teaches her "complete abandonment of soul and will, holy, blessed, purely passive obedience; for example, the Blessed Virgin, who feared not Gabriel, but obeyed, and conceived. . . . Herein she exposed herself to no risk. For a spirit can cause no impurity. Quite the contrary, he purifies." At Louviers this noble doctrine was in the ascendant as early as 1623, and was taught systematically by a confessor of ripe age and well-supported authority, Father David by name. The gist of his teaching was "to kill sin by sin, the better to return to a state of innocence. This is what our first parents did." Esprit de Bosroger (Capuchin), La Piete affligee (Piety Afflicted), 1645; pp. 167, 171, 173, 174, 181, 189, 190, 196.

^193:3 The work entitled L'Histoire des diables de Loudun (History of the Devils of Loudun), by the Protestant Aubin, is a serious and painstaking book, and its statements are confirmed by the Official Reports even of Laubardemont. On the contrary, Tranquille's book is a grotesque production. The Procedure is in the Bibliotheque Nationale at Paris. M. Figuier has given a lengthy and excellent account of the whole matter (Histoire du merveilleux,--History of the Miraculous). I am, as the sequel will show, against the judges, but by no means in favour of the condemned. It is absurd to make a martyr of him, out of dislike for Richelieu. The fact is he was a fool, a fop, and libertine, who deserved, not the stake, but imprisonment for life.

^194:4 See Del Rio, Llorente, Ricci, etc.

^204:5 Esprit de Bossuet, p. 135.

^204:6 Such was still the custom. See Mabillon.

^205:7 These words, which he addressed to his judges after hearing his sentence pronounced, were: "This sentence, delivered in the name of a God of mercy, is perhaps more a cause of fear to you than to me." He was burned at the stake at Rome, February 17th, 1600.

     The Sorceress, by Jules Michelet, [1939], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 207]

  

20

  

THE NUNS of LOUVIERS and SATANIC POSSESSION
 MADELEINE BAVENT
 1640-1647

HAD not Richelieu refused to order the inquiry demanded by Father Joseph against the thirty thousand illuminati among the Father Confessors, we should doubtless have had some strange revelations as to the internal life of the convents and the morals of the nuns inhabiting them. Failing this, the history of events at Louviers, more instructive than anything told us about Aix or Loudun, proves that confessors, although possessing in Illuminism a new instrument of corruption, by no means neglected the old tricks of Sorcery, diabolic apparitions, angelic visitations, and the like. [*1]

Of three successive Directors of the Convent of Loudun,

[p. 208]

within thirty years, the first, David, is one of the illuminati, a Molinist (before Molinos); the second, Picart, has dealings with the Devil and uses magic arts; the third, Boulle, acts under the guise of an angel.

The great authority on the whole affair is a book entitled, Histoire de Magdelaine Bavent, Religieuse de Louviers, avec son interrogatoir, etc. (History of Madeleine Bavent, a Nun of Louviers, together with her Examination, etc.), 4to: Rouen, 1652. [*2] The date of this work accounts for the perfect freedom with which it is written. During the "Fronde," a stout-hearted priest, an Oratorian, having found the nun in question in the prisons of Rouen, conceived the bold idea of writing down at her dictation the history of her life.

Madeleine was born at Rouen in 1607, and was left an orphan at nine years old. At twelve she was bound apprentice to a tradeswoman of the city, a worker in linen. The Confessor of the establishment, a Franciscan, was absolute master of the house, the linen-worker, who was chiefly employed in making nuns' robes, depending wholly on the Church's patronage. The monk made the apprentice girls, who were drugged probably with belladonna and other Wizards' potions, believe he was taking them to the "Sabbath" and marrying them to the great

[p. 209]

devil Dagon. He had his will of three of them, and Madeleine, at fourteen, made the fourth.

She was filled with ardent piety, especially towards St. Francis. A Franciscan convent had just been founded at Louviers by a lady of Rouen, widow of the King's Procureur Hennequin, hanged for malversation. The lady hoped by this good work to do something for the salvation of her husband's soul, and with this view consulted a holy man, an aged priest by name Father David, who superintended the new foundation. Outside the gates of the town, buried in the woods surrounding Louviers, the convent, a poor place gloomily situated, and established under such tragic circumstances, seemed a fit place for the austere life. David himself was known by a strange, violent book he had composed against the abuses that disgraced the Religious Houses, the Fouet des Paillards (A Whip for Wantons), as it was called. [*3] Nevertheless, this stern moralist had some very curious notions as to what constituted purity. He was an Adamite, preaching the nudity Adam practised in his innocence. Obedient to his teaching, the Sisters of the convent at Louviers, by way of subjugating and humiliating the novices and breaking them in to discipline, required (no doubt in summer-time) these young Eves to resume the condition of our first mother. They made them take exercise in this state in certain private gardens, and even appear so in chapel. Madeleine, who had succeeded at sixteen in being received as a novice, was too proud (too pure-minded perhaps so far) to submit to this strange way of living. She incurred the displeasure of the authorities and was scolded for having endeavoured, at Communion, to hide her bosom with the altar-cloth.

She was equally reluctant to unveil her soul, and would not confess to the Lady Superior,--a usual practice in convents and one that the Abbesses found greatly to their liking. She preferred to entrust the care of her soul to the old priest, David, who separated her from the other Sisters,--while he

[p. 210]

returned the compliment by entrusting his body to her when he was ill. He did not hide from her his private, inner doctrine, the conventual theory of Illuminism: "The body cannot contaminate the soul; we must, by means of sin, which makes us humble and cures our pride, kill sin," etc. The nuns, saturated with these doctrines, and unobtrusively putting them in practice among themselves, appalled Madeleine with their abominable doings. She withdrew and kept apart from the rest, living in the outer purlieus of the convent, having secured the post of touriere. [*4]

 

She was eighteen when David died. His advanced age can scarcely have allowed him to go very far with Madeleine but the cure Picart, his successor, pursued her with ardent importunity. At confession he spoke of nothing but love, and made her Sacristaness, that he might be able to be with her alone in the convent chapel. She did not like him; but the Sisters forbade her any other confessor, for fear of her divulging their little mysteries. This put her completely in Picart's hands. He assailed her when she was ill, when she was almost on her deathbed; moreover, he assailed her through her fears, leading her to believe that David had handed on to him certain diabolical talismans. Last of all, he assailed her through her feelings of compassion, shamming sick himself and beseeching her to visit him in his room. From that moment he was her master, and it would seem, confused her wits with magic potions. She dreamed of the Witches' Sabbath, fancied herself carried off thither in his company, where she was at once altar and victim. And it is only too true she was so in sad reality!

But Picart was not satisfied with the barren pleasures of the "Sabbath," but, defying scandalous tongues, boldly got her with child.

The nuns, whose turpitude he knew, were afraid of him.

[p. 211]

[paragraph continues] Besides which they were bound to him by their worldly interests; it was his credit, his energy, the alms and gifts he attracted from all quarters, which had enriched their convent. He was even now building them a great church. The affair of Loudun has sufficiently shown what were the ambitions and mutual rivalries of these Houses and the jealous eagerness they displayed to out-vie one another. Picart, in virtue of the good will of rich patrons, found himself promoted to the role of benefactor and sacred founder of the convent. "Dear heart," he declared to Madeleine, "'tis I am building this magnificent church. After my death you will see wonders. . . . Will you not do as I wish?"

He was a great lord, and carried things with a high hand. He paid down a dowry for her, and from a mere lay Sister raised her to the position of a full-blown Sister, so that, being no longer in charge of the turning-box, and living within the convent itself, she might conveniently be delivered or contrive abortion, as the case might be. Provided with certain drugs, and possessed of certain secrets, convents could dispense with the necessity of calling in medical aid. Madeleine declares (Examination, p. 13) she bore several children. What became of these infants she does not say.

 

Picart, already an oldish man, dreaded Madeleine's fickleness, fearing she might form a new connexion with some other confessor, to whom she could pour out her remorse. He adopted a hateful means of attaching her irrevocably to himself. He made her swear an oath pledging herself to die when he should die, and be with him where he should go. The poor, fainthearted creature endured agonies of terror. Would he drag her with him into the tomb? would he set her in Hell alongside of himself? She fully believed herself a lost soul. She became his chattel, his familiar spirit bound to do his will, and he used her and abused her for every vile purpose. He prostituted her in a fourfold orgy, carried out with his vicar Boulle and another woman. He made use of her to win over the other nuns by a

[p. 212]

magic talisman. The sacred wafer, dipped in Madeleine's blood and buried in the convent garden, was a sure way of agitating their senses and eluding their wits.

It was the very same year that Urbain Grandier was burned, and all France was talking of nothing else but the devils of Loudun. The Penitentiary of Evreux, who had been one of the actors in that drama, brought back appalling accounts of what had occurred to Normandy. Madeleine felt herself possessed, assailed, battered, by devils; a cat with fiery eyes pursued her with amorous advances. Little by little other Sisters caught the contagion, and began to experience strange, supernatural stirrings. Madeleine had asked help of a Capuchin, and later on of the Bishop of Evreux. The Lady Superior, who could not but be aware of the fact, was rather glad than otherwise, seeing the glory and riches a similar affair had brought to the Convent of Loudun. But for six years the Bishop was deaf to all such appeals, being no doubt afraid of Richelieu, who was trying at the time to initiate a reform of the Religious Houses.

His wish was to put an end to all these scandals. Only at his death and that of Louis XIII., in the general confusion that followed, under the Queen and Mazarin, did the priests really take up their dealings with the supernatural again, and resume their struggle with the Devil. Picart was dead, and interference looked less hazardous now in an affair in which that dangerous man might have involved many others in his own guilt. To fight the visions of Madeleine, another visionary of the same sort was sought for, and soon found. A certain Anne of the Nativity was introduced into the convent, a woman of sanguine and hysterical temperament, on occasion shown, a savage and half a madwoman, actually insane enough to believe her own lies. It was a stand-up fight, regularly arranged like a bout between two bulldogs; and the pair fell to sacrificing each other with outrageous calumnies. Anne declared she saw the Devil standing stark naked by Madeleine's side. Madeleine swore that she had seen Anne at the Witches' Sabbath, along with the Lady Superior,

[p. 213]

the Mother Delegate, and the Mother of the Novices. Not that there was a single novel feature; it was all a rechauffe of the two famous cases at Aix and Loudun. Both had the printed reports of those trials, and followed them slavishly, without a trace of discrimination or originality.

The accuser Anne and her devil Leviathan had the countenance of the Penitentiary of Evreux, one of the chief actors in the Loudun affair. By his advice the Bishop of Evreux orders the exhumation of Picart's body, so that his corpse being removed from the neighbourhood of the convent may remove the devils along with it. Madeleine, condemned without a hearing, is to be degraded, and examined to discover on her body the satanic sign-manual. Her veil and robe are torn off her wretched body, which is left to be the butt of an unworthy curiosity, ready to pry into her very vitals to find excuse to send her to the stake. The Sisters would entrust to no hands but their own this cruel search, in itself a terrible punishment. These virgin nuns, in the guise of matrons, verified her condition, whether pregnant or no, then shaved her in every part of her person, and pricking with their needles, driving them deep in the quivering flesh, sought if there was anywhere a spot insensible to pain, as the devil's mark is bound to be. But every stab hurt; failing the crowning triumph of proving her a Witch, at any rate they had the satisfaction of gloating over her tears and cries of agony.

 

But Anne was not satisfied yet; on the testimony of her devil, the Bishop condemned Madeleine, whom the examination vindicated from the suspicions entertained, to be immured in an in pace for life. Her removal, it was alleged, would calm the other nuns. But it was not so. The Devil raged only the more furiously; and a score of the Sisters were soon screaming, prophesying, and struggling.

The sight attracted the curious in crowds from Rouen, and even from Paris. A young surgeon of the latter city, Yvelin by name, had already been a spectator of the farce perpetrated at

[p. 214]

[paragraph continues] Loudun, and now came to watch the one at Louviers. He was accompanied by a magistrate, a very clear-headed man and an Assistant Counsellor at Rouen. They devoted a steady and persevering attention to the matter, establishing themselves in the town and studying the phenomena systematically for seventeen days.

From the very first day they detected the imposture. A conversation they had had with the Penitentiary on entering the town was repeated to them (as a special revelation) by the devil in possession of Anne of the Nativity. On every occasion they accompanied the crowd to the convent garden. The scene and its accessories were extremely striking; the shades of night, the torches, the trembling and smoky lights, all produced effects which had been lacking at Loudun. The mode of procedure, however, was of the simplest; one of the possessed would declare, "You will find a talisman at such and such a spot in the garden." A hole was dug at the place indicated, and the charm duly discovered. Unfortunately, Yvelin's friend, the sceptical magistrate, refused to quit the side of the principal performer, the nun Anne. On the very edge of an excavation they were going to open up, he grasps her hand, and opening the fingers, finds the talisman (a little black thread) concealed there, which she was on the point of throwing into the hole.

Exorcists, Penitentiary, priests, and Capuchins, who were all present, were covered with confusion. The intrepid Yvelin, on his own authority, commenced an inquiry and saw to the bottom of the whole thing. Among fifty-two nuns there were, he declared, six under possession, diabolic or otherwise, who would seem to have deserved a taste of discipline. Seventeen others, under a spell, were merely victims, a troop of young women affected by the morbid excitement characteristic of cloister life. He details the symptoms with precision; the girls are otherwise normal, but hysterical, suffering from extreme disturbances and derangements of the womb, to all intents and purposes lunatic and deranged. Nervous contagion had destroyed

[p. 215]

their wits, and the very first thing to do is to isolate them from each other.

Next he scrutinises with a Voltairean keenness the various signs by which the priests recognise the supernatural character of the possession under which they labour. They prophesy; granted, but things that never happen. They translate tongues; granted, but without understanding the original (for instance, ex parte Virginis is made to mean "the departure of the Virgin"). They know Greek before the populace of Louviers, but cannot speak a word of it before the doctors at Paris. They make extraordinary leaps and perform feats of strength,--the easiest in the world, climbing a great tree-trunk a child of three could negotiate. In one word, the only thing they do really terrible and unnatural is to say filthy abominations no man would ever soil his lips with.

 

The surgeon was really doing a great service to humanity by tearing away the mask from them. For the business was being pressed, and more victims would soon have been added. Besides the talismans, papers were discovered which were attributed to David or Picart, and in which such and such individuals were declared Sorcerers and marked down for death. Everybody trembled, and the terror of ecclesiastical pains and penalties gained ground from day to day.

The evil days of Cardinal Mazarin were now come, and the first essays in ruling of the weak Anne of Austria. Order and good government were things of the past. "There was only one phrase left in the whole French language, La Reine est si bonne (the Queen is so good-natured)." This good nature it was gave the clergy their chance to gain the upper hand; lay authority being interred with Richelieu, bishops, priests, and monks were going to govern instead. But the impious audacity of the magistrate and Yvelin was like to compromise this agreeable hope. Voices of lamentation and protest reached the good Queen,--not the voices of the victims, but those of the scamps and impostors

[p. 216]

caught red-handed in their trickeries. The Court must go into mourning for the dire outrages done to the sacred cause of Religion!

This was a blow Yvelin was far from expecting, believing his favour at Court to be firmly based, as for ten years he had enjoyed the title of Surgeon to the Queen. Before his return from Louviers to Paris, his adversaries won from the weakness of Anne of Austria the appointment of other experts, of their own choosing, an old dotard in his second childhood, a Diafoirus of Rouen and his nephew, two clients of the clergy. These did not fail to find that the affair of Louviers was supernatural, above and beyond all human skill.

Any other man but Yvelin would have been discouraged. The Rouen experts, who were physicians, treated as altogether an inferior this mere barber-surgeon, this quack; while the Court gave him no support. He only stiffened his back and wrote a pamphlet, which will live. In it he accepts the great duel between Science and the Clergy, and declares (as Wyer had done in the sixteenth century) "that in such-like matters the proper judge is not the Priest, but the man of Science." After much difficulty he found a printer to risk putting it in type, but no one willing to sell it. Accordingly the heroic young fellow set himself in broad daylight to the task of distributing the little book. He posted himself at the most frequented spot in Paris, on the Pont Neuf, and standing at the feet of Henri IV., presented his brochure to the passers-by. There they could read the official report of the scandalous deceit, the magistrate seizing in the very hand of the female devils the unanswerable evidence of their own infamy.

 

To return to the unhappy Madeleine. Her enemy, the Penitentiary of Evreux, the same who had ordered her to be pricked--personally marking the place for the needles!--now carried her off as his prey, and deposited her in the depths of the episcopal in pace at that town. Beneath a subterranean gallery

[p. 217]

was a cellar at a lower level still, beneath the cellar a dungeon where the prisoner lay rotting in damp and darkness. Her unfeeling companions, making sure she must soon perish in the dreadful place, had not common kindness enough to provide her with a little linen to dress her ulcer with. She suffered both from pain and from her filthy condition, lying as she did in her own excrements. The perpetual darkness was disturbed by a dreadful scampering of hungry rats, the object of much terror in prisons, as they will sometimes gnaw off the helpless prisoners' noses and ears.

But the horror even of these fearful surroundings did not equal that inspired by her tyrant, the Penitentiary. Every day he would come into the cellar overhead, to speak down the orifice of the in pace, threatening, ordering, confessing her in her own despite, making her say this and that against other people. Presently she left off eating entirely. He was afraid she was going to die, and took her out of the in pace for a brief while, lodging her in the cellar above. Then, furious at Yvelin's brochure, he threw her once more into the foul sewer down below.

This glimpse of light, this gleam of hope, kindled and so soon extinguished, all added to her despair. The ulcer had now closed, and her strength was somewhat recruited. She was seized with a heartfelt, wild desire for death. She swallowed spiders,--she merely vomited, without further bad effects. She pounded glass and gulped it down,--but in vain. Putting her hand on an old blunt knife, she tried hard to cut her throat, but could not succeed. Next, choosing a softer place, her belly, she forced the iron into her inwards. For four whole hours she worked, and writhed and bled. But nothing answered her hopes; even this wound soon closed. To crown her woes, the life that she hated so, grew stronger within her. Her heart was dead indeed,--but what of that?

She became a woman once more, and alas! desirable still, a temptation for her gaolers, brutal fellows of the Bishop's household, who, in spite of the horrors of the place, the unhealthy and

[p. 218]

unclean condition of the wretched creature, would come to take their pleasure of her, deeming any outrage permissible on a Witch. An angel came to her succour, so she declared. She defended herself both from men and rats, but not from her own evil passions. A prison degrades the character. She began to dream about the Devil, to call upon him to visit her, to implore the renewal of the shameful, agonising delights he used to wring her heart with in the old days at Louviers. But he would come back no more; the power of dreams was done in her, her senses depraved indeed, but dulled and dead. Only the more eagerly did she recur to the thought of suicide. One of the gaolers had given her a poison to destroy the rats that infested her cell. She was on the point of swallowing it, when an angel stayed her hand (was it an angel or a demon?), reserving her for an existence of crime.

Now fallen into the most abject condition, to indescribable depths of cowardice and servility, she signed interminable lists of crimes she had never committed. Was she worth the trouble of burning? Many renounced the idea, and the implacable Penitentiary was the only one who still thought seriously of adopting such a course. He offered money to a Wizard of Evreux they had under lock and key if he would give such evidence as to ensure Madeleine's death.

But henceforth she could be utilised in quite a different way, as a false witness, an instrument of lying and slandering. Every time it was desired to ruin a man she was haled to Louviers, to Evreux,--the accursed phantom of a dead woman who went on living only to be the death of others. In this fashion she was brought along to kill with the venom of her tongue a poor man by name Duval. The Penitentiary dictated, and she said her lesson obediently after him; he told her by what sign she should recognise Duval, whom she had never seen. She duly identified him, and affirmed she had seen him at the Witches' Sabbath,--and he was burned on her testimony!

She confesses to this atrocity, and shudders to think she must

[p. 219]

answer for it before God. After a while she fell into such contempt they did not so much as deign to watch her. The doors stood wide open; sometimes she had the keys in her own possession. Where, indeed, should she have fled, now she was grown a mere object of horror to all mankind? From henceforth the universe rejected the odious creature and spued her out; her only world was her dungeon.

Under the anarchy of Mazarin and his "good-natured" mistress, the Parlements were the sole and only authority left. That of Rouen, till then the most favourable of them all towards the clergy, yet waxed indignant at the insolence of their present proceedings, the way they were domineering and burning. By a mere decree of the Bishop's, Picart had been exhumed and his body cast into the common sewer. Now it was the vicar Boulle's turn, and they were trying him. The Parlement hearkened to the appeal of Picart's family, and condemned the Bishop of Evreux to return the body at his own cost to the tomb at Louviers. It summoned Boulle to appear before it, discharged his case, and on the same occasion finally removed the unhappy Madeleine Bavent from Evreux, and took her also to Rouen.

There was much reason to fear the Parlement might call up both the surgeon Yvelin and the magistrate who had detected the nuns, flagrante delicto, in their imposture. Appeal was instantly made to Paris; and Mazarin threw the aegis of his protection over his fellow-rascals. The whole affair was to be laid before the King's Council, an easy-going tribunal, which had neither eyes nor ears, and whose first care was invariably to bury, to hush up, to make a cloud of darkness, in any question of law and justice.

Simultaneously, soft-spoken priests, in the dungeons of Rouen, comforted Madeleine, received her confession, and for penance ordered her to ask pardon of her persecutors, the Sisters of Louviers. Henceforward, come what might, Madeleine, thus tongue-tied, could not be brought up to bear witness against them. This was a distinct triumph for the clergy,--a triumph

[p. 220]

which the Capuchin, Esprit de Bosroger, one of the charlatan exorcists, has celebrated in his Piete affligee, a grotesque monument of human folly, in which, quite unknowingly, he incriminates the very people he believes himself to be defending. We have seen a little above (in a note) the noble words of the Capuchin in a passage where he gives as lessons of the angels a series of shameful maxims that would have utterly shocked Molinos.

The Fronde was, as I have said before, a revolt in favour of integrity of living. Fools have seen in it only the formal and ludicrous side, but the real basis was a solemn and serious moral reaction. In August, 1647, at the first breath of free criticism, the Parlement took action, and cut the knot. It decreed: imprimis, that the Sodom of Louviers should be destroyed, the young women dispersed and sent home to their families; secundo, that henceforward the Bishops of the Province should send four times a year Confessors Extraordinary to all nunneries to make sure that these filthy abuses were not being repeated.

Still a sop was needed for the clergy. They were given the bones of Picart to burn, and the living body of Boulle, who, after making a proper expression of contrition in the cathedral, was drawn on a hurdle to the Fish-market, and there delivered to the flames,--August 21st, 1647. Madeleine, or rather her dead carcass, remained in the prisons of Rouen.

Footnotes

^207:1 It was only too easy to deceive women who wished to be cajoled. Celibacy was now more difficult than in the Middle Ages, the monastic fastings and bleedings being largely discontinued. Many died of a life so cruelly inactive and so liable to nervous over-excitation. The unhappy women took little pains to hide the martyrdom they suffered, but spoke of it to the other Sisters, to their Confessor, to the Virgin herself,--a circumstance deserving our sympathy and pity far more than our ridicule. We read in a report of an Italian Disciplinary Commission such an avowal on the part of a nun, who said naively to the Madonna, "of your gracious favour, Holy Virgin, grant me some one I may sin with" (in Lasteyrie, Confession, p. 205). It formed a genuine embarrassment for the Director, who, no matter what his age, was in real peril. The story of a certain Russian convent is well known,--how a man who had penetrated within its doors did not come out alive. In the French Houses the Director went inside, indeed it was his duty to do so, every day. The general belief among Religious Women was that a holy man [p. 208] can only sanctify, and a pure being purify. The people called them in mockery "the Sanctified" (Lestoile). This was a matter of very serious conviction in convents (see the Capuchin Esprit de Bosroger, ch. xi. p. 156).

^208:2 I do not know a more important, a more terrible book, or one better deserving to be reprinted (Bibliotheque Z, ancien 1016). It is the most striking of all such histories. Another work, La Piete affligee (Piety Afflicted), by the Capuchin Esprit de Bosroger, is a book that must live for ever in the annals of human folly and dulness. I have extracted from this, in the preceding chapter, some surprising statements which might well have involved its being burned by the common hangman; but I have carefully refrained from reproducing the amorous liberties which it makes the Archangel Gabriel take with the Virgin, his dove-like kisses, and so on. The two admirable pamphlets of the stout-hearted Surgeon Yvelin are to be found in the Bibliotheque de Sainte-Genevieve. The Examen and the Apologie are bound up with other documents in a volume inappropriately labelled Eloges de Richelieu (Letter x. 550). A duplicate of the Apologie occurs also in the volume numbered Z 899 in the same collection.

^209:3 See Floquet, Parl. de Normandie, vol. v. p. 636.

^210:4 I.e., the nun who attends to the turning-box of a convent, by means of which communication is kept up with the outside world.

     The Sorceress, by Jules Michelet, [1939], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 221]

  

21

  

SATAN TRIUMPHANT in the SEVENTEENTH CENTURY

THE Fronde was essentially Voltairean. The Voltairean spirit, as old as France really, though long kept in abeyance, breaks out in Politics, and very soon afterwards in Religion. The King, with all his greatness, tries in vain to impose a solemn and serious attitude on his subjects. The undercurrent of mocking laughter is always audible.

Does it all mean nothing more then but laughter and derision? Far from that; it is the beginning of the reign of Reason. Kepler, Galileo, Descartes, and Newton triumphantly established the dogma of reason, of faith in the unchangeableness of the Laws of Nature. The Miraculous dares no more show its face on the stage, or if it does, it is promptly hissed off.

To put it better still, the fantastic miracles of casual caprice have had their day, and the great, universal, the standing Miracle of Nature appears instead, the more divine from the very fact of its definite subjection to law and order.

It marks the final victory of a general Revolt. So much may be seen in the bold forms assumed by these earliest protests, in the irony of Galileo, in the absolute scepticism from which Descartes starts to build up his system. The Middle Ages would have said, "It is the Spirit of the Wily One, the Foul Fiend."

No mere negative victory, however, but positive and firmly based.

The Spirit of Nature and the Sciences of Nature, those proscribed outlaws of an earlier day,--there is no resisting their

[p. 222]

restoration to power. It is Reality and hard fact chasing away the empty shadows of mediaeval darkness.

Foolishly men had said, "Great Pan is dead." Then presently, seeing he was alive still, they had made him into a god of evil; and in the gloom and chaos of those days the mistake was possible enough. But lo! he is alive now, and with a life in harmony and sweet accord with the sublime and immutable laws that guide the stars of heaven, and no less surely govern the deep mystery of human life.

 

Two things may be predicated of this epoch, apparently, yet not really, contradictory: the spirit of Satan has prevailed, but Witchcraft is doomed.

Magic of every kind, whether diabolic or divine, is sick unto death. Sorcerers and Theologians, both are equally impotent. They are reduced to the condition of empirics, vainly imploring of some supernatural accident or the caprice of a Gracious Providence, those marvels that Science asks only from Nature, from Reason.

The Jansenists, with all their ardent zeal, obtain in a whole century but one insignificant, rather ludicrous, miracle. More unfortunate still, the Jesuits, rich and powerful as they are, cannot, at any price, get even one, but must rest content with the visions of a hysterical girl, Sister Marie Alacoque, a being of a quite abnormally sanguine idiosyncrasy. In face of such a show of impotence, Magic and Sorcery may well take heart of grace for their own failures.

Observe how in this decay of faith in the Supernatural, infidelity of one kind ensues upon infidelity of the other. The two were bound together in the thoughts and fears of the Middle Ages. They continued closely bound together in ridicule and contempt. When Moliere made fun of the Devil and his "boiling cauldrons," the Clergy were sorely disturbed: they felt instinctively that faith in Paradise was being depreciated to a corresponding degree.

[p. 223]

A purely lay Government, that of the great Colbert (who for a long period was king in all but name) takes no pains to conceal its contempt for these outworn questions. It purges the gaols of the Sorcerers the Parlement of Rouen still went on accumulating within their walls; eventually forbids the Courts to take cognisance of charges of Witchcraft at all (1672) . The said Parlement protests, and protests with great plainness of speaking, that a repudiation of Sorcery implies risk to a great many other things as well. Who throws doubt on the nether mysteries, shakes belief in many a soul in the mysteries of heaven.

 

The Witches' Sabbath disappears; and why? The reason is, it is everywhere henceforth; it is a part of men's ordinary habits; its practices are those of everyday life.

It was said of the "Sabbath," "No woman ever returned from it in child." The Devil and the Witch-wife were reproached with being sworn foes of generation, of hating life and loving death and annihilation. And lo! it is precisely in the sanctimonious seventeenth century, when Witchcraft is a-dying, [*1] that love of barrenness and fear of giving birth form the most general of diseases.

If Satan is a reading man, he has good cause to laugh when he peruses the Casuists, his successors and continuators. Yet a difference there is between them. Satan in dread days of old was careful for the hungry, and pitiful for the poor. But these others have pity only for the rich man. Croesus with his vices and luxury and life at Kings' Courts, is needy, grievously poor, a beggar. He comes in Confession, humble, yet menacing, to

[p. 224]

extract from the learned Father a licence to sin, within the bounds of conscience. Some day will be written (if anyone has the courage to write it) the surprising history of the cowardly expedients of the Casuist eager not to lose his penitent and the disgraceful subterfuges he is ready to resort to. From Navarro to Eseobar, a strange bargaining goes on at the expense of the wife, and some points are still left open to dispute. But this is not enough; the Casuist is fairly beaten, and gives up everything. From Zoccoli to Liguori (1670-1770), the defence of Nature is abandoned altogether.

The Devil had, as everyone knows, when attending the Witches' Sabbath, two faces, one above, gloomy and terrible, the other behind, ludicrous and grotesque. Nowadays, having no more use for it, he will of his generosity give the latter to the Casuist.

What must vastly divert Satan is the fact that his most faithful followers are to be found in those days among respectable folks, in serious households, ruled and governed by the Church. [*2] The woman of the world, who raises the fortunes of her house by means of the great resource of the period, profitable adultery, laughs at prudence and boldly follows the promptings of nature. The pious family follows merely its Jesuit Confessor. To preserve and concentrate the family fortune, to leave a rich heir, the crooked ways of the new spirituality are entered upon. In shadow and secret, the proudest wife, at her prie-Dieu, ignores her self-respect, forgets her true nature, and

[p. 225]

follows the precept of Molinos: "We are set here below to suffer! One thing only, a pious indifference, at long last, softens and lulls our pain,--and wins us respite. What is this respite? It is not Death. We feel to some extent what goes on beside us; without joining in it, or responding to its stimulus, we yet hear an echo of its movement, vague and gentle. 'Tis a sort of happy accident of Grace, which soothes and thrills us, never more so than in those abasements where free will is all eclipsed."

What refinement, what depth is here. . . . Poor Satan! how are you outdone! Bow down, and admire, and own the sons of your own engendering.

 

The doctors, who are in an even more true sense his lawful sons, who sprung from the popular empiricism known as Witchcraft, these his chosen heirs, to whom he left his noblest patrimony, are far too ready to forget the fact. They are basely ungrateful to the Witches who paved their way for them.

They do more. On this fallen monarch, their father and the author of their being, they inflict some sore lashes. . . . Tu quoque, file mi! (You too, my son!) . . . They supply the mockers with some cruel weapons to use against him.

Already the physicians of the sixteenth century derided the Spirit, which in all ages, from Sibyls to Witches, tormented women and harassed them with windy troubles. They maintained this is neither Devil nor God, but even as the Middle Ages said, "the Prince of the Air." Satan, it would seem from them, is simply a form of disease!

Satanic possession, they declared, was simply a result of the close, sedentary life, dull and yet harassing and exasperating, of the cloister. The 6,500 devils that dwelt in Gauffridi's Madeleine, the legions of demons that fought and struggled in the bodies of the tormented nuns of Loudun and of Louviers,--these doctors call them physical disturbances and nothing more. "If Aeolus makes the earth shake," Yvelin asks, "why not a

[p. 226]

girl's body?" The surgeon who attended La Cadiere (the subject of our next chapter) says drily, "Nothing else in the world but a choking of the womb."

What a strange come-down! The terror of the Middle Ages put to rout by the simplest of remedies, exorcisms a la Moliere, in fact, flying helter-skelter, to be seen no more!

Nay! this is assuming too much. The question is not so simple as all that. Satan has other aspects besides, of which the doctors see neither the highest nor the lowest,--neither his grand revolt in Science, or those extraordinary combinations of pious intrigue and stark impurity he contrives towards 1700, uniting in one conglomerate Priapus and Tartuffe.

 

Historians suppose themselves to know the eighteenth century, and yet they have never observed one of its most essential characteristics.

The more its surface, its higher levels, were civilised, illuminated, saturated with light, the more hermetically sealed and closed was the vast underlying region of the ecclesiastical world, of the convent, of credulous womanfolk, morbidly ready to believe anything and everything. In anticipation of Cagliostro, Mesmer and the magnetisers who will come with the later years of the century, not a few priests make a profit out of the Sorcery of a departed age. All their talk is of bewitchments, the dread of which they spread broadcast, and undertake to drive out devils by means of various indecent exorcisms. Many play the wizard, well assured the risk is small and burnings henceforth an impossibility. They know themselves sufficiently safeguarded by the civilisation of the times, the toleration preached by their enemies the Philosophers, and the light indifferentism of the scoffers, who think the last word has been said, when they have raised a laugh. But it is just this laughing attitude which enables such-like dark schemers to go on their way unafraid. The new spirit is that of the Regent, sceptical and good-naturedly tolerant. It is conspicuous in the Lettres Persanes,

[p. 227]

and saturates through and through that all-powerful journalist who fills the century, Voltaire. Once let human blood flow, and his whole heart revolts; at all else he laughs. Little by little the guiding principle of the world at large apparently comes to be, "Punish nothing, and make fun of everything."

The spirit of toleration is such as to suffer Cardinal Tencin to live openly as his own sister's husband; such as to ensure the ruling spirits of the convents in peaceful, undisturbed possession of the nuns in their charge, so completely so indeed that cases of pregnancy amongst the latter were regularly announced, and births formally and legally declared. [*3] The same spirit of tolerance excuses Father Apollinaire, caught in a vile and shameful act of exorcism, [*4] while Cauvrigny, the gallant Jesuit, idol of the provincial nunneries, expiates his intrigues merely by a recall to Paris, in other words by a summons to higher preferment.

Similar was the punishment accorded the notorious Jesuit, Father Girard; he deserved hanging, but was loaded with honours instead, and died in the odour of sanctity. Indeed this is one of the most curious occurrences of the century, marking exactly the characteristic methods of the period, the rough-and-ready combination of the most contradictory modes of procedure. The perilous suavities of the Song of Songs formed, as usual, the preface, followed up by Marie Alacoque and her ecstasies, by the wedlock of Bleeding Hearts, seasoned with

[p. 228]

the morbid, unctuous phrases of Molinos. Girard supplemented all this with the diabolic element and the terrors of bewitchment. He was the Devil, and the Exorcist to boot. The dreadful conclusion of the whole affair was that the unhappy woman he so barbarously immolated, far from obtaining justice, was harried to her death. Eventually she disappeared, probably imprisoned under a lettre de cachet, and cast for the rest of her days into a living tomb.

Footnotes

^223:1 I do not regard La Voisin as a Sorceress, nor as a true Witches' Sabbath the travesty she performed to amuse blase noblemen of high rank, Luxembourg and Vendome, her pupil, and the like. Reprobate priests, allies of La Voisin's, would say the Black Mass secretly for their benefit, undoubtedly with even more obscene details than it had ever included in old days when celebrated before a multitude. In some wretched female victim, a living altar, Nature was pilloried. A woman given up to vile mockery! what an abomination! . . . a sport far less of men than of her sister women's cruelty,--of a Bouillon, brazen, abandoned creature, or of the dark Olympe, deep-dyed in crime and learned in poisons (1681).

^224:2 Voluntary sterility is continually on the increase in the seventeenth century, especially among the more carefully regulated families, subjected to the strictest discipline of the Confessional. Take even the Jansenists. Follow the history of the Arnaulds, and see the steady ratio of decrease among them,--to begin with, twenty children, fifteen children; then five! and eventually not one. Can it be this energetic race (their blood mingled moreover with the gallant Colberts) finishes in enervation? Not so. The fact is it has little by little limited its output, so to speak, in order to make a rich eldest son, a great Lord and King's Minister. The end is gained, and the race dies of its ambitious carefulness, undoubtedly duly planned and purposed.

^227:3 For instance, the most noble Chapter of the Canons of Pignan, who had the honour to be represented in the "Estates" of Provence, were equally proud of their recognised right to possess the nuns of that country. There were sixteen canons; and the Provost's offices received in a single year from the nuns sixteen declarations of pregnancy (Histoire manuscrite de Besse, by M. Renoux). This publicity had at any rate this advantage, that the especial crime of Religious Houses, to wit infanticide, was bound to be less common. The nuns, quietly submitting to what they held to be a necessary accident of their profession, at the cost of a trifle of shame, were humane and good mothers. At any rate they did not kill their children. The nuns of Pignan put theirs out to nurse with the peasants, who were ready to adopt them, make what use they could of them and bring them up with their own family. Thus it comes that not a few farmer folk thereabouts are known down to the present day as descendants of the ecclesiastical nobility of Provence.

^227:4 Garinet, p. 344.

     The Sorceress, by Jules Michelet, [1939], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 229]

  

22

  

FATHER GIRARD and CHARLOTTE CADIERE

THE Jesuits were much to be pitied. So favourably regarded at Versailles, "masters of all they surveyed" at Court, they had not the smallest prestige in the eyes of Heaven, not the most insignificant miracle to show. The Jansenists enjoyed an abundance at any rate of moving legends. Unnumbered crowds of sick folk, of the afflicted, the lame, the paralytic, found at the tomb of the Deacon Paris a moment's healing and relief. The unhappy French people, bowed down under an appalling succession of scourges,--the Grand Monarque, in the first place, then the Regency and Law's wondrous system, which between them reduced such multitudes to beggary,--this unhappy people came to implore salvation of a poor man of righteousness, virtuous if weak-witted, a saint in spite of his many ridiculous attributes. And when all is said and done, why jeer? His life is indeed far more touching than ludicrous. No need for wonder if these good folks were moved to awe and veneration at their benefactor's tomb, and straight forgot their ills. True the cure was hardly ever permanent; still, what matter? The miracle had actually occurred, the miracle of genuine devotion, and loving faith, and heartfelt gratitude. Later on, an alloy of charlatanry was infused in it all; but at that time (in 1728) these extraordinary scenes of popular enthusiasm were still perfectly sincere.

The Jesuits would have given their ears to own the smallest of these miracles which they refused to credit. For more than

[p. 230]

half a century they had been at work decking with fables and pretty tales their legend of the Sacred Heart, the story of Marie Alacoque. For five-and-twenty or thirty years they had been striving to persuade the world that their ally, James II., not content with curing the King's evil (in his quality as King of France, which he never was), amused himself after his death in making the dumb to speak, the halt to run, the squint-eyed to see straight. Unfortunately, after cure, their outlook was more oblique than ever; and as for the dumb, it was discovered, alas! that the individual who played this part was a known and proved impostor, a woman who had been caught red-handed in cheatery. Her habit was to travel the countryside, and at every chapelry renowned for the holiness of its patron saint, to be miraculously healed and receive the alms of the edified worshippers,--going through the same performance at each successive shrine.

For miracle-working, give us the South for choice,--a land abounding in superstitious women, quickly stirred to nervous excitement, good subjects for somnambulism, miraculous manifestations, the holy stigmata, and the like.

The Jesuits had at Marseilles a Bishop of their own kidney, Belzunce, a man of good heart and courage, famous ever since the date of the Great Plague, but credulous and extremely narrow-minded, under shelter of whose authority much might be attempted that would otherwise have been over-risky. As his right-hand man they had established a certain Jesuit from Franche-Comte, a man of keen intelligence and no little ability, who for all his austerity of external demeanour was yet an agreeable preacher in the florid, somewhat worldly style ladies admire. A true Jesuit, competent to win success in either of two ways, whether by feminine intrigue or by the most straight-laced piety, Father Girard had otherwise neither youth nor good looks to recommend him. He was a man of forty-seven, tall, dry-as-dust, tired-looking; he was rather deaf, had a squalid look about him,

[p. 231]

and was for ever spitting (pp. 50, 69, 254). [*1] He had been a teacher up to the age of thirty-seven, and still retained some of the tastes he had learned among schoolboys. For the last ten years--since the Great Plague, that is to say--he had been a confessor in nunneries. He had been highly successful, and had acquired a large measure of ascendency over his penitents by imposing on them the very regimen that seemed prima facie most diametrically opposed to the temperament of these Provencal nuns, viz. the doctrine and discipline of mystic self-annihilation, passive obedience, and the absolute and utter abnegation of self. The fearful incidents of the Plague had broken their spirit, enervated their heart, and affected them with a sort of morbid languor. The Carmelites of Marseilles, under the direction of Girard, carried this species of mysticism to great lengths,--at their head a certain Sister Remusat, who was reputed a veritable saint.

The Jesuits, in spite of all this success, or perhaps just because of it, removed Girard from Marseilles. They were anxious to employ him in the task of raising the status of their House at Toulon, which sorely needed it. Colbert's magnificent Foundation, The Seminary of Naval Almoners, had been entrusted to the Jesuits to gradually wean the young priests attached to it from the mischievous ascendency of the Lazarist Fathers, to whose spiritual superintendence they were in almost every instance subject. But the two Jesuits appointed were far from competent for the task. One was a fool, the other one (Father Sabatier) a man of a singularly violent temper, notwithstanding his years. He had all the blunt insolence of the old type of naval martinet, and scorned any sort of moderation. He was blamed by people at Toulon, not for keeping a mistress or even going with a married woman, but with doing so openly, insolently,

[p. 232]

and outrageously, in such sort as to drive the injured husband to despair. His chief wish was that the latter should before all things realise his shame and feel all the pangs of marital jealousy. Eventually things were pushed so far that the poor man died of chagrin. [*2]

However, the rivals of the Jesuits afforded even greater cause for scandal. The Observantine Fathers, who acted as spiritual directors to the nuns of Saint Claire of , lived in open concubinage with their penitents; nay! they were not satisfied with this iniquity, but even failed to respect the little girls who were pupils at the nunnery. The Father Superintendent, one Aubany, had violated one, a child of thirteen, afterwards flying to Marseilles to escape the vengeance of her relatives.

Girard, now nominated director of the Seminary of Toulon, was destined, by his apparent austerity of character and his very real dexterity of management, soon to regain ascendency for the Jesuits over a body of monks so deeply compromised and of parish priests of small education and of a very common stamp.

In this land where men are rough and hasty, often harsh in speech and rugged in appearance, women appreciate highly the gentle gravity of men of the North, liking and admiring them for speaking the aristocratic, the official language, French. [*3]

Girard on his arrival at Toulon must have known the ground thoroughly well already. He already possessed a devoted ally there, a certain Madame Guiol, daughter of a cabinet-maker in a small way of business; she was in the habit of paying occasional visits to Marseilles, where she had a daughter in a Carmelite convent. This woman put herself absolutely at his disposal, as much as and more than he wished; she was well on in years (forty-seven), extremely hot-spirited, utterly corrupt

[p. 233]

and unscrupulous, ready to serve him in any capacity, whatever he did or whatever he was, be he saint or sinner.

Besides her daughter in the Carmelite convent at Marseilles, she had another who was a lay sister with the Ursulines of Toulon. The Ursulines, a society of teaching nuns, constituted in all localities a nucleus of social intercourse; their parlour, which was frequented by their pupils' mothers, formed a halfway house between the cloister and the world outside. Here by the Sisters' complacence, no doubt, Father Girard came in contact with the ladies of the town, amongst the rest with a lady of forty, and unmarried, a certain Mlle. Gravier, daughter of a former Contractor of Government Works in the Royal Arsenal. This lady had a friend and familiar, a sort of shadow accompanying her wherever she went, Mlle. Reboul, her cousin, daughter of a ship's captain, who was her heir and who, though of pretty near the same age (thirty-five), quite expected to succeed to her property. Round these two grew up by degrees a little coterie of Father Girard's female admirers, who chose him as their Confessor. Young girls were sometimes admitted, for instance, Mlle. Cadiere, a tradesman's daughter, Mlle. Laugier, a sempstress, Mlle. Batarelle, daughter of a waterman of the port. Books of devotion were perused, and occasionally little suppers indulged in. But nothing interested them so strongly as a series of letters in which were recounted the miracles and ecstasies of Sister Remusat, who was still living at the time. (She died in February, 1730.) What a crown of glory for good Father Girard, who had led her so near to Heaven! The letters were read and admired with tears and exclamations of delighted wonder. If not literally ecstatic as yet, these women were surely not far from the confines of ecstasy. And indeed, Mlle. Reboul, in order to gratify her kinswoman, was already in the habit occasionally of producing strange phenomena in herself by the familiar device of quietly holding her breath and pinching her nose with her fingers. [*1]

[p. 234]

Of this band of women, old and young, the most serious-minded was undoubtedly Mlle. Catherine Cadiere, a delicate, invalidish young girl of seventeen, entirely devoted to piety and works of charity, and showing a sad, thin face, which seemed to declare that young as she was she had felt more deeply than any the great misfortunes of the time, the calamities of Provence and her native Toulon. This is easily accounted for. She was born during the terrible famine of 1709, while just at the epoch when a girl is growing into a woman, she witnessed the appalling scenes of the Great Plague. These two sinister events, quite beyond the range of ordinary experience, seemed to have left a permanent mark on her personality.

This melancholy blossom was a pure product of Toulon, of the Toulon of that date. To understand its genesis, it is indispensable to recall what this town is now, and was then.

Toulon is a thoroughfare, a place of embarkation, the gateway of a vast harbour and a gigantic naval arsenal. This is what first strikes a traveller's eye and prevents him seeing Toulon itself. Still there is a town there, a city of venerable antiquity. It contains two distinct populations, officials and functionaries from other parts, and the genuine Toulonnais, the latter not over well-disposed towards the former, envious of the government employe and not unfrequently disgusted at the arrogance of naval men,--all this concentrated within the gloomy streets of a place still shut in and half strangled by the narrow girdle of its fortifications. The most striking feature of the little black-browed town is its situation midway between two great oceans of brilliancy, the wondrous mirror of the roadstead and the majestic amphitheatre of its bare mountains of a dazzling grey that well-nigh blinds your eyes at midday. All the more gloomy seem the streets. Except such as run directly to the harbour and derive some light from its expanse, these are in deep shadow all day long. Grimy alleyways of small hucksters' shops, poorly set out, and the goods all but invisible to anyone coming from the glare of daylight,--such is the general aspect. The centre of the town

[p. 235]

is a labyrinth of intricate lanes, hiding a number of churches and old monastic buildings, now turned into barracks. Turbulent brooks, heavy and foul with household refuse, rush fiercely down the middle of the narrow ways. The air is stagnant, and you are surprised, in so dry a climate, to find so much damp everywhere. In front of the new theatre an alley known as the Rue de l'Hopital connects the Rue Royale, itself a narrow thoroughfare, with the still narrower Rue des Canonniers (St. Sebastian), seeming at the first glance to be a cul-de-sac. Still the sun does cast one look into it at high noon, but finds the spot so dismal he instantly passes overhead and restores the lane to the shadowy dimness proper to it.

Among its black-browed houses the smallest was that inhabited by the Sieur Cadiere, huckster and second-hand dealer. The only entrance was through the shop, and there was one room on each floor. The Cadieres were honest, pious folks, and Madame Cadiere a very mirror of perfection. Nor were these good people in absolute poverty; not only was the little house their own property, but like most of the bourgeois of Toulon city, they possessed a bastide. This generally includes a building of sorts and a small rocky messuage producing a trifle of wine. In the great days of the French navy, under Colbert and his son, the prodigious activity of the port was highly profitable to the town. The wealth of France poured thither in a constant stream. All the great lords who passed that way were accompanied by their household and domestic servants, a wasteful crew that left many fine pickings behind. But all this came to an abrupt conclusion, and an activity artificially fostered came to a dead stop. There was not money enough even to pay the Arsenal artificers' wages, while the ships of war under repair were left indefinitely on the stocks, and the hulls eventually sold for what they would fetch. [*5] Toulon suffered severely under the effects of all this. During the siege of 1707 the place seemed only half alive. But how much worse the dreadful year of 1709, the '93 of Louis

[p. 236]

[paragraph continues] XIV., when all calamities, a cruel winter, plague and famine, were concentrated simultaneously on the ruin of fair France! The trees of Provence themselves were not spared. Intercommunication ceased entirely, and the roads swarmed with starving mendicants! Toulon shuddered, ringed round with robbers who intercepted all traffic.

To cap all, Madame Cadiere found herself pregnant in this terrible year. She had three boys already. Of these the eldest remained at home to help his father in the shop. The second was a pupil at the Preachers' College, being intended for a Dominican monk, or Jacobin, as the name was. The third was studying for the priesthood at the Jesuit Seminary. Husband and wife both desired a girl, while the latter prayed God she might turn out a saint. She spent her nine months in constant prayer, fasting or else eating nothing but rye bread. Eventually she bore a daughter, Catherine, who was an extremely delicate and, like her brothers, a rather unhealthy child. No doubt the damp, ill-ventilated house, as well as the insufficient diet of a saving and more than abstemious mother, had something to say to this. Her brothers suffered from glandular swellings, which sometimes broke out into open sores, and little Catherine had the same in her childish days. Without being exactly ill, she showed the invalidish prettiness common with sickly children. She grew tall without growing strong. At an age when other girls feel their strength and activity overflowing, and experience all the exhilaration of youth, she was already declaring, "I have not long to live."

She had the small-pox, which left her somewhat marked. We do not know if she was pretty, but it is very certain she was dainty and charming, possessing all the engaging contrasts of young Provencal maidens and their twofold nature. At once vivacious and dreamy, gay and melancholy, a well-conducted, pious child, with harmless interludes of frivolity. At intervals between the long church services, if she was taken to visit the bastide with other girls of her own age, she raised no difficulties

[p. 237]

about doing as they did, singing, dancing, or touching the tambourine. But such days were rare. More often her great pleasure was to climb to the very top of the house (p. 24), to get nearer the sky and catch a glimpse of daylight, perhaps to see a little bit of sea, or a pointed summit of the great waste of surrounding mountains. These were solemn then as now, but at that date somewhat less forbidding in aspect, less bare and denuded of trees, sparsely clothed in the refreshing green of arbute trees and larches.

This dead city, at the time of the Plague, numbered 26,000 inhabitants, an enormous mass of humanity to be crowded into so minute a space. Besides, from this space must be subtracted the ground occupied by a ring of great monasteries and convents built up against the town walls, Minims, Oratorians, Jesuits, Capuchins, Recollets, Ursuline Sisters, Visitandines, Bernardines, Refuge, Good Shepherd, and right in the centre of the town the enormous House of the Dominicans. Add in the parish churches, presbyteries, episcopal palace, etc., and it will be evident the clergy filled all the room, while the people had next to nothing.

Easy to see how fiercely the disease, concentrated in so small a focus, must have burned. Moreover, its own good nature was fatal to the town, which magnanimously took in refugees from the stricken city of Marseilles. These were just as likely to bring the Plague with them as certain bales of wool which were held responsible for the introduction of the contagion. The notables were panic-stricken and on the point of flight; they were for scattering over the country, when the chief of the Consuls, M. d'Antrechaus, a brave-hearted hero, stopped them, sternly asking, "And the people, gentlemen, what is to become of them, if, in this poverty-stricken town, the rich desert the place and take their purses with them?" [*6] He succeeded in staying the panic and forced everybody to remain. The horrors of Marseilles

[p. 238]

were attributed to the free communication permitted between the inhabitants; so D'Antrechaus tried an exactly opposite system, viz. to isolate the citizens, to shut each household up in its own domicile. At the same time two enormous hospitals were established, one in the roadstead, one on the mountainside. Whoever did not go to one or the other of these was bound to remain within doors under penalty of death. D'Antrechaus for seven long months kept his stupendous wager, performing the seemingly impossible task of keeping and feeding in their own houses a population of 26,000 souls. For all this time Toulon was a sepulchre, nothing stirring all day long after the morning distribution of bread and the removal of the dead that followed it. The doctors most of them perished, and all the magistrates except D'Antrechaus. The gravediggers died to a man, and were replaced by deserters under sentence of death. These wretches displayed a savage haste and brutality; the bodies of the dead were thrown from the fourth story, head downwards, into the carts. A mother had just lost her daughter, a little girl. Horrified at the thought of seeing the poor little corpse treated in this violent fashion, she gave the men money to carry it decently downstairs. On the way the child came to itself and opened its eyes. She was taken upstairs again, and recovering completely, actually became the grandmother of the learned M. Brun, already referred to as the author of the admirable History of the Port of Toulon.

The poor little Cadiere girl was then precisely the same age as this rescued victim of the Plague, viz. twelve, an age abounding with so many perils for her sex. The universal closing of the churches, the suppression of all Feasts and Holy Days (Christmas above all, so merry a time at Toulon), all this was for the child the end of the world. She seems never to have really recovered the shock, and the same is true of the town. It never lost its deserted look; all was ruin and mourning, a city of widows and orphans and crowds of desperate men. In the midst of all, a grand, a gloomy spectre, D'Antrechaus, who had witnessed

[p. 239]

the death of all he cared for, sons, brothers, and fellow-magistrates, and who had nobly ruined himself,--so much so that he had to live at his neighbours' tables, the poor disputing among themselves the honour of feeding him.

The child informed her mother she would never wear the fine clothes she had again, and they were sold. All she cared for now was to tend the sick, and she was for ever enticing her mother to the Hospital situated at the bottom of their street. A neighbour, a little girl of fourteen, Laugier by name, had lost her father, and was living in great poverty with her widowed mother. Catherine went to see her constantly, taking her her food and clothes and everything she could. She asked her parents to pay the expenses of apprenticing Laugier to a sempstress, and such was her ascendency over their minds they did not refuse this heavy outlay. Her piety, her loving little heart, made her all-powerful. Her charity was a passion; she not only gave money, but affection as well. She would fain have made Laugier as perfect a character as herself, and took delight in having her near her, and often sharing her bed with her. Both had been received among the Daughters of St. Theresa, a tertiary order which the Carmelites had organised. Mlle. Cadiere was the shining light of the affiliation, and at thirteen seemed a fully trained Carmelite Sister. She had borrowed from a Visitandine certain books of mysticism which she devoured eagerly. The girl Laugier, at fifteen, offered a marked contrast, showing no predilection for anything but eating, and looking pretty. She was this, and for this reason had been made sacristaness of the Chapel of St. Theresa,--an appointment which gave great opportunities for familiarities with the priests. So much so that when her behaviour earned her a well-deserved threat of expulsion from the congregation, a higher authority, a Vicar-General, was so indignant as to declare that, if this were done, he would lay an interdict on the chapel (pp. 36, 37).

Both the girls shared the temperament of their native Provence, one of excessive nervous excitability, and from very early

[p. 240]

years had been subject to what were locally styled vapours of the womb. But the effects were quite different in each,--to the last degree carnal in Laugier, a greedy, indolent, violent-tempered creature, purely cerebral in the case of the pure, gentle-minded Catherine, who as the result of her ill-health or her vivid imagination absorbing her whole nature, had no conception of sex whatever. "At twenty, she was like a child of seven." All her thoughts turned to prayer and almsgiving, and she refused to entertain the idea of marriage. The mere word set her weeping, as if she had been asked to desert God.

Someone had lent her the Life of her Patron Saint, St. Catherine of Genoa, and she had bought a copy of the Chateau de l'Ame (Fortress of the Soul) of St. Theresa. Few Confessors cared to follow her in this excursion into mysticism, and those who talked ineptly of these holy things offended her. She could find satisfaction neither in her mother's Confessor, a priest attached to the cathedral, nor in a Carmelite Father, nor yet in the old Jesuit Sabatier. At sixteen she had as her Director a priest of St. Louis, a man of high-strung piety. She spent whole days in church, till her mother, by this time a widow and who required her help, pious woman as he was herself, used to punish her when she came home at last. But it was no fault of hers; she forgot everything in her ecstatic trances. The girls of her own age looked upon her as so saintly a being that sometimes at Mass they believed they saw the Holy Wafer, drawn by the attraction of her love and longing exercised, fly to her and enter in between her lips of its own accord.

Her two younger brothers entertained widely divergent sentiments towards Girard. The elder of the two, the one at the Preachers' College, felt for the Jesuit the antipathy characteristic of the Dominican Order. The other, who was studying for the priesthood with the Jesuits, regarded Girard as a saint and a great man, and had made him his peculiar hero. Catherine loved her youngest brother, who was a weakling in health like herself. His never-ending praises of Girard were bound to take

[p. 241]

effect. One day she encountered him in the street, and seeing him so grave and serious and yet so kind and benignant-looking, an inner voice cried within her, Ecce homo (behold the man, predestined to direct your conscience). The following Saturday she went to confess to him; "and he told me, 'Mademoiselle, I have been expecting you.'" She was filled with wonder and emotion, never dreaming her brother might have warned him, but thinking the mysterious voice had spoken to him as well, and that both shared this celestial boon of heavenly admonitions (pp. 81, 383).

Six summer months rolled by without Girard, who confessed her every Saturday, having made any advances. The scandal attaching to the old Jesuit Sabatier was sufficiently deterrent. It would have been his more prudent course to be content with the more obscure attachment, and stick to the Guiol woman, a very mature charmer it is true, but a very devil incarnate for ardour and enterprise.

It was Charlotte herself who, in all innocence, made the first advances toward her Father Confessor. Her brother, the hotheaded Jacobin, had thought good to lend to a lady of his acquaintance, and circulate through the town, a satiric piece entitled, La Morale des Jesuites (Morals of the Jesuits). The latter soon got wind of it, and Sabatier swore he would write to Court to demand a lettre de cachet to clap the obnoxious Jacobin in prison. His sister is anxious and alarmed, and goes with tears in her eyes to beg and implore Father Girard's intervention. On her coming to him again after a short interval, he tells her, "Courage, mademoiselle; your brother has nothing to fear; I have arranged the matter." She was melted by his kindness, and Girard was not slow to perceive his advantage. A man of such influence, the King's friend, and God's favoured instrument, and who had shown himself so good and kind! What more moving for a young and generous heart? He took his courage in both hands, and said (but still in his usual equivocal phraseology), "Put yourself in my hands; give yourself up wholly and entirely

[p. 242]

to me." Without a blush, in her angelic purity of mind, she promised "I will," understanding merely that she was to have him henceforth for sole and only director of her conscience.

What did he propose to do with the girl? Would he make her his mistress, or his tool for charlatanry? Doubtless Girard was drawn both ways, but I believe his inclination was to adopt the second alternative. He had a wide choice, and could find sensual gratification elsewhere without the same risk. Mlle. Cadiere was protected by a God-fearing mother; she lived with her relations, a married brother and the two Churchmen, in a house of the most confined dimensions, the only means of entering which was through the elder brother's shop. She scarcely ever went abroad except to church. Great as was her simplicity, she divined by a sort of instinct anything that was impure and houses of a dangerous character. A band of women, penitents of the Jesuit Fathers, were fond of meeting at the top of a certain house, where they indulged in little gormandisings and foolishness of other sorts, shouting in their Provencal dialect, "Long live the Jesuiticals!" A neighbour, disturbed by the noise, came on the scene and surprised them lying flat on their bellies (p. 56), singing and eating fritters,--the expenses, it was said, being all defrayed from the alms-box. Mlle. Cadiere was invited to join this coterie, but was disgusted by what she saw, and never came again.

She was only open to attack on the spiritual side, and Girard's designs seemed limited to getting the mastery of her soul. To win her subjection, to make her accept the doctrines of passive obedience he had taught at Marseilles, such apparently was all he wanted. He thought example would be more efficacious than precept, and instructed the woman Guiol, his familiar spirit and abject servant, to carry the young saint to that town, where Mlle. Cadiere had a friend of her girlhood, a Carmelite nun, daughter of Madame Guiol. The astute schemer pretended, by way of inspiring her companion with confidence, that she too experienced ecstatic stirrings of spirit, and fed her with a string

[p. 243]

of ridiculous tales. She told her, for instance, how on one occasion finding a cask of wine turned sour in her cellar, she fell to her prayers, and instantly the wine grew good again. Another time she felt a crown of thorns wounding her brow, but to comfort her the angels had served up a good dinner, which she enjoyed along with Father Girard.

Charlotte secured her mother's permission to visit Marseilles with her good friend, the excellent Madame Guiol, Madame Cadiere paying expenses. It was in the hottest month of that blazing climate, in August (1729), a season when the whole countryside is burnt up, and offers a landscape of bare rocks and gravel reflecting the fierce sunlight. The poor girl's brain, parched by the heat and weakened by the fatigues of travelling, received only too readily the sinister impressions of conventual mortification. The most striking type of this was afforded by the afore-mentioned Sister Remusat, little better than a corpse already, and who actually died shortly afterwards. Charlotte was lost in admiration of such high perfections, while her artful companion plied her with the alluring suggestion of following in her steps and succeeding to her prestige.

During her temporary absence, Girard, left behind in the hot, stifling oven of Toulon, had lamentably deteriorated. He was constantly visiting the little Laugier girl, who also thought she had ecstasies, to comfort her,--which he did so effectually that all of a sudden she found herself enciente! When finally Mlle. Cadiere came back to him all spirituality and mystic ecstasy, Girard, whose feelings were widely different, entirely carnal in fact and pleasure-seeking, "cast over her a breath of desire" (pp. 6, 383). She was kindled by it, but (it is evident) in her own peculiar fashion, in a spirit of purity, holiness, and generosity, anxious to spare him from a fall, devoting herself to save him to the point of being ready to die for him (September, 1729).

One of the privileges attaching to her sanctity was a gift of seeing to the bottom of men's hearts. It had several times been her lot to discover the secret life and private morality of her

[p. 244]

confessors, and warn them of their faults,--rebukes which some of them, astounded and disconcerted, had taken in a contrite spirit. One day during this summer, seeing Madame Guiol on her way home, she suddenly accosted her with the words, "Ah! bad woman, what have you been doing?" "And she was quite right," Guiol admitted subsequently herself. "I had just been doing a sinful act." What was this act? Probably the betrayal of Laugier to Father Girard's passion. We are strongly tempted to think so, seeing how ready she was next year to do the same with the girl Batarelle.

Laugier, who often shared Charlotte Cadiere's bed, may very likely have made her the confidante of her happiness and described the holy man's love-making and fatherly caresses,--surely a harsh trial for the good child and a cause of much searching of heart. True she was thoroughly well acquainted with Girard's great axiom, That with holy men every act is holy. But on the other hand her innate sense of right and wrong and all her previous upbringing compelled her to believe that an inordinate complacency towards any created being was a mortal sin. This agonising perplexity between two contradictory doctrines was too much for the poor girl; she suffered fearful storms of doubt, and firmly believed herself possessed of the Devil.

Here again she showed the goodness of her heart. Without humiliating Girard, she told him she had the vision of a soul tormented by the lusts of the flesh and in peril of mortal sin, that she felt in her an imperative need to save this soul, to offer the Evil One victim for victim, to acquiesce in diabolic possession and sacrifice herself in lieu of the other. He raised no objection, but permitted her to be possessed, but for a year only (November, 1729).

She was aware, like everybody else in the place, of the scandalous intrigues of the old Jesuit, Father Sabatier, a reckless, insolent transgressor, without a trace of Girard's judicious prudence. She saw the contempt into which the Jesuits (whom she

[p. 245]

counted as the pillars of the Church) could not but fall. One day she said to Girard, "I have had a vision,--a storm-tost sea, a ship full of souls, beaten about by the tempest of unclean thoughts, and on the deck two Jesuit priests. I cried to the Redeemer, whom I saw in Heaven, 'Lord! save them, and drown me . . . I take all the shipwreck on myself.' And Almighty God granted my prayer."

Never once, during the course of her trial and when Girard, now her bitterest enemy, was seeking her death by every means, did she recur to these visions. Never did she condescend to expound these parables, whose meaning was so plain, her nobility of spirit shrinking from all speech of the kind. She had vowed herself, according to her own conviction, to certain damnation. Shall we say that, out of pride, deeming herself virtually dead and unaffected by carnal emotions, she defied the uncleanness the Demon was staining the man of God with. One fact is beyond doubt, she had no precise knowledge of sensual concerns, that in all this mystery she foresaw nothing but pain and demoniac tortures. Girard was cold and cruel, utterly unworthy of such devotion. Instead of being melted, he played on her credulity by means of an ignoble trick. He slipped into the box where she kept her papers one in which God informed her that for her sake He would in very deed save the ship. But the wily priest took care not to leave this ridiculous document there; by repeated study of it she might have discovered it was a forgery. The same angel that had brought the paper carried it off again next day.

With the same want of proper feeling Girard, seeing her agitated and unable to pray, gave her unconditional leave, without a thought of possible consequences, to communicate as often as she chose, every day, in different churches. The result was to make her worse; bursting with the Demon already, she was but setting the two enemies side by side within her distracted body, where they fought an evenly matched battle. She felt as if she must die under the horrid strain; she fell in a dead

[p. 246]

faint, remaining in this condition for several hours. By December she hardly left the house at all, being indeed pretty much confined to her bed.

Girard had only too good excuses for visiting her, and he observed considerable prudence, always getting her young brother to conduct him to her room, at any rate as far as the door. The sick-room was at the top of the house, and the girl's mother always remained discreetly in the shop downstairs. He could be alone with her as much as he pleased, and if he chose might turn the key in the lock. By this time she was very ill, and he treated her like a child, leaning forward a little over the head of the bed, taking her face between his hands and kissing her as a father might,--a caress which she invariably received with respect and affectionate gratitude.

Pure as she was, she was intensely sensitive. The slightest contact, which another girl would never have noticed, produced a condition of unconsciousness,--a mere touch near the bosom was enough. Girard observed the fact, and it suggested bad thoughts. He threw her at will into this sort of sleep, without her entertaining a thought of stopping him. Her confidence was complete; her only feeling was one of reluctance and something of shame to take such freedoms with so holy a man and waste so much of his precious time. His visits grew longer and longer, and the result to be foreseen soon followed. The poor girl, ill as she was, intoxicated Girard beyond all power or self-control. Once, on awaking, she found herself in a highly ridiculous and highly indecent posture; another time she caught him caressing her person.

She blushed, groaned, remonstrated. But he told her with the utmost effrontery, "I am your master, your God. . . . You are bound to endure all things in the name of obedience." Towards Christmas, in the festal season, he laid aside his last scruples. On waking she exclaimed, "Great God! how I have suffered!"

"I am sure you have, poor child!" he answered in a tone of pity.

[p. 247]

[paragraph continues] Henceforth she complained less, but was never able to account to herself for what she felt in her sleep. [*7]

Girard understood better, but not without terror, what he had done. In January or February an only too significant sign warned him she was with child. To cap his difficulties, Laugier also found herself in the same condition. The religious meetings and picnics, so to speak, above mentioned, accompanied as they were by a somewhat indiscreet indulgence in the cheap but seductive wine of the country, had been followed primarily by a state of mental excitation naturally to be expected among so inflammable a race, by a condition of contagious ecstasy. With the more cunning and experienced it was all pretence; but with Laugier, a young girl of a sanguine and headstrong temperament, the ecstasy was real. She exhibited in her little room at home veritable excesses of delirium and swooning fits, particularly when Father Girard came to see her. Her pregnancy began a little after that of Charlotte Cadiere, no doubt about the time of the Twelfth Night celebrations. [*8]

The danger was imminent. The girls did not live in a desert; they were not buried in a convent, where everybody was concerned to hush the matter up, but in the glaring light of an inhabited quarter,--Laugier surrounded by inquisitive friends and neighbours of her own sex, Cadiere in the bosom of her own family. Her brother, the Jacobin, began to look suspiciously on the lengthy visits her confessor paid her. One day he insisted on staying by her, when Girard arrived; but the latter put him out of the room, and his mother indignantly turned her son out of the house.

Things were ripening for an explosion. No doubt but the young man, so harshly treated, driven from home, bursting with resentment, would go to complain loudly to his masters, the Preaching Fathers. The latter, quick to seize so excellent an

[p. 248]

opportunity, would hasten to repeat the scandal, and set to work surreptitiously to rouse the town against the Jesuit. This latter took a sudden and extraordinary resolution, to retaliate by a bold stroke and save his skin by crime. The man of pleasure was turned into a man of sin.

He knew his victim intimately. He had seen on her person the traces left by the scrofulous sores she had suffered from as a child. These do not heal cleanly like an incised wound, the skin always remains reddened at the spot, exceptionally thin and tender. Such marks she had on her feet, and another in a sensitive, dangerous place, just under the breast. He conceived the devilish idea of reopening these wounds, and giving them out as stigmata, like those of St. Francis and other saints had received from Heaven, holy men who, aspiring to imitation of the Crucified and complete conformity with His blessed body, came to bear the mark of the nails and of the lance-thrust in the side. Were not the Jesuits in despair at having nothing to offer in opposition to the miracles of the Jansenists? Girard felt sure of delighted acceptation of so unexpected a miracle, and he could hardly fail to be supported by the members of his own order and their house at Toulon. One, the old Sabatier, was ready to believe anything; he had already been Charlotte's confessor, and the fact had redounded to his honour. Another, Father Grignet, was a pious fool, who would see whatever he was told to. If the Carmelite Fathers thought good to entertain any doubts, why, they should have a hint from such high quarters that they would deem it prudent to keep these to themselves. Even the Jacobin Cadiere, hitherto his persistent and jealous enemy, would find it best to change his attitude, and credit a circumstance that would redound so much to the glory of his family and constitute him the brother of a saint.

"But surely," it will be objected, "the thing may be explained on natural grounds. Countless examples, perfectly well authenticated, are known of genuine stigmata." [*9]

[p. 249]

Probability points the other way. Directly she noticed what had occurred, she was vexed and ashamed, fearing Girard would be annoyed at this revival of her childish complaint. She hurried to consult a neighbour, a Madame Truc, who dabbled in medicine, and bought of her (pretending it was for her young brother) an ointment that cauterised the wounds.

What method did the cruel priest employ to make the wounds? Did he use his nails? did he resort to a small knife he always had with him? Or else did he draw the blood to the surface in the first instance, as he undoubtedly did afterwards, by vigorous sucking? The victim was unconscious, but not insensible to pain; there cannot be a doubt she felt the pangs in her sleep.

She would have deemed it a deadly sin not to tell Girard everything, and however much afraid of displeasing and disgusting her friend, she informed him of the facts. He looked, saw, and began the comedy he had resolved to play, reproaching her for wishing to get cured and so opposing the will of God. "'Tis the celestial stigmata," he cried, and dropping on his knees, fell to kissing the wounds on the girl's feet. For her part, she crosses herself, bows to the earth, cannot credit the thing. Girard is only the more earnest and scolds her for her incredulity; then he makes her show him her side and is lost in admiration of the wound there. "I, too, am marked," he tells her, "but my stigmata are eternal."

Thus is she constrained to believe herself a living miracle. What helped her to acquiesce in so strange a marvel was the circumstance that Sister Remusat had just died. She had seen her in glory, and her heart borne aloft by angels. Who was to be her successor on earth? Who was to inherit the sublime gifts that had been hers, the celestial privileges she had been so richly endowed with? Girard offered Charlotte Cadiere this succession, and corrupted her by appealing to her pride.

Henceforth she was a changed woman. In a spirit of vainglory she sanctified all she experienced in the way of bodily

[p. 250]

derangements. Repulsions and shudderings natural to pregnancy, but the meaning of which she utterly failed to grasp, she put down to violent activities of the Spirit within her. The first day of Lent, being at table with her family, she suddenly beholds the Lord. "I would fain lead you to the Desert," he tells her; "to have you share in the ineffable ardours of the Forty Days, to have you share in my pain and agony. . . ." The vision left her trembling, afraid to think of the sufferings she must undergo. But she, and she only, can be sacrifice in herself for a whole world of sinners. She dreams of blood, sees nothing but blood, beholds Jesus as it were a sieve distilling blood. She spat blood herself, and lost still more in another way. But simultaneously her nature seemed transformed, and the more she suffered, the more she began to feel the pricks of love. On the twentieth day of Lent she sees her own name joined with Girard's. Then at last pride, stirred and stimulated under the new feeling that had come over her, pride teaches her comprehension of the especial domination Mary (Womanhood) has over God.

She knows how much the angel is inferior to the least and lowliest saint, whether male or female. She sees the palace of the Almighty's glory, and is joined in union with the Lamb of God! . . . To cap her illusion, she feels herself lifted from the ground, rises several feet in the air. She can scarce believe it, but a credible witness, Mlle. Gravier, assures her of the fact. All the neighbours come to marvel and adore, Girard bringing with him his colleague Grignet, who drops on his knees and weeps for joy.

Not venturing to see her every day at home, Girard would have her pay frequent visits to the Church of the Jesuit Fathers. Thither she would drag her feeble limbs at one o'clock, after the morning services were over, during the dinner hour. No one was in the building at that time, and Girard gave himself up, before the altar, in front of the cross, to transports which the abominable sacrilege only made more ardent. Did his victim feel no scruples? Can she really have been hoodwinked? Her conscience

[p. 251]

would seem, with all her exalted enthusiasm, which was still sincere and genuine enough, to have already grown somewhat dulled and darkened. Underlying the bleeding stigmata, the cruel favours of the celestial bridegroom, she began to find mysterious compensations. Her swoons were blissful periods, in which she declared she enjoyed agonies of ineffable delight and a mystic flood of grace, culminating "at last in perfect and complete consent" (p. 425).

At first she was surprised and agitated at these novel experiences, and spoke of them to Madame Guiol. But the latter only smiled, telling her she was a little fool to make so much of nothing, and adding cynically that she felt just the same things herself.

Thus did these faithless friends do their best to corrupt a young girl of great natural goodness, and whose belated senses only awoke at last under the odious, overmastering constraint of religious authority misapplied.

Two things stir our sympathy in her pious dreams. The first is the pure and holy ideal she formed in her own mind of a union of faithful hearts, firmly believing she saw the name of Girard and her own united together for all eternity in the Book of Life. Another touching feature is the way her kind heart, her pretty childish ways, show through all her aberrations. On Palm Sunday, seeing all assembled round the merry domestic board, she wept for three hours without stopping to think that "on the same day nobody invited Jesus to dinner."

Nearly all through Lent she was all but unable to eat, her stomach rejecting even the little food she did take. During the last fortnight of the time she fasted rigorously, and reached the last degree of weakness. Will it be believed that Girard, far from leaving the dying girl to breathe her last breath in peace, actually began to practise fresh violence upon her? He had prevented her wounds from closing; and now a new one made its appearance in her right side. Finally, on Good Friday, to crown the cruel farce, he made her wear a crown of iron wire, which,

[p. 252]

piercing her forehead, set drops of blood coursing down her face. It was all done with hardly an attempt at secrecy. First of all he cut off her long hair, which he carried away with him. The crown he had ordered of a certain Bitard, a tradesman of the port, who made bird-cages. She never showed herself to those who came to see her wearing this crown; only the effects were visible, the drops of blood staining her face red. The marks of these were imprinted on napkins, and the Veronicas thus manufactured were taken away by Girard to be presented no doubt to pious clients of his.

The girl's mother was involved in spite of herself in the imposture. Nevertheless she began to be afraid of Father Girard, becoming more and more convinced the man was capable of anything, while someone (very likely Madame Guiol), very much in his secrets, had told her that, if she said one word, her daughter would not have twenty-four hours to live.

As for Charlotte herself, she never spoke anything but the truth on this point. In the account she dictated of the events of this Lenten season she says expressly it was a crown with sharp points, which was pressed down on her head, and so caused the bleeding.

Nor did she make any concealment where the little crosses she was in the habit of giving her visitors came from. According to a pattern Girard supplied her with, she ordered these from one of her relatives, a carpenter in the Arsenal.

She lay, on Good Friday, for four-and-twenty hours in a swoon (which they called an ecstasy), given up to Girard's tender mercies, and various debilitating and dangerous practices on his part. Already he saw this saint and martyr, this miraculous and transfigured being, showing more and more evident marks of pregnancy. He desired, yet feared, the violent solution of the difficulty by means of abortion. This he tried to provoke by a daily administration of perilous potions and certain reddish-brown powders.

[p. 253]

Her death would have been most satisfactory to him, and the best solution of his embarrassments. Failing this, he would like to have removed her from her mother's influence, and buried her in a convent. He was well acquainted with these establishments, and like Picart (see above in the Louviers affair), with what adroitness and discretion things of the sort are hushed up within their walls! He wanted to send her either to the Carthusian nunnery of Premole, or to the house of St. Claire of Ollioules. He even broached the subject on Good Friday but she seemed so feeble they dared not let her leave her bed. Eventually, four days after Easter, Girard being present in her bedroom, she had a painful evacuation, and was suddenly relieved of a heavy lump of what appeared to be coagulated blood. Girard took up the vessel, went to the window, and carefully examined it. But the girl, who had no suspicions about what had occurred, called the serving-maid, and gave her the vessel to empty. "What foolish rashness!" Girard could not help exclaiming, and he was imprudent enough to repeat the same remark again afterwards (pp. 54, 388, etc.).

We do not possess equally precise details with regard to Laugier's miscarriage. She first noticed the fact of her pregnancy during this same Lent, having previously experienced strange convulsions and the beginnings of stigmata of a ludicrous sort, one being a small wound she had given herself with a pair of scissors when working at her trade as a seamstress, the other an open cutaneous sore in the side (p. 38). Suddenly her pious ecstasies turned into blasphemous despair. She spat on the crucifix; she cried out against Girard, screaming, "Where is he, that devilish father, who has brought me to this pass? . . . It was easy enough to abuse a poor girl of twenty-two! . . . Where is he? He should come here, and not leave me in the lurch like this." The women about her were themselves Girard's mistresses. They went in search of him, but he was afraid to face the angry transports of the girl he had betrayed.

[p. 254]

[paragraph continues] The good dames, whose interest it was to minimise the scandal, could surely find some means of settling the matter quietly without his interfering.

Was Girard a wizard, as was alleged at a later stage? Really the hypothesis would seem almost credible when we see how easily the man, without being either young or handsome, had fascinated so many female hearts. But strangest of all was the fact that, after compromising himself so deeply, he could still defy public opinion. For the time being he seemed to have bewitched the whole town.

As a matter of fact, the Jesuits were recognised as being immensely powerful, so that no one cared to join issue with them. It was even deemed a trifle dangerous to speak ill of them in whispers. The main body of ecclesiastics consisted of comparatively insignificant monks belonging to Mendicant Orders, possessing neither influential connections nor high-placed protectors. Even the Carmelites, for all their jealousy and the chagrin they felt at losing Charlotte Cadiere, even they said nothing. The girl's brother, the young Jacobin, moved by his mother's scared remonstrances, fell back on measures of politic circumspection, made friends with Girard, and eventually became his creature as completely as the other brother had done,--going so far even as to second him in carrying out an extraordinary manoeuvre calculated to foster a belief that Girard was possessed of the gift of prophecy.

 

Any small opposition he had to fear was from the very individual he seemed to have the most completely subjugated. Charlotte, though still his obedient servant, yet began to exhibit some faint signs of an independence soon to assert itself. On April 30th, during a country expedition which Girard had politely organised for his lady friends, and to which, in company with Madame Guiol, he sent his band of young devotees, Charlotte Cadiere fell into a state of profound reverie. Moved by the beauties of springtide, so especially delightful in these parts, she

[p. 255]

lifted up her heart to God, declaring with an accent of genuine piety, "You only, my Lord and Saviour! . . . I want no one but you only! . . . Your angels cannot content me." Then presently, one of her companions, and a very light-hearted young woman, having in Provencal fashion hung a little tambourine round her neck, Charlotte did as the rest did, romped, danced, threw a rug round her by way of girdle, played the strolling gipsy, and generally indulged in a hundred innocent frivolities.

She was strangely moved. In May she got her mother's leave to make a journey to La Sainte-Baume to visit the church of the Magdalene, the saint par excellence of penitent young women. Girard allowed her to go, but only under escort of two trusty emissaries to look after her, viz. Guiol and Reboul. On the road, however, though still falling occasionally into the old ecstasies, she was evidently grown weary of being the passive instrument of the fierce spirit (infernal or divine) which troubled her peace. The termination of her year of diabolical possession was now approaching; and, indeed, she appeared to have regained her emancipation already. Once outside the gloomy streets of her native Toulon, which cast so strong a spell over her spirit, and restored to the free air of the country, to the sights of Nature and the light of the sun, the captive recovered her own soul, made head against the alien soul indwelling in her, dared to be herself and exercise her own free will. This was far from edifying the two spies Girard had set over her, who immediately on returning from this brief expedition (from May 17th to 22nd) warned him of the alteration. This he was able to verify for himself; for she struggled now against the state of ecstasy, reluctant it would seem to obey any impulses but those of reason and common sense.

He had supposed her his, by his personal fascination, by his authority as a priest, last but not least by the fact of possession and carnal habit. Now he found his hold was gone; the tender soul, which after all had not so much been conquered as surreptitiously

[p. 256]

surprised, was reasserting its natural bent. This wounded him to the quick; his old trade of schoolmaster, the despotism he had wielded over children whom he could chastise at will, and subsequently over nuns not less at his mercy, had left deep in his heart a harsh, jealous love of domineering. He made up his mind to regain his power over Charlotte Cadiere at any cost, and punish her first essay at revolt,--if revolt it can be called, this timid aspiration of a downtrodden soul to lift its head again.

On May 22nd, when, as her habit was, she confessed to him, he refused her absolution, saying she was so much to blame he must next day inflict a great, a very great penance on her.

What penance was it to be? Fasting? But she was already weak and exhausted. Long prayers, another usual form of penance, were not approved of by the Quietists; in fact, directors holding their tenets actually forbade them. There only remained corporal punishment, the discipline of the rod. This was very generally, indeed lavishly employed--in convents no less than in schools, being short, sharp, and easy of application. In rude and simple times the church itself was often the scene of such executions; and we see in the old Fabliaux, those naive records of mediaeval manners and customs, how the priest, after confessing husband and wife, would proceed without more ado on the spot, behind the confessional box, to lay the lash across their backs. Schoolboys, monks, nuns, all were chastised in the same homely fashion. [*10]

[p. 257]

Girard felt sure a girl like Charlotte Cadiere, unused to humiliation, and modest in the highest degree (all she had undergone was in her sleep and unconsciously to herself ), would suffer excessively from a shameful chastisement, which would infallibly break her spirit and destroy whatever spring was yet left her. She was bound perhaps to be even more deeply mortified than another would have been, to suffer (if the truth must be told) in her vanity as a woman. She had borne so much, fasted so rigorously!--and then her miscarriage had come as a climax. Her body, naturally delicate, seemed little better than a shadow. The more certain was she to dread letting any part of her poor emaciated, marred, and aching person be seen. Her legs were swollen, and she suffered from a little infirmity of the flesh that could not but humiliate her extremely.

We have not the heart to relate in detail what followed. It may be read in the three depositions she made, so naive and so manifestly sincere. Not being under oath, she makes it a duty to declare even matters which it was for her own interest to conceal, even such as might be most cruelly abused to her own disadvantage.

First Deposition, made in reply to unexpected questioning before the Ecclesiastical Judge, who was sent to pay her a surprise visit; here we have throughout words springing naturally from a young and innocent heart, speaking as in face of God Himself.

Second Deposition, before the King, that is to say, before the magistrate representing him, the King's "Lieutenant Civil and Military" at Toulon.

Third and Last Deposition, before the High Court of the Parlement of Aix (pp. 5, 12, 384 of the "Trial" folio).

Observe that all three, in remarkably close agreement, are printed at Aix, under the eyes of her enemies, in a volume, the intention of which is (as I shall prove later on) to minimise Girard's criminality and draw the reader's mind to every circumstance unfavourable to Charlotte Cadiere. And yet whoever

[p. 258]

issued it has found himself unable to help giving these depositions, which tell so crushingly against the man he favours.

With monstrous inconsistency, Girard first terrorised the unhappy child, then with a brusque change of front, shamefully and barbarously took foul advantage of her panic fear. [*11]

There is no question here of love as an extenuating circumstance. Far from it; he did not love her, which adds to the horror of it all. We have seen the cruel drugs he administered, and shall presently see how he abandoned her in her need. He begrudged her  her superiority to the other degraded women he had to do with; he hated her for having (how innocently!) tempted him and compromised his reputation. Above all, he could never forgive her for keeping her soul her own. His only wish was to break her spirit; yet he was filled with hope to hear her say, "I feel I shall not live long,"--a phrase she often made use of now. Scoundrel and libertine!--showering dishonouring kisses on her poor broken body, longing she were well dead all the while!

How did he account to her for these atrocious contrasts of caresses and cruelty? Did he represent them as trials of her patience and tests of obedience? Or did he appeal boldly to the real basis, the fundamental doctrine, of Molinos' teaching, "That it is by dint of sinning sin must be killed?" Did she believe it all? Did she not realise at all that these pretensions of justice, expiation, penitence, were nothing more nor less than a cloak for licentiousness?

After a while she preferred not to realise it, in the extraordinary crisis of moral deterioration she underwent after May 23rd, and in June, under the effects of the hot, enervating time of year. She owned him her master, partly from fear of him, partly out of a strange, slavish sort of love, persisting in the farce of receiving at his hands day by day light penances for her

[p. 259]

lapses. Girard treated her very cavalierly, not even taking the trouble to hide from her his relations with other women. He was for sending her to a convent. Meantime she was his plaything; and knowing this, she yet suffered him to have his will of her. Weaker and weaker, more and more debilitated by repeated shame and suffering, a prey to ever-increasing melancholy, she had little left to live for, and would often repeat the words (no ill tidings to Girard), "Ah! I feel, I feel I shall die before very long!"

Footnotes

^231:1 Dealing with a matter which has been the subject of so much controversy, I shall quote freely,--especially from a folio volume entitled, Procedure du P. Girard et de la Cadiere, Aix, 1733. To avoid a multiplicity of footnotes, I merely give in my text the page of the book in question.

^232:2 Bibliotheque de la ville de Toulon, Pieces et Chansons manuscrites, 1 vol. folio,--an extremely curious collection.

^232:3 That is the tongue of Northern and Central France, descended from the old Langue d'Oil, as contrasted with the Langue d'Oc, still spoken in the South. The latter is often called a patois, but it is really a distinct language.

^233:1 See the Trial; also Swift, Mechanical Operations of the Spirit.

^235:5 See an excellent MS. dissertation by M. Brun.

^237:6 See M. d'Antrechaus' book, and the excellent little pamphlet by M. Gustave Lambert.

^247:7 pp. 5, 12, etc.

^247:8 pp. 37, 113.

^248:9 See in particular A. Maury, Magie.

^256:10 The Dauphin himself was whipped cruelly. The young Boufflers (a boy of fifteen) died of chagrin at having suffered the same indignity (Saint-Simon). The prioress of the Abbaye-aux-Bois, threatened by her superior "with disciplinary chastisement," appealed to the King; for the credit of the convent she was relieved of the disgrace of a public whipping, but sent back to the superior for proper measures to be taken, and doubtless the punishment was duly inflicted on the quiet. By degrees it came to be recognised more and more how dangerous and immoral the practice was. Fear and shame led to degrading supplications and unworthy compromises. This had come out only too clearly in the famous trial which under the Emperor Joseph revealed the secret places of the Jesuit colleges, the report of which trial was reprinted later under Joseph II., and again in our own day.

^258:11 This is put in Greek in the book of Depositions, and falsified twice over, on p. 6 and again on p. 389, in order to extenuate Girard's guilt. The most exact version here is that of her deposition before the "Lieutenant-Criminal" of Toulon, pp. 12 sqq.

     The Sorceress, by Jules Michelet, [1939], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 260]

  

13

  

CHARLOTTE CADIERE at the CONVENT of OLLIOULES

THE abbess of the convent of Ollioules was young for an abbess, being only thirty-eight. She was a woman of wit, intelligence, and great vivacity. Impetuous in her likes and dislikes, and easily carried away by any impulse of heart or senses, she was conspicuously lacking, however, in the tact and moderation required for the government of such an establishment.

The religious house in question depended upon two sources of income. On the one hand, it had from Toulon two or three nuns belonging to consular families, who, bringing with them handsome dowries, did pretty much what they pleased, living in communion with the Observantine monks, who were confessors of the convent. On the other, these same monks, whose order had extensive ramifications at Marseilles and throughout the country, were able to get the nuns little girls as boarders and paying novices,--an ill-omened connection, fraught with peril for the children, as the Aubany affair showed clearly enough.

No serious confinement within bounds, and little discipline indoors. In the burning nights of summer in this African climate (more oppressive and exhausting than elsewhere in the stifling gorges of Ollioules) nuns and novices came and went with little to control their freedom. What occurred at Loudun in 1630 was repeated exactly at Ollioules in 1730. The majority of the sisters (twelve, or thereabouts, out of the fifteen the house numbered), a good deal neglected by the monks, who preferred the well-born ladies of society, were poor, languid, disappointed creatures, whose only consolations were gossip, childish games,

[p. 261]

and dubious familiarities amongst themselves, and between them and the novices.

The abbess was afraid Charlotte Cadiere would see too much of all this, and raised difficulties about receiving her. Then suddenly changing her mind, she took just the opposite side, and in a charming letter, far more flattering than a little girl had any right to expect from such a great lady, she expressed the hope that she would give up Girard as her director. Not that she wished to transfer her allegiance to the Observantine Fathers, who were quite unworthy of such a trust; the bold and brilliant idea she had conceived was to make the girl her own, to be Charlotte's confessor herself.

The lady abbess was vain and ambitious, and hoped to appropriate the marvellous child for her own purposes. She thought she could easily gain an ascendency over her mind, being convinced of possessing greater powers to please than an old Jesuit Father, and would fain have exploited the girl saint for the profit of her house.

She paid her the signal honour of receiving her at the threshold of the outer door. She kissed her, and generally took possession of her; presently leading her to the fine chamber she occupied as lady abbess, she told her they would henceforth share it in common. She was enchanted with her modest bearing and rather sickly elegance, as well as with a certain mysterious, affecting touch of strangeness about her. Charlotte had suffered extremely during the short journey, and the abbess was for getting her to bed at once, in her own bed. She told her she was so fond of her she wanted her to share it, that they should sleep together like sisters.

In view of the object she had in view, this was perhaps an injudicious step. It was going too far; to lodge the saint in her own apartments would have been quite enough. By yielding to this curious caprice of having the child sleep with her, she made her appear too much in the light of a little favourite. Such intimacy, very much practised among ladies of the world, was

[p. 262]

a thing forbid in convents, a thing to be done surreptitiously, and a bad example for a lady superior to set.

The abbess was astonished, however, to find her protegee hesitate. Doubtless modesty and humility were not the only factors in this reluctance. Still less would it have been due to any repugnance for the lady's person; relatively speaking, she was a younger woman than poor Charlotte Cadiere, enjoying a vitality and health she would fain have communicated to her little sick friend. She pressed her tenderly to consent.

To make her forget Girard was her object, and she expected much from this close intimacy at all hours of the day and night. It was the especial foible of lady abbesses, their most cherished pretension, to confess their nuns,--as is permitted by St. Theresa. This was bound to come of itself, under the pleasant conditions arranged. The girl would surely make her confessors only trifling confidences,  the innermost privacy of her heart for the one person of her predilection. Of evenings, at night, behind the bed-curtains, under the caresses of a companion eager to penetrate her soul, she would let slip many a secret,--both of her own and other people's.

She was unable just at first to shake herself free from such pressing importunities, and shared the lady abbess's bed. The latter deemed her hold secure now,--doubly secure, and on two different grounds; she was hers both as a saint and as a woman,--I should say as a girl, nervous, sensitive, and from very weakness, perhaps sensual. She had her legend composed, her words, every remark that escaped her, written down. Moreover, she carefully collected the most homely details of her physical existence, sending the report to Toulon. She would so gladly have made her an idol, her little doll and darling. On such slippery ground the downward road was no doubt easy and rapid, but the girl had scruples, and was in a way afraid. She roused herself to a great effort that might have been supposed beyond her exhausted strength. She asked humbly to quit this dove's nest, this

[p. 263]

downy bed, and pampered existence, to share the ordinary life of the novices or of the boarders.

Great the surprise and mortification of the abbess, who deemed herself insulted. She was deeply offended at what she called her ingratitude, and never forgave her.

 

A warm welcome awaited her from the rest of the community. The mistress of the novices, Mme. de Lescot, a nun from Paris, equally clever and good-hearted, was a superior woman to the abbess. She seems to have realised what Charlotte was really, the victim of an unfortunate destiny, a young heart full of God's Holiness, but cruelly marred by abnormal accidents of fate, bound to bring her headlong to shame and some sinister end. Her only preoccupation was to watch over her, to guard her against her own imprudent impulses, to explain and excuse whatever seemed most inexcusable in her conduct.

Barring the two or three noble ladies who lived with the monks, and had small liking for the high abstractions of mysticism, all loved the girl and thought her a very angel from heaven. Their sensibility, which wanted an object, was concentrated on her, and her alone. They found her not only pious and supernaturally religious, but a good girl and a good sort, a charming and diverting companion. Ennui was a thing of the past; Charlotte both amused and edified them with her dreams,--truly, by this I mean sincerely, recounted and always overflowing with the purest tenderness. She would say, "I travel everywhere at night, even to America. I leave letters everywhere, to tell the people to be converted. To-night I shall come and find you, even though you were to lock yourself in your room. We will go together into the Sacred Heart."

Miraculous! One and all, at midnight, received, so they declared, the delicious visit. They firmly believed they felt Charlotte kiss their cheeks, and lead them away into the Heart of Jesus (pp. 81, 89, 93). They were very frightened and very

[p. 264]

happy. The most soft-hearted and credulous of them all was a nun from Marseilles, Sister Raimbaud by name, who enjoyed this felicity no less than fifteen times in three months, or, in other words, every six days pretty nearly.

All pure fancy--as is sufficiently proved by the fact that Cadiere was with each and all of them at identically the same moment. Still the abbess was hurt, in the first instance because she was jealous at feeling herself the only one left out in the cold, in the second place being convinced that Charlotte, however buried she might be in her dreams and visions, would be only too certain eventually to hear from so many bosom friends about the scandals of the establishment. They were not hard to see. But as nothing could penetrate Charlotte Cadiere's mind otherwise than by special illumination from on high, she believed herself to have discovered them by revelation. Her gentle heart was stirred to its depths, and she felt profound compassion for God, who was so vilely outraged. Once more she imagined herself bound to pay for the rest, to save the sinners from the chastisements they had deserved by exhausting in her own person whatever fiercest cruelty the fury of the devils might inflict.

This all burst upon her unexpectedly and overwhelmingly on June 25th, St. John's Day. In the evening she was with the sisters in the novices' room. Suddenly she fell back writhing and screaming, and presently became unconscious. On her waking, the novices crowded round her, waiting inquisitively to hear what she would say. But the mistress, Mme. Lescot, guessed of what sort this would be, and felt sure she would ruin herself. She carried her off straight to her own room, where she found her body to be scarified all over and her linen stained with blood.

How came Girard to fail her in the midst of these struggles, internal and external? This was a thing she could not understand. Surely did she need support; yet he never came, or if he did, only to the public parlour, at long intervals and for a hurried visit.

She writes to him on June 28th (by her brothers, for though

[p. 265]

she could read, she scarcely knew how to write), summoning him in the most ardent and pressing terms. He answers her appeal by pleading for delay; he has to preach at Hyeres, he has a sore throat, etc. Contrary to all expectation, it was the abbess herself who eventually got him to come. No doubt she was anxious about the discoveries Cadiere had made as to the internal economy of the convent. Convinced she would speak of these to Girard, she wanted to anticipate her revelations. She wrote the Jesuit a letter of the most flattering and tender character (July 3rd; p. 327), begging him, when he came, to see her first, as she wished, unknown to everyone, to be his pupil, his disciple, as the humble-hearted Nicodemus was our Lord's. "I shall be able, quietly and unobtrusively," she writes, "to make great strides in virtue, under your guidance, by favour of the blessed freedom my position gives me. Our new novice affords a pretext that will serve to conceal and at the same time forward my purpose" (p. 327).

An extraordinary, a reckless step to take, that shows how ill-balanced was the lady abbess's mind. Having failed to supplant Girard with Charlotte, she was for trying to supplant Charlotte with Girard. Without preface or preparation she went straight to the point, as great ladies will, who are still well able to please, and whose overtures are certain to be instantly accepted, even going so far as to refer to the freedom she enjoyed!

This false step was determined by the belief that Girard had pretty well ceased to care for Charlotte by this time, as indeed was the case. But she might have guessed he had other difficulties on his hands at Toulon. He was disturbed and anxious about another affair, no longer involving a mere child, but a lady of ripe age, easy circumstances, and good position, the best-conducted of all his penitents, Mlle. Gravier to wit. Her forty years had been unavailing to protect her; Father Girard would tolerate no independent lamb in the fold. One fine morning she was astounded and deeply mortified to find herself pregnant, and gave vent to bitter recriminations (July; p. 395).

[p. 266]

Girard, preoccupied by this fresh misadventure, looked coldly upon the very unexpected advances made by the abbess of Ollioules. He suspected her of laying a trap for him in conjunction with the Observantine Fathers, and resolved to be very cautious. He saw the abbess, already half regretting her imprudent letter, and then Charlotte afterwards, but only in the convent chapel, where he heard her confession.

The latter could not but be wounded by the slight, and no doubt his behaviour was very strange and to the last degree inconsistent. He would disturb her peace of mind with frivolous, flattering letters, and little playful, almost loverlike, threats and teasings (Depos. Lescot. and p. 335 ),--then scornfully refuse to see her except in public.

In a note written the same evening she pays him out cleverly, telling him how at the moment he gave her absolution she had felt herself marvellously detached both from her own personality and from every human creature.

The very thing Girard most desired! The threads of his life were sorely entangled, and Charlotte was only a further embarrassment. Far from being annoyed at her letter, he was delighted at what she said, and made detachment the text of an urgent sermon. At the same time he insinuated how great was the need of prudence on his part. He had received, he told her, a letter in which he was seriously warned of the errors he had committed. However, as he was leaving on Thursday (the 6th) for Marseilles, he would pay her a flying visit (pp. 329, July 4th, 1730).

She waited for him, but no Girard appeared. Her agitation was intense; the flood rose to its height and became a raging, tempestuous sea. She confided in her bosom friend Raimbaud, who would not leave her, but slept the night with her (p. 73), against the rules, saving appearances by saying she had come to her room in the early morning. It was the night of July 6th, a night of concentrated, overpowering heat, in the narrow, shut-in furnace of Ollioules. At four or five, seeing her struggling in sharp agony, she "thought she had the colic, and went to the

[p. 267]

kitchen in search of fire." During her absence Charlotte had recourse to extreme measures, which could certainly not fail to bring Girard there without a moment's delay. Whether by reopening the wounds on her head with her nails, or in some way forcing the iron-pointed crown over her brow, she continued to drench her face with blood, which ran down in great gouts. The pain transfigured her whole appearance, and her eyes glittered strangely.

The scene lasted a good two hours. The nuns crowded in to see her in this extraordinary condition, and were lost in admiration. They were for bringing the Observantine Fathers, but Charlotte would not allow them.

The abbess, for her part, would have taken good care not to let Girard know, having no wish for him to see her in her present pathetic condition, which was too touching by far. However, the kind-hearted Mme. Lescot saw to this, and had the father duly informed. He came, but instead of going up to her chamber at once, like a true charlatan, he had an ecstasy of his own in the chapel, where he remained a whole hour prostrate on his knees before the Blessed Sacrament (p. 95). Going upstairs at last, he finds all the nuns assembled round Charlotte. He is told how for a moment she had looked just as if she were at Mass, moving her lips for all the world as if she were receiving the wafer. "Who should know it better than I?" was the impostor's ready answer. "An angel had given me notice. So I said Mass, and gave her communion from Toulon." The sisters were overwhelmed by the miracle, one of them actually being ill for two days afterwards. Then Girard, addressing Cadiere with unseemly levity, "Ah! ha! little sweet-tooth," he cried, "so you are robbing me of half my share?"

The rest withdraw respectfully, and leave him face to face with his pale-eyed, bleeding, enfeebled victim,--and for these very reasons the more strongly moved. Any other man would have been touched; what more naive, more striking avowal could she give of her dependence than this irresistible craving she

[p. 268]

had to see him? This avowal, expressed in her bleeding face and wounded brow, must surely stir his compassion. She was humiliating herself, but who could fail to pity her under the circumstances? She was constrained then for once to yield to Nature's impulses, this innocent being? In her short and unhappy life, then, the poor girl saint, so much a stranger to things of the senses, did know one hour of human weakness. What he had had of her without her consciousness could count for little or nothing. Now, with consent of soul and will, he was to have all.

Charlotte is very brief, as may be supposed, about all this. In her deposition she says shamefacedly she lost consciousness, and scarcely knew what happened. In a confession made to her friend, Madame Allemand (p. 178), without formulating any complaint, she makes clear all that occurred.

In return for this vivid outburst of devotion towards him, this charming impatience to see him, what did Girard do? Scolded her! The flame that would have caught another man and set him on fire, chilled Girard. His tyrannous heart would tolerate only women whose will was dead within them, unresisting playthings of his passions. And this girl, by the vigorous initiative she had taken, had forced him to come to her!--the scholar was leading the master. The irritable pedant treated the whole situation as he would have done a barring-out at school. His libertine severities, his selfish coldness, and the evident pleasure he felt in inflicting pain horrified the unhappy girl, and left her with no other feeling but remorse.

Another abomination! The very blood shed for him had no effect but to suggest the idea he might utilise it to his own advantage. In this interview, the last perhaps, he wished to bind over the poor creature at any rate to discretion, to make her think herself, though deserted by him, still under obligations towards him. He asked if he was to be less favoured than the nuns who had witnessed the miracle. She made her wounds bleed for him to see, and the water with which he washed off

[p. 269]

this blood was then drunk between him and her, [*1] by which odious communion he believed himself to have bound her soul to his.

This took up two or three hours, and it was nearly midday. The abbess was scandalised, and thought good to come herself with the dinner and make them open the door. Girard drank tea; as it was a Friday, he pretended he was fasting, having taken in good provision no doubt at Toulon. Cadiere asked for coffee. The lay Sister in charge of the kitchen was surprised on such a day (p. 86). But without this stimulant the girl would have fainted. It gave her a little strength, and she kept Girard still by her side. He remained with her (it is true, the door was not locked now) till four o'clock, wishing to efface the sinister impression left by his behaviour of the forenoon. By dint of a string of lies promising friendship and protection, he somewhat reassured the excitable creature, and restored her to calmness. She conducted him to the door on his leaving at last, and walking behind him, she took, like the child she really was, two or three little jumps of joy. He said drily, "Silly little madcap!" and that was all (p. 89).

 

She paid cruelly for her weakness. The same evening, at nine o'clock, she had a fearful vision, and they heard her screaming, "Oh, my God, begone! Leave me, leave me!" On the 8th, at the morning Mass, she did not stay for the communion (no doubt deeming herself unfit), but took refuge in her room. The scandal was great; but so great a favourite was she, that a nun who had run after her invented a merciful lie and swore she had seen Jesus communicating her with his own hand.

Mme. Lescot, with equal judgment and adroitness, wrote in the accredited legendary form, as mystic ejaculations, pious sighs, holy tears, any words they could drag from her torn and

[p. 270]

bleeding heart. A very rare occurrence--there was a conspiracy of kindness among women to shield a fellow-woman; and nothing could speak more highly in the poor girl's favour or be a surer testimonial to her powers of pleasing. In a month she was the spoiled child of all the Sisters. Whatever she did, they defended her: innocent in any case, they saw in her only a victim of the devil's wicked assaults. A worthy, stout-hearted woman of the people, daughter of the locksmith of Ollioules, and keeper of the turning-box at the convent, Matherone by name, after surprising certain indecent liberties on Girard's part, declared none the less, "It is nothing; she's a saint." Once when he was speaking of withdrawing her from the convent, the woman cried out, "Take away our Mademoiselle Cadiere! . . . Why, I will have an iron door made, to stop her going out of the house." Her brothers, who came to see her every day, alarmed at the state of things they found and the advantage the abbess and her monks might turn them to, plucked up courage, and in an open letter, which they addressed to Girard in the name of Charlotte Cadiere, recalled the revelation she had had on June 25th as to the way of life followed by the Observantine Fathers, telling him "it was high time to carry out God's purposes in this matter,"--no doubt to demand an inquiry being held, to accuse the accusers.

The challenge was over-bold and altogether injudicious. Almost dying as she was, Charlotte Cadiere was very far from any such ideas. Her friends thought perhaps the man who had caused the mischief might possibly allay it, and begged Girard to come and confess their protegee. The result was a terrible scene. In the confessional she gave vent to screams and lamentations, audible thirty yards away. The curious amongst the nuns enjoyed a fine opportunity of eavesdropping, which they did not fail to benefit by. Girard was in torment, and kept repeating, quite unavailingly, "Calm yourself, calm yourself, mademoiselle!" (p. 95).--All very well to give her absolution, but alas! she could not see her way to absolve herself. On the

[p. 271]

[paragraph continues] 12th she had so sharp a pain below the heart she thought her ribs would burst. On the 14th she seemed at death's door, and her mother was summoned. She received the Viaticum. The following day "she made a general apology, the most touching and expressive ever heard," which "dissolved us in tears" (pp. 330, 331). The 20th she fell into a sort of death agony that was un-endurably pathetic. Then by a sudden and favourable change that saved her life, she enjoyed a very soothing vision. She saw the penitent Magdalene forgiven and transfigured in glory, holding the place in heaven which Lucifer had lost (p. 332).

Still Girard could not make sure of her discretion except by corrupting her yet further and stifling her remorse. Now and again he would come (to the convent parlour) and kiss her, then regardless of appearances. But more often still he would send his pious protegees to see her. Madame Guiol and others visited her, overwhelming her with caresses and embraces; when she confided her secret to them with tears of shame, they only smiled, and told her all this was only part of the divine liberties the elect enjoyed; that they had had their share too, and were in the same case with her. Indeed, they openly boasted of the delights of such an association amongst women. Nor did Father Girard disapprove of their mutual confidences and their thus sharing the most disgraceful secrets. So habituated was he to these abominations, and looked upon it all so much as a matter of course, that he actually spoke to Charlotte about Mlle. Gravier's pregnancy. He wanted her to have her invited to Ollioules, calmed her irritation, and persuaded her her condition might very well be an illusion of the Evil One that could be dissipated by proper means (p. 395).

All this disgusting information made no impression on Charlotte Cadiere, though it could not but rouse her brothers' indignation, who knew how true it all was. The letters written by them in her name are exceedingly curious. Savage and furious in their inmost hearts, regarding Girard as a consummate scoundrel, yet obliged to make their sister speak with respect

[p. 272]

and tenderness, they yet write in such a way that here and there, to anyone reading between the lines, their rage is evident.

As for Girard's letters, these are laboured productions, manifestly composed in view of a possible trial to come. We will quote from the only one he never had an opportunity of falsifying, one dated July 22. It is bitter-sweet in tenor aid gallant in tone, the letter of a reckless, hot-headed man. This is the gist of it:

"The Bishop arrived this morning at Toulon, and intends to visit Cadiere. . . . Arrangements will be made beforehand as to what can be done and said. If the Vicar-in-Chief and Father Sabatier come to see her and ask to see (her wounds), she will tell them she has been forbidden to act or speak.

"I am hungry to see you again and to see everything. You know I only ask my rights. It is long since I have seen anything more than half (he means at the grating of the parlour). I shall tire you out? Well, then! do not tire me out too"--and so on.

An extraordinary letter in every way. He is suspicious at one and the same time both of the Bishop and even of the Jesuit, his own colleague, old Father Sabatier. It is at bottom the letter of a guilty man in terror of discovery. He knows perfectly well she has in her possession his letter and papers, in a word stuff enough to ruin him outright.

The two young men answer in their sister's name by an animated letter, the only one that rings true. They answer line by line, without invective, but with a bitterness that is often ironic, and which displays a concentrated fire of indignation. In it their sister promises to obey her correspondent, to say nothing either to the Bishop or the Jesuit. She congratulates him on having "so much courage to exhort others to suffer." She throws his odious gallantry back in his face, but in equally odious words,--in this part a man's hand is manifest, it is the work of a couple of clumsy schoolboys.

The next day but one they went to tell him she wished to quit the convent instantly. He was terribly startled, thinking

[p. 273]

the papers were going to escape along with her. So profound was his terror it robbed him of his presence of mind, and he was weak enough to go weeping to the parlour at Ollioules, where he threw himself on his knees before her, and asked her if she would have the courage to leave him (p. 7). This touched the poor girl, who told him no, came forward and allowed him to embrace her. And all the time the Judas only wanted to deceive her and gain a few days' breathing space, time to get support from high quarters.

By the 29th all is changed. Charlotte is still at Ollioules, asking his pardon and promising submission (p. 339). It is very evident he has brought powerful influence to work, that by this date they have received threats,--perhaps from Aix, or later on from Paris. The bigwigs of the Jesuit Order have written, and Court protectors from Versailles.

What were the two brothers to do in this dilemma? Doubtless they consulted their chiefs, who probably warned them not to press Girard too hard on the ground of immorality as a confessor; this would have been to offend the whole of the clergy, whose dearest prerogative confession is. On the other hand, they were to isolate him from the clerical body, by insisting on the singularity of his tenets, and bring the Quietist in him into prominence. With this weapon alone they could do great execution. In 1698 a cure of a village near Dijon had been burned for Quietism. They conceived the idea of composing (apparently from their sister's dictation, who was really an entire stranger to the plan) a memoir, in which Girard's Quietism, exaggerated and sublimated, should be established, or as a matter of fact denounced. This consists in an account of the series of visions she had had during Lent. In these the name of Girard is already in the heavens; she sees it, united with her own name, in the Book of Life.

They dared not carry the memoir in question directly to the Bishop; but they got it stolen by their friend, his almoner, young Father Camerle. The Bishop read it, and other copies

[p. 274]

circulated in the town. On August 21st, Girard being at the palace, the prelate said to him, laughing, "Well! well! Father, so your name's in the Book of Life, is it?"

He was panic-stricken, and believed himself undone. He wrote to Charlotte in terms of bitter reproach, once more tearfully demanding his papers. Charlotte was greatly surprised, and swore the memoir had never been out of her brothers' hands. When she discovered this was untrue, her despair knew no bounds (p. 363). The most cruel pains of mind and body assailed her, and a moment came when she verily thought her flesh was melting. "I became more than half mad. I felt such a craving for pain! Twice I grasped the scourge, and so fiercely, I drew blood abundantly" (p. 362). In the midst of this wild frenzy, which shows equally the ill-balance of her brain and the infinite sensitiveness of her conscience, Guiol put the finishing touch to her agony by describing Girard to her as a man almost at death's door. Her pity rose to the highest pitch (p. 361).

She was sure now to let the papers go; though it was only too plain they were her only protection and defence, alone capable of proving her innocence and the nature of the wiles to which she had fallen a victim. To give them back was to run a serious risk of herself and her seducer changing places. It might be said, and there would then be nothing to disprove the lie, that it was she had led a holy man astray, and all the odium would be concentrated on her unhappy head.

But, if the only alternative lay between perishing herself or ruining Girard, she very much preferred the first. A demon (Guiol, no doubt) tempted her with this very bait, the extraordinary sublimity of such a sacrifice. She wrote to her saying God claimed of her a bloody sacrifice (p. 28). She was able to quote saints for her example, who, when accused, made no attempt at justification, but rather accused themselves and died as meek as lambs. This was the course Charlotte Cadiere deliberately adopted. When charges were alleged against Girard

[p. 275]

in her presence, she invariably justified him, saying, "He speaks the truth; I told lies" (p. 32).

She might very well have returned merely Girard's own letters, but in the generosity of her heart she was ready to do whatever she was asked; so she gave him the drafts of her own into the bargain. He secured at the same time both these drafts in the handwriting of the Jacobin and the copies which the other brother made to send to him. After this he had nothing to fear. No sort of control was possible; he could excise, add, destroy, erase, falsify at his good pleasure. His task as a forger was perfectly easy, and he worked with a will. Out of eighty letters there remain sixteen, and even these appear to be elaborate compositions, manufactured after the event.

Girard held all the cards, and could laugh at his enemies, whose turn it now was to tremble. The Bishop, a man of the great world, knew his Versailles far too well, and what influence the Jesuits wielded there, not to treat them with consideration. He even thought it politic to say a gracious word to Father Girard to make up for his malicious remark about the Book of Life, and told him with an amiable smile he would like to act as sponsor to a child of any of his relatives at the font.

The bishops of Toulon had always been great lords. The episcopal register contains all the chief names of Provence, Baux, Glandeves, Nicolai, Forbin, Forbin d'Oppede, as well as famous Italian names like Fiesci, Trivuleio, La Rovere. From 1712 to 1737, under the Regency and Fleury, the Bishop of Toulon was a La Tour du Pin. He was a very rich man, holding in commendam the abbeys of Aniane and Saint Guilhem of the Desert in Languedoc. He was said to have behaved well during the Plague in 1721. Otherwise, he was an almost constant absentee, lived a purely worldly life, never saying Mass, and having the reputation of something more than gallantry.

He arrived at Toulon in July, and though Girard would gladly have dissuaded him from going to Ollioules and visiting

[p. 276]

[paragraph continues] Charlotte Cadiere, his curiosity was too strong to resist the temptation. He saw her at one of her good times, and was taken by her looks. He thought her a good, saintly little personage, and was so far convinced of the reality of her revelations from on high as, rather inconsiderately, to speak to her of his affairs, and interests, and future, consulting her much as he might have done a common fortune-teller.

Still he hesitated, in spite of her brothers' prayers, to remove her from Ollioules, and out of Girard's reach. Means, however, were found to fix his resolution. The report was spread at Toulon that Charlotte had shown a wish to fly to the desert, as her model St. Theresa had tried to do as a child of twelve. This notion, so it was said, was put in her head by Girard, in order to carry her off some fine morning, get her beyond the bounds of the diocese, whose chief glory she was,--in a word, to make a present of this treasure to some far-away religious house, where the Jesuits, having an exclusive monopoly, would exploit for their own benefit her miracles and her visions, and all the attractions she exercised as a young and popular saint. The Bishop was much aggrieved, and sent word to the abbess to deliver Mlle. Cadiere to no one but her mother, who was shortly to remove her from the convent and take her to a bastide belonging to the family.

Not to offend Girard, they got Charlotte to write to him to the effect that, if the change of residence was inconvenient to him, he could procure a coadjutor, and so give her a second confessor. He understood the hint, and preferred to disarm jealousy by giving up Cadiere altogether. He broke off relations (September 15th) by a very judiciously worded, humble, and piteous epistle, in which he endeavoured to leave her still his friend and well-wisher. "If I have committed faults against you," he writes, "still you must always remember I had every wish to help you. . . . I am and shall always be your devoted friend in the Sacred Heart of Jesus."

Nevertheless the Bishop was far from being reassured. He

[p. 277]

thought the three Jesuits--Girard, Sabatier, and Grignet--were for putting his suspicions to sleep, and then one fine day, with an order from Paris, carrying off the girl with them. He took the decisive step, September 17th, of sending his carriage (a light, fashionable, unclerical conveyance called a phaeton), and having her driven to her mother's bastide in the near neighbourhood.

To calm her feelings and protect her person, and set her generally in the right way, he sought a confessor for her, addressing himself in the first instance to a Carmelite who had been her director before Girard. But the monk, who was an old man, refused, and others in all probability followed his example. The Bishop was obliged to take a stranger, a new arrival three months before from Franche-Comte, one Father Nicholas, Prior of the Barefooted Carmelites. He was a man of forty, at once able and courageous, of a very determined, not to say obstinate character. He showed himself well worthy of the confidence reposed in him by declining the duty at first. It was not so much the Jesuits he was afraid of as Charlotte Cadiere herself. He expected little good of her, considering the angel was likely enough to be an angel of darkness, and fearing the foul fiend, under the gentle guise of a young girl, would only strike the fouler blows.

But the mere sight of her reassured him not a little; she seemed innocent enough, and only too glad to have found a man at last who was sure and trustworthy, and able to give her firm support. She had suffered sorely from the continual state of uncertainty Girard had always kept her in. From the first day she talked more freely than she had done for a month past, telling him about her life and sufferings, her pieties and visions. Even the coming of night did not stop her--a hot night of mid-September. All stood open in the chamber, the three doors as well as the windows. She went on almost till dawn, by the side of her sleeping brothers. Next day she began again, sitting in the vine-trellised summer-house, speaking in the most edifying fashion of God and the sublimest mysteries of religion.

[p. 278]

[paragraph continues] The Carmelite was astounded, asking himself if the devil could possibly praise God so eloquently.

Her innocence was self-evident. She seemed a good-hearted, docile girl, meek as a lamb and frolicsome as a puppy. She was eager to play bowls (a common amusement at the bastides), and he did not refuse to play too.

If a spirit dwelt in her, at any rate no one could say it was a "lying spirit." Watching her long and closely, none could doubt that her wounds really bled at times. Her new confessor, unlike Girard, carefully avoided any indecent investigations to verify the fact, contenting himself with what he saw of the stigmata on her feet. He was only too frequently witness of her ecstasies. A violent heat would suddenly take her at the heart and circulate all through her frame; then she would lose consciousness, fall into convulsions, and begin talking wildly.

The Carmelite understood perfectly that in Charlotte Cadiere there were two distinct persons, the girl herself and the demon that possessed her. The first was right-thinking, and even exceptionally innocent of heart, ignorant of wrong, for all the wrong she had suffered, comprehending little of the very things that had troubled her so sorely. Previous to her confession, when she spoke of Girard's kisses, the Carmelite told her roughly, "Why, they are very deadly sins." "Oh, God!" she replied, weeping, "then I am undone, for he did many other worse things to me."

The Bishop often came to see her, the bastide making a convenient object for his walks. When he questioned her, she answered simply and unsuspiciously, and told him at any rate the beginning of what had occurred. The Bishop was very angry, deeply mortified and indignant, doubtless guessing what was left unsaid. He came within an ace of raising a terrible hue-and-cry against Girard. Without a thought of the dangers of provoking a struggle with the Jesuits, he entered completely into the Carmelite's ideas, admitting she was bewitched,--ergo that Girard was a wizard. He was for instantly inhibiting him formally,

[p. 279]

ruining and disgracing him. But Charlotte pleaded for the man who had so deeply wronged her, and refused to be avenged. Throwing herself on her knees before the Bishop, she conjured him to spare Girard, not to speak of such severe measures. With touching humility, she declared, "Enough that I am enlightened now, that I know how sinful I was" (p. 127). Her brother, the Jacobin, seconded her prayers, foreseeing all the perils involved in such a contest, and doubting if the Bishop had firmness enough to carry it through.

She was now much calmer. The burning heats of summer were over, and the gracious month of October come, when Nature at last showed a more kindly face. The Bishop reaped a lively gratification from the fact of her having been saved by his instrumentality. The poor girl, removed from the stifling conditions of Ollioules, freed from all contact with Girard, well guarded by her relatives and the good, brave-hearted monk, last but not least protected by the Bishop, who grudged no trouble and consistently gave her his countenance, she entirely recovered her serenity. Like the parched grass that revives under the October showers, she lifted up her drooping head and bloomed afresh.

For some seven weeks she appeared perfectly sensible and well behaved. So delighted was the Bishop, he would fain have had the Carmelite, with Cadiere to second him, deal with the rest of Girard's penitents and bring them to a similar condition of sweet reasonableness. They were to come to the bastide,--one may guess how much against the grain and with how ill a grace. Nothing, in fact, could well be more unseemly than thus to confront women of the sort with the Bishop's protegee, a young girl barely recovered from a state of ecstatic deliriousness.

The situation was critical, verging indeed on the ludicrous. Two factions were brought face to face,--Girard's women on the one side, the Bishop's on the other. On the Bishop's part Madame Allemand and her daughter, partisans of Charlotte

[p. 280]

[paragraph continues] Cadiere's; on the opposite the rebels, the Guiol woman at their head. The Bishop opened negotiations with the latter to induce her to enter into relations with the Carmelite and bring her friends to confess to him. He sent his registrar to her, and later on a procurator, a former lover of Madame Guiol's. Meeting with no success, the Bishop played his last card, and summoned them all to the Palace. There they denied one and all the reality both of ecstasies and stigmata, of which they had previously boasted. One of the party, no doubt Guiol, with equal effrontery and malicious artfulness, astounded his lordship yet more by offering to show him there and then they had no mark whatever on any part of their bodies. They had supposed him giddy-headed enough to fall into the snare. He scored cleverly, however; he refused flatly, but expressed his thanks to the ladies who, at the expense of their modesty, would have made him Father Girard's imitator, setting all the town grinning at his adroitness.

The Bishop's proceedings turned out a dead failure. On the one hand, these insolent women merely laughed at him, while on the other, his supposed success with Mlle. Cadiere ended in disappointment. No sooner back in gloomy Toulon and installed in the confined Ruelle de l'Hopital, than she suffered a relapse. She was again on the very scene, with all its dangerous and sinister associations, that had witnessed the first commencement of her malady, in the actual battlefield where the two opposing factions were engaged. The Jesuits, with the Court of France, as all could see, at their back, had on their side the politicians, the diplomats, the moderate men. The Carmelite had only the Bishop, not supported even by his own colleagues, or by the cures. However, he had a weapon in reserve. On November 8th he extracted from Cadiere a written authorisation to make public her confession, if circumstances required it.

This was a bold step that set Girard trembling by its very audacity. He was not a brave man, and he would have been

[p. 281]

undone if his cause had not been the Jesuits' too. He lay perdu in the recesses of their house. On the other hand, his colleague Sabatier, an old man of a sanguine, choleric temperament, went straight to the Palace and forced himself into the Bishop's presence, bearing in his gown, like Popilius, peace or war. He put his back, so to speak, to the wall, and gave the prelate to understand that an action at law with the Jesuits meant his professional ruin, that he would remain Bishop of Toulon to the end of his days, and never be Archbishop. More than that, with the freedom of speech allowable to an apostle so influential at Versailles, he told him plainly that if the business should prove a revelation of a Jesuit Father's morals, it would throw no less searching a light on those of a certain Bishop. A letter, obviously put together by Girard (p. 334), would seem to show that the Jesuits lay all ready in ambush to launch formidable countercharges against the prelate, declaring his life "not merely unworthy of the episcopal dignity, but abominable."

The wily and perfidious Girard, the apoplectic Sabatier, bursting with rage and spite, would have seconded the calumny with might and main. Such men would not have failed to say all this ado was for a girl's sake, that if Girard had tended her when sick, the Bishop had enjoyed her favours when restored to health. What annoyance such a scandal must occasion in the well-ordered life of a great nobleman and gentleman of society! It would have been too ridiculous a piece of Quixotism to take up arms to avenge the virtue of a little crack-brained invalid girl, and for her sake to come to blows with all respectable men! Cardinal de Bonzi died of disappointed love at Toulouse, but, at any rate, it was for a fair and high-born lady, the Marquise de Ganges. Here his lordship ran the risk of ruining himself, of being overwhelmed by shame and ridicule for the daughter of an old-clothes-man in the Rue de l'Hopital!

These menaces of Sabatier's produced the more effect, inasmuch as the Bishop was already, for other reasons, less eager in Charlotte's behalf. He was annoyed with her for falling ill

[p. 282]

again, and thus spoiling his success. She was putting him in the wrong by her inconsiderate relapse, and he could not help bearing her a grudge for not getting well.

He told himself Sabatier was quite right; it would be a piece of silly good-nature to compromise himself. The change was sudden and instantaneous, like conversion by the grace of heaven. He saw the light in a moment of time, like St. Paul on the road to Damascus, and straightway went over to the Jesuits.

Sabatier stuck to his guns. He put pens and paper before him, and made him write out and sign on the spot an interdiction directed against the Carmelite, his agent with Charlotte Cadiere, and another for her brother, the Jacobin (Nov. 10, 1730).

Footnotes

^269:1 This was a custom of the Reiters, the northern soldiery, to make themselves blood-brothers by this sort of communion (see Michelet, Origines du Droit).

     The Sorceress, by Jules Michelet, [1939], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 283]

  

24

  

TRIAL of CHARLOTTE CADIERE

  

1730, 1731

WHAT this dreadful blow was for the Cadiere family may be imagined. The sick girl's seizures became frequent and appalling, while, cruel aggravation, a regular epidemic of the same sort spread amongst her bosom friends. Her neighbour, Madame Allemand, who also was subject to ecstasies, but who had hitherto taken them as coming from God, was seized with sudden terror and thought hell was upon her. The good lady (she was now fifty) remembered that for certain she had often had unclean thoughts; she believed herself delivered up to the devil, saw nothing but devils about her, and though well looked after by her daughter, ran from her own house and asked asylum with the Cadieres. The latter's house henceforth became uninhabitable, and business out of the question. The elder brother was furious, and gave vent to his rancour against Girard, crying repeatedly, "It will be a case of Gauffridi . . . the man shall be burned, he shall be burned too!" And the Jacobin added, "Sooner than put up with it, we would spend the family savings to the last penny."

In the night of the 17th-18th November, Charlotte yelled and choked till they thought she was going to die. The elder Cadiere brother, the dealer, lost his head, and started shouting out of the window, screaming to the neighbours, "Help! help! the devil is strangling my sister!"--who came running up with next to nothing on. The doctors and surgeons diagnosed her state to be a suffocation of the womb, and ordered her to be cupped. Whilst the cupping-glasses were being fetched, they

[p. 284]

managed to open her clenched teeth and made her swallow a taste of brandy, which brought her round. Meantime the physicians of the soul were likewise coming on the scene one after the other, first an old priest, Mme. Cadiere's confessor, soon followed by sundry cures of Toulon. The noise, the shouts, the arrival of the priests in full fig, the paraphernalia for exorcism, had quickly collected a crowd in the street. New arrivals kept asking what the matter was,--and were answered, "It is Charlotte Cadiere, bewitched by Girard." The pity and indignation of the populace may be imagined.

The Jesuits were intensely dismayed, but anxious to throw off their panic. They were guilty of a very barbarous act; going away to the Palace, they demanded imperatively that legal steps should be taken against Cadiere, and the attack delivered that very day. The result was, the poor girl, on the very bed where she lay, but now almost at death's door, directly after the awful crisis she had gone through, received without the smallest warning a visit from the police. . . .

Sabatier had refused to leave the Bishop before he had summoned his judge, his ordinary, the Vicar-General Larmedieu, and his apparitor (or episcopal procurator), Esprit Reybaud, and directed them to take instant proceedings.

The thing was impossible really, illegal in Canon Law. A preliminary declaration as to the facts was required before proceeding to interrogations. Another difficulty: the ecclesiastical judge had no power to order such a visit except for a refusal of the sacrament. The two Church legists were bound to point out these objections; but Sabatier would not hear a word. If things were to be delayed in this way by an adherence to cold, formal legality, his shot would miss fire, and no one would be tempted at all.

Larmedieu, or Larme-Dieu (what a touching name!) was a complacent judge, well disposed to the clergy. He was none of those hard-bitten magistrates who rush straight before them, like wild boars blind with fury, along the high-road of the law

[p. 285]

without seeing anybody or drawing any distinctions between individuals. He had shown great consideration in the affair of Father Aubany, superintendent of Ollioules. He had put the law in motion so slowly as to give Aubany time to make good his escape. Then, on learning he was at Marseilles, as if Marseilles had been miles away from France, an Ultima Thule, or the Terra Incognita of the old maps, he took no further steps. Here all was different; the same judge who had been so paralytic where Aubany was concerned had wings for Cadiere,--and the wings of the lightning.

At nine o'clock in the morning the inhabitants of the alley were watching inquisitively the arrival of a very imposing procession, Messire Larmedieu at its head, followed by the prosecutor of the Episcopal Court, the pair of them respectfully escorted by two vicars of the parish, doctors in theology. They invaded the house, and summoned the sick girl before them. She was made to give an oath to tell the truth against herself, an oath to incriminate herself by revealing to justice what were really secrets of her own conscience and the confessional.

She need not have answered, no proper formalities having been observed. But she raised no difficulties, and swore as she was directed,--which was equivalent to throwing up her case and delivering herself into their hands. For, once bound by the oath, she told everything, even the shameful and ludicrous details it is so cruel for a young girl to have to confess.

Larmedieu's official report and his first interrogatory point to a fixed and settled plan between himself and the Jesuits. This was to display Girard as the dupe and victim of Charlotte Cadiere's wiles. A man of fifty, a doctor of the Church, a schoolmaster, a director of religious women, who has remained so innocent and credulous through it all as to be trapped by a little girl, a mere child! The artful, abandoned creature deceived him, it would seem, about her visions, but did not succeed in alluring him to share her wild doings.

Furious at her failure, she revenged herself by imputing to

[p. 286]

him every abomination the imagination of a Messalina could suggest to her.

Far from the interrogatory giving any confirmation of all this, the most touching feature is the victim's gentleness. Obviously her accusations were only dragged from her by means of the oath she had taken. She is gentle towards her enemies, even towards the treacherous Guiol, who (her brother says) betrayed her, did everything she could to corrupt her, and eventually ruined her by inducing her to give up the papers that would have been her safeguard.

The Cadieres were appalled by their sister's simplicity. In her respect for her oath she had given herself away completely, made herself the butt for the contempt, ribaldry, and lampoons even of men who were ill-disposed to the Jesuits, and libertines and fools of every sort and description.

As the thing was done, they wished at any rate it should be accurately recorded, that the report drawn up by the priests might be verified by a more formal legal act. From accused, as she was made to appear, they constituted her accuser, taking the offensive themselves and engaging the King's magistrate, the "lieutenant, civil and military," Marteli Chantard, to come and take her deposition. In this document, at once lucid and brief, are distinctly established, first, the fact of seduction; further, the expostulations she had addressed to Girard with regard to his licentious caresses, expostulations he only laughed at; further, the advice he had given her to let herself be possessed by the devil; lastly, the sucking by means of which the impostor kept her wounds open.

The King's official, the lieutenant, ought to have dealt with the case in his own court. For the ecclesiastical judge having failed in his extreme haste to fulfil the proper formalities of ecclesiastical law, his action was really null and void. The lay magistrate, however, had not the courage of his opinions. He consented to assist at the clerical inquest, accepted Larmedieu

[p. 287]

as assessor, and actually sat to hear evidence in the Bishop's Court at the Palace. The latter's registrar, and not the royal "lieutenant's" registrar, wrote the report of the proceedings. Did he report impartially? This is open to legitimate doubt, when we see how this same clerical registrar systematically intimidated the witnesses, and went every evening to show their depositions to the Jesuits. [*1]

The two joint vicars of Charlotte Cadiere's parish, who were heard first, gave their evidence drily, showing no bias in her favour, but none against her, and none for the Jesuits (Nov. 24th). The latter now foresaw a complete fiasco, and losing all shame and at the risk of shocking public opinion, resolved on a bold and decisive stroke. They extracted an order from the Bishop to imprison Cadiere herself and the principal witnesses she proposed to tender. These were the two Allemand ladies and Mlle. Batarelle, of whom the latter was confined in the Refuge, a convent prison, the other two in a house of correction, the Bon Pasteur (Good Shepherd), where madwomen were shut up and common street-walkers subjected to correction. Charlotte (Nov. 26th) was dragged from her bed and handed over to the Ursuline Sisters, penitents of Father Girard, who duly provided her with a bed of rotten straw.

Then, a reign of terror being thus established, they could hear witnesses. One was the woman Guiol, notorious for having selected the witnesses (Nov. 28th), two highly respectable, specially procured girls for Girard--an adroit, venomous tongue, chosen to inflict the first sting and start the open sore of calumny. The other was Laugier, the little sempstress Charlotte Cadiere was supporting and the expenses of whose apprenticeship she had paid. With child by Girard, this Laugier had indulged in recriminations against her seducer; now she purged this fault by mocking at Charlotte and throwing dirt at her benefactress--but clumsily, like the abandoned creature she was, attributing

[p. 288]

bold, shameless speeches to her, quite inconsistent with her general behaviour. To these succeeded Mlle. Gravier and her cousin, Mlle. Reboul, and in fact the whole gang of the Girardines, as they were called at Toulon.

Nevertheless things could not be so cleverly arranged but that the truth peeped through here and there. The wife of a "procureur," in whose house the Girardines used to meet, said with brutal frankness there was no standing it, they turned the whole place upside down so; she described their noisy laughter, the feasts paid for out of the collections they levied for the poor, etc., etc. (p. 55).

Much anxiety was felt lest the nuns should side with Mile. Cadiere. The Bishop's registrar was sent to inform them (as if on the Bishop's authority) that any who spoke ill-advisedly would be punished. By way of putting still stronger pressure on them, they brought back from Marseilles their gallant Father Aubany, whose ascendency over them was well known. The matter of violating the little girl was arranged, and her relatives given to understand the law would do no more for them. The child's honour was estimated at eight hundred livres, and this sum paid on Aubany's behalf. This settled, he came back full of zeal, a Jesuit to the backbone, to his flock at Ollioules,--and the poor flock trembled not a little on the father's informing them that he was commissioned to warn them that, if they were not discreet, they would be put to the question. [*2]

For all this, they failed to elicit what they wanted from the fifteen nuns. Barely two or three were for Girard, and all detailed facts, especially facts relating to July 7th, which directly incriminated the Jesuit.

His colleagues in despair adopted heroic measures in order to secure proper evidence being given. They established themselves on permanent guard in an intermediate hall leading to the court, where they stopped the witnesses, cajoling or threatening them, as the case might be, and if they were against Girard,

[p. 289]

barring their entrance altogether and impudently putting them to the door again. [*3]

The ecclesiastical judge and the King's "lieutenant" were simply cat's-paws in the hands of the Jesuits. This the whole town realised with horror, while in the course of December, January, and February the Cadiere family formulated and circulated a complaint on the grounds of refusal of justice and subornation of witnesses. The Jesuits themselves felt the position was no longer tenable, and appealed for assistance from higher quarters. The best thing would apparently have been a simple decree of the Great council, citing the whole case before its own judges, and so hushing up everything,--as Mazarin did in the Louviers business. But the Chancellor was D'Aguesseau, and the Jesuits were not desirous the matter should be referred to Paris. They retained the case in Provence, and obtained a decision from the King ( Jan. 16th, 1731) that the Parlement of Provence, in which they had many friends, should give the verdict on evidence to be called by two of its counsellors at Toulon.

As a matter of fact a layman, M. Faucon, and a clerical counsellor, M. de Charleval, presently arrived, and at once took up their lodging with the Jesuits (p. 407). These hot-headed delegates took so little pains to conceal their violent and cruel partiality that they launched against Charlotte Cadiere a personal citation, such as was commonly served on the accused party, while Girard was politely requested to attend and left at liberty meantime; in fact, he went on saying Mass and confessing penitents just the same as before. But the complainant all the while was under lock and key, in her enemies' hands, lodged with Girard's devoted adherents and exposed to any and every species of cruelty.

The welcome accorded her by the good Ursuline Sisters had been for all the world the same as if they had been commissioned to do her to death. As a sleeping-room, they had

[p. 290]

assigned her the cell of an insane nun who befouled everything round her, and she lay on the madwoman's straw amid the horrid stench she occasioned. With the utmost difficulty her relatives managed next day to get a blanket and a mattress admitted. They gave her as gaoler and nurse a lay Sister, Girard's protegee and familiar spirit. She was daughter of the same Mme. Guiol who had been Charlotte's betrayer, a creature well worthy to belong to such a mother and quite capable of dark deeds, a peril to her prisoner's modesty and possibly even to her life. The latter was condemned to a penance of all others the most cruel for her, forced abstention from confession and communion. She began to fall ill again directly she ceased to communicate. Then her inveterate enemy, Sabatier the Jesuit, came to the cell, and essaying a new and extraordinary departure, tried to win her over, to tempt her with the sacred wafer! Truly an unseemly bargaining! Going, going, gone!--to receive communion, she must confess herself a slanderer, and so unworthy of the sacrament. She might even have done this, out of excessive humility. But in ruining herself she would have been ruining the Carmelite and her own brothers into the bargain.

Reduced to employ the artifices of the Pharisees, they glossed her words. What she spoke in a mystic sense was perversely taken as meant to apply to material reality. To avoid all these snares, she exhibited the last quality we should have expected from her, a remarkable degree of presence of mind (see in particular p. 391).

The most perfidious trick of all, contrived on purpose to alienate public sympathy and set the profane laughing at her, was to give her a lover. It was alleged she had proposed to a young scamp to elope with her and scour the wide world together.

The great nobleman of those days, who liked to have little lads as pages, were always ready to take into their service the prettiest of the peasants' children on their lands. This the Bishop had done with one of his farm-tenant's boys, whom he trained

[p. 291]

to polite arts. Later on, when his favourite grew up, he had him tonsured by way of giving him an air, and turned him into an abbe with the title of his lordship's almoner--all by the time he was twenty. Such was the young Abbe Camerle. Brought up with the servants and broken to all sorts of dirty work, he was like many another country lad, when the rust has been partly, but not entirely, rubbed off, a scampish young lout, both simple and subtle at one and the same time. He was quick to notice that the prelate, from the moment of his arrival at Toulon, took an interest in Charlotte Cadiere, and was not well disposed towards Girard. He thought to please and amuse his patron by constituting himself at Ollioules the spy of the suspicious relations subsisting between the two. But the instant the Bishop changed front and showed he was afraid of the Jesuits, Camerle exhibited an equal zeal and activity on Girard's behalf and in helping him against Mlle. Cadiere.

Like another Joseph, he declares that Mlle. Cadiere (a la Potiphar's wife) had tempted him, endeavoured to shake his virtue. Supposing it had been the truth, supposing she had paid him the compliment of showing some weakness towards him, surely this would only have made it the more cowardly of him to punish her for it and take advantage of a thoughtless word. But a training like this, first as page, then as seminarist, produces neither honour nor love of women.

She made a ready and excellent defence, and covered her accuser with confusion. So victorious were her answers, that the two unworthy commissioners of the Parlement cut short the confrontations and cut down the numbers of her witnesses. Of sixty-eight originally called by her, they allowed only thirty-eight to appear (12mo., vol. i., p. 62). Observing neither the delays nor the formalities of justice, they hurried on to the final scene of confrontation. Yet with all this lustre, they gained nothing; again on February 25th and 26th she repeated without any variation her damaging depositions.

So furious were they that they regretted bitterly they had no

[p. 292]

executioner or torture "to make her sing out a bit." This was always ultima ratio; in every century the Parlements resorted to it. I have before me at the present moment an eloquent panegyric of torture, [*4] written in 1780 by a learned member of Parlement, promoted to a seat on the Great Council, and dedicated to the King (Louis XVI.), and approved in most flattering terms by his Holiness Pius VI.

However, in default of torture which would have "made her sing out," they induced her to speak by better means still. On February 27th, early in the day, the lay Sister who acted as her gaoler, Mme. Guiol's daughter, brings her a glass of wine. The girl is astonished; she is not thirsty, she never drinks wine in the morning, and still less wine without water. The lay Sister, a rough, sturdy servant-girl, such as are kept in convents to master disorderly or mad members of the community, and punish the pupils, overrules the weak invalid's objections with threats and domineering insistence. She does not want to drink, yet drinks nevertheless. Moreover, she is forced to drink it all off, to the very dregs, which have a disagreeable, salty taste (pp. 243-7) .

What was this unpleasant beverage? We have already seen, at the time of her miscarriage, how expert the former Director of Nuns was in the administration of drugs. In this case the strong wine would have been enough by itself, acting on a constitution weakened by sickness. It would have been quite sufficient to intoxicate her, to draw from her during the course of the same day some stammering words or other, which the Registrar would have twisted into a flat contradiction of her previous evidence. But a drug was added as well (perhaps the witches' herb, which clouds the mind for several days), in order to prolong this condition, so that they might obtain formal testimony from her that would render it impossible for her to retract her denial.

We have the deposition she made on February 27th, showing a sudden and complete change of front, being, in fact, a direct

[p. 293]

plea for Girard! Strangely enough, the Commissioners never notice so marked an alteration. The extraordinary and shameful spectacle of a young girl in a state of intoxication rouses no surprise or suspicion. She is made to declare Girard never laid hand upon her, that she herself felt neither pleasure nor pain, that all the sensations she experienced arose from an infirmity she labours under. Only the Carmelite, and her brothers, had persuaded her to recount as actual occurrences what was never anything better than a dream. Not satisfied with whitewashing Girard, she blackens her own friends, overwhelming them with monstrous charges and virtually putting the rope round their necks.

The surprising thing is the clearness and precision of the deposition, in which the hand of the practised Registrar is very evident. The astonishing circumstance is that having begun so well, they did not go on. Examination is held on one day only, the 27th. Nothing on the 28th; nothing from the 1st to the 6th of March.

Presumably on the 27th, under the influence of the wine, she was still able to speak and say something or other capable of being arranged consecutively. But by the 28th, the poison having exerted its full effects, she would seem to have been either in a stupor or in an unseemly state of delirium (like that common at the Witches' Sabbath), and it was out of the question to produce her in public. Besides, once her wits were thoroughly confounded, it was an easy matter to give her other potions, without her knowing or remembering anything about it.

At this stage it was, I make no doubt, during the six days between February 28th and March 5th or 6th, that an occurrence took place, so repugnant in itself and so sad for the unhappy child, that it is merely hinted in three lines, without either herself or her brothers finding the heart to speak of it more particularly (p. 249 of the fol. edition, lines 10-13). They would never have mentioned it at all, had not the brothers been accused and seen plainly their own lives were threatened.

[p. 294]

Girard went to see Charlotte, and once again took impudent, immoral freedoms with her!

This took place, according to what the brother and sister say, since the case began. But from November 26th to February 26th Girard was in a state of prostration and humiliation, invariably beaten in the war of witnesses he was waging with Cadiere. Still less did he dare to see her after March 10th, the date when she recovered her full wits and left the convent where he had kept her confined. He only saw her during those five days when he was still her master, and the unhappy girl, demoralised by the effects of the poison, was no longer herself.

Madame Guiol had formerly betrayed Charlotte, and her daughter could do the same again. Girard, who had by then won the game by the contradiction she had given to her own statements, had the heartlessness to come to her prison, see her in the condition he had brought her to, dull or despairing, abandoned by heaven and earth alike, and if any power of clear thinking was left her, given up to the horrid pain of having, by her deposition, been the murderess of her own kith and kin. The end was come, and her fate was sealed. But the other trial was only beginning, against her brothers and the stout-hearted Carmelite. Remorse may have urged her to try and move Girard and induce him to drop the prosecution directed against them, and above all not to put her to the question.

The prisoner's condition was deplorable, and called for leniency. Minor infirmities arising from a purely sedentary life caused her much suffering, while as a consequence of her convulsions, she suffered from a prolapsus vulvae, which was very painful at times (p. 343). What proves Girard to have been no casual criminal, but a man of perverted sentiment and abandoned character, is that in all this he saw only a better and surer means of confirming his advantage. He argued that if he adopted these means, she would be so far humiliated in her own eyes she would never pluck up a spirit again, never recover courage to recant her recantation. He hated her by this time,

[p. 295]

and yet in jocose phrases of odious obscenity he spoke of this last infirmity, and seeing the poor creature defenceless, did her the outrageous indignity of touching it (p. 249). Her brother asserts the fact positively, though briefly and shamefacedly, without pursuing the subject further. Questioned on the matter herself, she answers in three letters, "Yes!"

Alas! her soul was not now her own, and she was long in regaining anything like composure. It was on March 6th she was to be brought up to confirm everything and finally and irretrievably undo her brothers; but when the time came she was choking, and unable to speak. The gentle-hearted Commissioners informed her the torture-chamber was next door, and explained to her the action of the wedges that would squeeze her bones, the rack and the iron spikes. Her body was so weak her courage failed her; and she endured to face her cruel master, who was in a position to laugh and triumph, having humiliated her in person, and still more deeply in conscience, making her the murderess of her own brothers!

No time was lost in profiting by her weakness. The Parlement of Aix was at once appealed to, and its approval obtained that the Carmelite and the two Cadiere brothers should presently be charged, and be tried separately, so that after Charlotte should have been condemned and punished, their case might next be taken and pushed to a conclusion through thick and thin.

On March 10th she was conveyed from the Ursuline convent at Toulon to St. Claire of Ollioules. Girard was not sure of her, and contrived that she should be carried thither, like some redoubtable brigand of that ill-reputed road, between troopers of the Marshal's posse. He demanded that at St. Claire she should be kept a close prisoner under lock and key. The Sisters were touched to the point of tears to see their poor sick favourite arrive so, scarce able to drag herself along, and escorted by armed men. Everybody pitied her; and two gallant individuals, M. Aubin, Procureur, and M. Claret, Notary, were found ready to draw up for her formal statements by which she retracted her

[p. 296]

retractation--terrible documents, in which she details the threats of the Commissioners and of the Lady Superior of the Ursulines, particularly the fact of the drugged wine they forced her to drink (March 10th to 16th, 1751, pp. 243, 248).

Simultaneously, these intrepid friends of justice drew up and forwarded to Paris, addressed to the office of the Great Seal, what was known as an "appeal against abuse of procedure," exposing the irregular and faulty methods of the court and the wilful breaches of law and justice involved in the high-handed doings of (1) the official in charge and the King's "lieutenant," and (2) the special Commissioners. The Chancellor d'Aguesseau showed himself weak and flaccid to the last degree, upholding the odious proceedings hitherto and allowing the case to be referred to the Parlement of Aix, open to such strong suspicion since the disgrace its two members had just covered themselves with.

This settled, they laid hands again on the victim, and from Ollioules had her dragged to Aix, once more in charge of the Marshal's men. The custom then was to sleep midway at a half-way house, a roadside tavern. Arrived there, the Brigadier explained that by his orders he was to sleep in the young woman's bedroom. They had actually pretended to think it likely that the sick girl, who could barely walk, would make her escape and jump out of the window. A vile design truly,--to entrust her chastity to the self-restraint of the soldiery of the Dragonnades! What a triumph it would have been! What an excuse for ribaldry, if she had arrived at her destination enceinte! Luckily her mother had come up on her departure, had followed the cortege in spite of all remonstrances, and even the men-at-arms had not dared to drive her away with their butts. She stayed all night in the room, both of them keeping up and awake, and so protected her child's virtue (12mo. ed., vol. i., p. 52).

Her destination was the Ursuline convent at Aix, the Sisters of which were to guard her under orders from the King. But the Lady Superior pretended she had not yet received the order, and

[p. 297]

what followed shows only too plainly how ferocious women are when once stirred by passion, and how they lose all womanly qualities. She kept her four hours at the door, in the open street, a show for the passers-by (vol. x. of 12 mo. ed., p. 404). There was time enough to call together the populace, the Jesuit rabble, the good working-people of the Church to howl and hiss, and a crowd of children, if need be, to throw stones. It meant four long hours in the pillory. Meantime any impartial spectators there may have been present were asking whether the Ursuline Sisters had orders to let the girl be killed. What tender gaolers the good Sisters made for their sick prisoner may be imagined.

The soil had been excellently well prepared. An active combination of Jesuit magistrates and intriguing ladies had organised a complete system of intimidation. No advocate would ruin his future chances by defending so ill-reputed a client. No one was willing to put up with the mortifications her gaolers kept in readiness for anyone who should face their parlour every day to hold interview with Cadiere. Under these circumstances the defence of the prisoner devolved upon the Syndic of the Aix Bas, M. Chandon. He did not decline the formidable task; but, in much perplexity, he would have preferred a compromise. This the Jesuits refused. Then he showed the stuff he was made of, that he was a man of unassailable honour and an admirable courage. A trained lawyer, he exposed the monstrous irregularity of the proceedings. This meant an irreconcilable quarrel with the Parlement, no less than with the Jesuits. He brought out clearly and distinctly the spiritual incest of the confessor, though he did not, from motives of decency, specify how far his licentious practices had gone. He refrained likewise from speaking of the Girardines, the pious disciples he had got with child,--a fact perfectly well known, but which no witness would have been willing to testify to. Eventually he brought the charge most likely to be practically effective under the circumstances against the criminal priest, attacking him as a Sorcerer. The advocate was greeted with a storm of mockery. He undertook to prove

[p. 298]

the existence of the Devil from a series of texts from Holy Writ, starting with the Gospels,--and his audience only laughed the louder.

The truth had been very adroitly distorted by making the honest Carmelite into a lover of Charlotte's, and the originator of a huge conspiracy of calumny directed against Girard and the Jesuit Fathers. Now the whole tribe of idle loungers and empty-headed worldlings, sneerers and philosophers alike, made fun of both sides equally, entirely impartial between Carmelites and Jesuits, but overjoyed to see the monks engaged in civil war among themselves. The Voltaireans, to anticipate by a few years the name they will presently be known by, the Voltaireans are actually biassed to some extent in favour of the Jesuits, polished men of the world, in preference to the old Mendicant Orders.

So it goes on, confusion growing ever worse confounded. It rains pasquinades, directed more especially against the victim. A love affair plainly, people say, and look at the whole thing in the light of an amusement. Not a student or a scholar but makes his rhymes on Girard and his pupil and revives the old Provencal skits on Madeleine (of the Gauffridi affair), her six thousand imps, the fear these show of the whip, and miracles of the lash which put to flight those infesting Charlotte Cadiere (MS. in the Toulon Library).

As to this particular point Girard's friends found no difficulty in clearing his reputation. He had acted entirely within his rights as a director of consciences and in accordance with ordinary usage. The rod is the attribute of fatherhood, and he had acted for his penitent's good and "for the cure of her soul." It was the custom of the age to thrash demoniacs, thrash madmen, thrash other sufferers from disease. It was the accredited means of driving out the enemy, be this who or what it might, demon or sickness. It was the popular view too; a worthy working-man of Toulon, observing Cadiere's unhappy condition, declared roundly the only cure for the poor patient was a good bull's pizzle.

[p. 299]

Girard, with the powerful supporters he possessed, had really no need to justify himself. And as a matter of fact he takes mighty little trouble to do so. His defence is charming in its offhandedness. He does not condescend so much as to be self-consistent in his depositions; he contradicts his own witnesses. He appears to make a joke of the whole thing, and says, with the swaggering tone of a great lord of the Regency days, that if he has been shut up alone with her, as they state, "it only happened on nine occasions."

"And why else did he do it, the good Father," his friends would ask, "except for the purpose of observing, judging, gauging precisely what he was to make of it?" This is the bounden duty of a director in such circumstances. Read the life of the famous St. Catherine of Genoa. At night her confessor used to conceal himself and remain in her bedroom to witness the wonders she wrought, and catch her out miracle-working, so to speak, flagrante delicto.

"But the unfortunate thing in this case was that hell, that never sleeps, had spread a snare for this lamb of God, and had spued forth this female dragon, this devouring monster, maniac and demoniac, to swallow him up and destroy him in the torrent of calumny."

It is a time-hallowed and excellent custom to strangle monsters in the cradle. But why not in later life as well? The charitable advice of Girard's lady friends was to employ sword and fire on her with the least possible delay. "Let her die!" these religious ladies claimed insistently. Many high-born dames also desired her chastisement, deeming it the height of insolence that the creature should have dared to complain and bring to trial a man of Girard's eminence, who had done her only too great an honour.

True there were in the Parlement some obstinate Jansenists, who as enemies of the Jesuits were more than well-disposed towards the girl. But how could they feel other than beaten and discouraged, seeing ranged against them at one and the same

[p. 300]

time the redoubtable Society of Jesus, Versailles, the Court, the Cardinal Minister, and even the leaders of society at Aix? Were they likely to show a bolder front than the chief administrator of justice, the Chancellor d'Aguesseau, who had proved himself such a broken reed? The "Procureur General" for his part displayed no hesitation; entrusted with the task of accusing Girard, he openly declared himself his friend and gave him his advice how to meet the charges of his accusers.

It was only a question of one thing,--to decide by what act of reparation, what solemn expiation, what exemplary punishment, the complainant, now accused in her turn, should make satisfaction to Girard and to the Jesuits. These latter, for all their gentleness and generosity, agreed that in the interests of religion an example would be useful as a warning both to the Jansenist Convulsionaries and to the swarm of scribbling philosophers now beginning to appear.

On two counts Charlotte Cadiere could be assailed, and a hold obtained over her:

1. She had slandered.--But no law existed punishing slander with death. To get that length, it was needful to go farther afield, and say: "The old Roman text De famosis libellis (of slanderous libels) pronounces the penalty of death against such as have uttered libels injurious to the Emperors or to the religion of the Empire. Now the Jesuits are Religion. Therefore a document reflecting on a Jesuit deserved the last penalty of the law."

2. They had even a better hold than this.--At the opening of the trial the episcopal judge, the judicious Larmedieu, had asked Charlotte if she had not divined the secrets of a number of persons, and she had replied in the affirmative. Therefore she could be qualified, in the terms laid down in the formulary for trials of witchcraft, as a divineress and deceiver. This in itself merited death by all ecclesiastical law. She might even be qualified as a witch, after the statements made by the ladies of Ollioules, who described how at night-time she would be in

[p. 301]

several cells at one and the same time, how she used to weigh softly upon them, etc. Their infatuation, their sudden and unexpected tenderness, had indeed very much the look of bewitchment.

What hindered burning her? Witch-burnings are still common everywhere in the eighteenth century. Spain in a single reign, that of Philip V., burns 1600 persons, even burning a witch as late as 1782. Germany burned a witch in 1751, and Switzerland one in 1781. Rome burns still,--on the sly, it is true, in the furnaces and cellars of the Inquisition. [*5]

"But doubtless France at any rate is more humane?"--France is inconsistent. In 1718 a wizard was burned at Bordeaux. [*6]

In 1724 and 1726 fires were lighted in the Place de Greve for offences which at Versailles passed for schoolboys' tricks. The tutors to the royal infant (Louis XV.), the Duke of Orleans and Fleury, so easy-going at Court, are terribly severe in Paris. An ass-driver and a nobleman, a M. de Chauffours, were burned alive. The beginning of the Cardinal-Minister's supremacy could not be better celebrated than by a reform of manners, by a severe example given the corruptors of public morality.--And what more appropriate example than a solemn and awful doom inflicted on this child of Satan, this girl who has assailed so fatally Father Girard's innocence?

The one thing needful to "thoroughly purge the good Father" was to establish the fact that (even granting he had done wrong

[p. 302]

and had imitated M. de Chauffours) he had been the plaything, the victim of enchantment. The law was perfectly clear on the point; by the forms of ecclesiastical jurisprudence and in strict accordance with recent decisions, someone was bound to be burned. Of the five magistrates on the bench, two only would have burned Girard, while three went against Charlotte Cadiere. A compromise was the result. The three who formed the majority did not insist on the stake and faggot, waived the long-drawn, gruesome spectacle of death by fire, declaring themselves satisfied with death pure and simple.

In the name of the five it was resolved and recommended to the Parlement, "That Charlotte Cadiere, after first undergoing the question, ordinary and extraordinary, be then carried to Toulon, and there in the Place des Prechems, be hanged by the neck and strangled."

The effect was instantaneous and startling,--a prodigious reversal of public opinion. The men of the world, the scoffers, scoffed no more; their laughter was turned into shuddering. Frivolous as they were, they were not prepared to treat so appalling a piece of injustice lightly. They thought little of a girl being seduced, abused, and disgraced, treated as a mere plaything, driven by grief to death or madness; well and good, it was no business of theirs. But when it came to punishment as a criminal, when they pictured the wretched victim, the rope round her neck, being strangled on the gallows, their gorge rose, On all sides echoed the cry, "Never was seen, since the world began, so wicked an upsetting of common justice,--the law of rape applied back foremost, the girl condemned to death for having been corrupted, the seducer strangling his victim!"

A highly unexpected phenomenon in a town like Aix, made up almost exclusively of judges, priests, and fashionables,--the people suddenly shows itself alive, a violent eruption of popular feeling occurs. In serried ranks a crowd of men of every class marches with one impulse to the Ursuline convent. They call for Charlotte Cadiere and her mother, and on their appearing

[p. 303]

cry out, "Courage, mademoiselle, courage! We are with you . . . fear nothing!"

The great eighteenth century, justly entitled by Hegel the "reign of mind," deserves even better to be known as the "reign of humanity." Ladies of distinction, like Madame de Sevigne's grand-daughter, the charming Madame de Simiane, took possession of the poor girl, and gave her refuge in their bosom. More beautiful and more touching still, the Jansenist ladies, women of a fanatic purity of life, so hard on each other and displaying so exaggerated an austerity, sacrificed law to mercy in this crisis, threw their arms round the neck of the poor terrified creature, purified her with their chaste kisses and rebaptised her with their tears.

If Provence is fierce and strenuous, she is only the more admirable at such moments,--fierce in her generosity and strenuous for great aims. Something of the same sort was seen during the early triumphs of Mirabeau, when he had about him at Marseilles a million of men. Here, in anticipation of a grander revolution, was a gallant revolutionary episode, a mighty protest against the imbecile Government of the day, and against the Jesuits, the Minister Fleury's special proteges,--a unanimous protest in favour of humanity and pity, a plea for the defence of a woman, a child, so barbarously immolated. The Jesuits conceived the idea of actually organising among their disreputable hangers-on, their clients and the beggars depending on their charity, a nondescript mob, which they armed with handbells and cudgels to make head against the Cadieres,--these being the nicknames given to the respective parties. The second named included practically everybody. Marseilles rose en masse to carry in triumph the son of the advocate Chandon, while Toulon declared so emphatically for their unfortunate compatriot that the populace was for burning the Jesuits' house there to the ground. The most touching of all these testimonials came to Charlotte from Ollioules. A plain simple boarder at the convent school, Mademoiselle Agnes, young and timid as

[p. 304]

she was, followed the generous impulse of her heart, threw herself into the war of pamphlets, wrote and printed Charlotte Cadiere's apology.

This deep and powerful movement reacted on the Parlement itself. The enemies of the Jesuits were instantly encouraged and fortified, so much so as to brave the threats of those in power, the influence the Jesuits could bring to bear, the lightnings of Versailles that Fleury might hurl at them. [*7]

Girard's own friends, seeing their numbers decreasing and their ranks thinning, called for an immediate decision,--which was given October 11th, 1731.

No one ventured, in view of popular feeling, to propose confirming the savage recommendations of the Bench to have Charlotte Cadiere strangled. Twelve counsellors sacrificed their honour, and declared Girard innocent; of the other twelve, certain Jansenist members condemned him to the stake as a sorcerer, while three or four, of a more reasonable temper, condemned him to death as a villain. Twelve being against twelve, the President, Lebret, had to give the casting vote. He gave it for Girard. Acquitted on the charge of sorcery and any crime involving death, he was sent back, as a priest and confessor, for trial before the ecclesiastical tribunals, presided over by the Ordinary of Toulon, his friend and intimate, Larmedieu.

The world at large, the crowd of indifferent spectators, was satisfied. Indeed, so little attention has been paid to the terms of the decision that even now M. Fabre states, and M. Mery repeats the statement, "that both parties were acquitted." This

[p. 305]

is to the last degree inaccurate. Charlotte Cadiere was dealt with as guilty of calumny, and condemned to see her memorials and acts of defence torn up and burned by the hand of the common hangman.

Moreover, there lurked a grim implication underneath. Cadiere being thus marked out, branded as a slanderer, the Jesuits were inevitably bound to push their endeavours, to continue their intrigues subterraneously, to follow up their successes with Cardinal Fleury and call down on her secret and arbitrary penalties. The town of Aix saw this plainly enough, and felt instinctively that the Parlement was really betraying her into the hands of her enemies. Hence such a formidable burst of indignation against President Lebret, and such alarming threats, he asked that the Flanders Regiment might be sent for to protect him.

Girard fled in a closed carriage, but was recognised, and would have been killed had he not rushed into the Jesuit church, where the hypocritical scoundrel started saying Mass. He escaped eventually, and returned to Dole, honoured and glorified by the society, He died there in 1733, in the odour of sanctity. The courtier Lebret died in 1735.

Cardinal Fleury did whatever he could to please the Jesuits. At Aix, at Toulon, at Marseilles, he exiled, banished, and imprisoned. Toulon in especial was guilty as having carried Girard in effigy to the doors of his Girardines, and having borne aloft in ridicule the sacrosanct "tricorne" (three-cornered hat) of the Jesuits.

Charlotte Cadiere should under the terms of the judgment, have been at liberty to return there and seek refuge with her mother. But I dare affirm she was never suffered to come back to the ardent stage of her native town, which had so loudly declared itself in her favour. What became of her? To this day no one has been able to discover.

If the mere crime of showing interest in her earned imprisonment, we cannot doubt she was not long in being imprisoned herself; that the Jesuits easily procured a lettre de cachet from

[p. 306]

[paragraph continues] Versailles to shut up the poor girl in a prison cell, and so stifle and bury along with her a business that had been so unfortunate for their Order. No doubt they waited till public attention was directed elsewhere, till people were thinking of other matters. Then the tiger's claw would seize her again, and she would be plunged in the abyss of some remote, unknown convent, and her voice stifled for ever in an in pace.

She was only twenty-one at the time the judgment was delivered, and she had always hoped for a short life. Pray God, she had her wish! [*8]

Footnotes

^287:1 Page 80 of the folio edition, vol. i., p. 33 of the 12mo.

^288:2 Trial, 12mo., vol. ii., p. 198.

^289:3 Ibid., 12mo., vol. i., p. 44.

^292:4 Muyart de Vouglans, at the end of his Loix criminelles, fol., 1780.

^301:5 This detail is sent us by a "Consultor" of the Holy Office still alive.

^301:6 I am not here speaking of executions the people carried out on their own account. A hundred years ago, in a village of Provence, an old woman, to whom a landowner refused an alms, flew into a passion and said, "You will be dead to-morrow!" He had a stroke and died. The whole village,--not the poor peasants only, but the most respectable inhabitants,--gathered in a crowd, seized the old woman and put her on a pile of vine-cuttings, where she was burned alive. The Parlement made a pretence of inquiry, but no one was punished. To the present day the people of the village in question are called woman-burners (brulo-fenno) by their neighbours.

^304:7 A grotesque anecdote symbolises and wonderfully well expresses the condition of the Parlement. The official reporter was reading his work, his conclusions with regard to the case as a trial for witchcraft and the share the Devil might have had in the affair. Suddenly a crash is heard; a black man comes tumbling down the chimney. . . . All fly in terror, except only the reporter himself, who is entangled in his own gown and unable to stir. . . . The man explains and apologises, being nothing more nor less than a chimney-sweep who has made a mistake between different flues (Pappon, iv. 430). In very fact it may well be said a great dread, that of the people, of the devil of popular indignation, pinned the Parlement down, and held it motionless, like the judge entangled in his gown in this story.

^306:8 Persecution has gone on, both by means of the publication of falsified documents, and even in the pages of the historians of the present day. The Trial (folio, 1733) itself, our main source of information, is followed by an Index cleverly compiled to tell against Charlotte Cadiere. Under her name is found noted consecutively and fully (as proven facts) anything and everything that was alleged against her, except that no reference is made to her retractation of what the drugged wine made her say. Under Girard, scarcely a word; for his doings the reader is referred to a crowd of passages he will never have the patience to look up.--In binding some copies care has been taken to place in front of the Trial itself, to serve as antidotes, sundry apologies and defences of Girard's, and the like.--Voltaire makes very light of the whole business, poking fun at both sides, particularly at the Jansenists.--The historians of our own day, who most certainly have not read the Trial, MM. Cabasse, Fabre, Mery, suppose themselves impartial, and sum up dead against the victim!

     The Sorceress, by Jules Michelet, [1939], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 307]

  

EPILOGUE

A WOMAN of genius, in a very noble burst of enthusiasm, represents herself as seeing the two spirits, whose mutual struggle made the Middle Ages, coming at last to an understanding, drawing together, uniting. Examining one another at nearer hand, they discover, late in the day it may be, traces of kinship between them. What if they were brothers, and their age-long strife nothing more than a misunderstanding? The heart speaks, and they are melted. The proud and gallant outlaw, the tenderhearted persecutor, forgetting the embittered past, spring forward eagerly to throw themselves into each other's arms (George Sand, Consuelo).

Amiable fancy of a great-souled woman; and others too have entertained the same beautiful dream. The gentle Montanelli wrote a fine poem embodying the notion. Indeed, who would not welcome the alluring hope of seeing the combat here below end in peace and a reconciliation so touching?

What thinks the wise bard Merlin [*1] on the point? In the mirror of his lake, whose depth he alone can plumb, what has he seen? What has he to say in the colossal epopee he gave us in 1860? [*2] That Satan, if he disarm, will do so only on the Day of Judgment. Then, and not till then, pacified at last, both powers will repose side by side in one common death.

Doubtless it is not difficult, by a travesty of their true nature, to arrive at a compromise. The exhaustion of long-continued struggles, by enervating every fibre, makes way for certain combinations. The last chapter showed us two shadows agreeing to make covenant in falsehood; the shadow of Satan, the

[p. 308]

shadow of Jesus, rendering little services one to the other, the devil posing as friend of Loyola, pious enthusiasm and diabolic possession going hand in hand, hell melted in the Sacred Heart!

These are mild times of ours, and hate far less virulent. Nowadays indeed men's animosity is pretty well confined to their friends. I have seen Methodists admire the Jesuits. I have seen those whom the Church throughout the Middle Ages brands as sons of Satan, whether legists or physicians, making prudent compact with the old vanquished spirit.

But, leaving mere fancies on one side, let us ask, Those who seriously expect Satan to come to terms and agree to peace, have they really weighed the problem involved?

The obstacle is not any surviving rancour. The dead are dead; the millions of victims, Albigensians, Vaudois, Protestants, Moors, Jews, American Indians, sleep in peace. The standing martyr of the Middle Ages, the Sorceress, says no word; her ashes are scattered to the winds.

Well, what is it, can you say, that protests, what is the solid barrier that divides the two spirits, and bars their coming together? It is a prodigious reality that has taken shape in the last five hundred years,--that Titanic work the Church has declared accursed, the vast edifice of the sciences and of modern institutions which she excommunicated stone by stone, but which each anathema only made more imposing and raised higher by yet another story. Is there one science you can name that was not originally a revolt against authority?

There is only one way to reconcile the two spirits and unite the two Churches. This is to demolish the new one, the one which, from its earliest beginnings, was declared sinful and damnable. Let us destroy, if we can, all the sciences of nature, demolish the observatory, the museum, the botanic garden, the school of medicine, every library of modern books. Let us burn our legal enactments and our codes. Let us go back to the Canon Law.

These novelties, one and all, were Satanic; no progress ever made but was his guilty work.

[p. 309]

The same wicked logician it was who, heedless of clerical law, preserved and refashioned that of the philosophers and Jesuits, based on the impious doctrine of Free Will.

The same dangerous magician it was who, while Churchmen were disputing about the sex of angels and the like sublime questions, stuck obstinately to facts and created chemistry and physics and mathematics. Yes! Mathematics no less than the rest had to be begun afresh,--another revolt against authority, for had not men been burned for saying, three make three, and not One?

Medicine above all was truly and indeed Satanic, a revolt against disease, the merited scourge of an offended God. Plainly a sinful act to stay the soul on its road towards heaven and replunge it in the life of this world!

How expiate all this? How suppress and rage to earth this accumulated pile of successive revolts, which to-day constitutes the whole of modern life? To re-enter the path of the angels, will Satan undo this great work? Never! for it rests on three eternal foundation-stones,--Reason, Right, and Nature.

 

So triumphantly victorious is the new spirit, it clean forgets its previous struggles, and scarcely deigns to-day to give a thought to its own triumph. It has been no useless task to recall the pitifulness of its earliest beginnings, the humble shapes, so rough and barbarous, so cruelly grotesque, it assumed in the days of persecution, when a woman, the unhappy Sorceress, gave the first impetus to its scientific and popular vogue. Bolder far than the heretic, the doubting half-Christian, the man of knowledge who still kept one foot within the sacred circle, she eagerly fled from such constraints, and free on the free soil, strove to build herself an altar of the rude wild boulders of untrammelled nature.

She perished in her turn, as she was bound to do. But how? Mainly by the progress of those very sciences she first originated, by the hands of the physician, the naturalist, for whom she had worked so well.

[p. 310]

The Sorceress has perished for ever, but not so the fairy. She will appear afresh under this form, which is immortal.

Woman, busied during the later centuries with men's affairs, has in requital lost her own true role,--that of healing, and consoling, that of the fairy that restores to health and happiness.

This is her true priestesshood,--hers by right divine, no matter what the Church may have said to the contrary.

With her delicate organs, her love of the finest detail, her tender appreciation of life, she is called to be its quick-eyed confidante in every science of observation. With her gentle heart and sweet pity, her instinctive kindness, she is a heaven-sent healer. Sick folk and children are very much alike; both need a woman to tend them.

She will pursue the sciences, and bring into their domain gentleness and humanity, like a smile on Nature's face.

Anti-Nature pales in death; and the day is not far off when her final setting will mark a dawn of blessed augury to mankind.

 

The gods wane, but not God. Quite otherwise; the more they wane, the more He waxes strong. He resembles an eclipsing light, that after each period of obscuration only shines out the brighter.

It is a good sign to see these things openly discussed, in the newspapers even. The feeling is taking root that all questions go back to the great fundamental and sovereign questions--education, organisation, the child, the woman. Such is God, and such the world.

All this proclaims the times are ripe.

 

So near is it, this religious dayspring, that again and again I thought I saw it dawning in the desert where I have completed this book of mine.

How bright and sunlit, how rugged and how lovely my desert home is! My nest was perched on a rock in the great roads of Toulon, in a humble villa, amid aloes and cypresses, cactuses

[p. 311]

and wild roses. In front, this vast basin of flashing sea; behind, the bare amphitheatre, where might sit at ease the States General of the world.

The countryside is quite African in general aspect, and has a steely splendour by day that dazzles the eyes. But on winter mornings, especially in December, the spot was full of divine mystery. I used to rise exactly at six, when the Arsenal gun gives the signal to begin work. From six to seven I enjoyed an entrancing hour. The keen, steely (if this is a permissible expression) scintillation of the stars put the moon to shame and stood out against the coming dawn. Before the day broke, and afterwards during the struggle between the two lights, the extraordinary translucency of the air allowed me to see and hear at incredible distances. I could make out every object at two leagues away. The smallest details of the distant mountains, trees, rocks, houses, contours of surfaces, all showed up with the most delicate and precise definition. My senses seemed multiplied, and I felt myself a new being, free, winged, emancipated. The moment was one of crystal clearness, of an austere beauty and infinite purity! . . . Involuntarily I would find myself exclaiming, "How now! can it be I am still a man?"

An intangible shade of blue--a blue the rosy dawn as yet respected and did not dare disturb, a holy ether, a sublimated spirit--made all Nature spiritual.

But a subtle change was in progress, a gradual, a gentle transformation could be felt approaching. A mighty marvel was at hand, soon to demolish and eclipse these quiet beauties. The impending transformation, the expected glories of the day, detracted nothing from the charm of being yet in the divine night, of lurking half-hid in the half-light, still enwrapped in the same enchanted wonderland. . . . Come, Sun! We stand all ready with our adorations, yet would fain enjoy yet another, a last, moment of waking dreams. . . .

The Sun is rising. . . . Let us await his coming in good hope and thoughtful reverence.

Footnotes

^307:1 Victor Hugo.

^307:2 La Legende des Siecles.

     The Sorceress, by Jules Michelet, [1939], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 312]

  

NOTES AND ELUCIDATIONS

Two only have been published in a complete form (see Limburch); the originals are at Toulouse, and extend from 1307 to 1326. Magi has taken extracts from two others (Acad. de Toulouse, 1790, 4to, vol. iv., p. 19). Lamothe-Langon has done the same for those of Carcassonne (Hist. de l'Inquisition en France, vol. iii.), Llorente for the Spanish Registers. These mysterious records were at Toulouse, and no doubt in all other cases, enclosed in bags suspended very high up on the walls, and, besides, sewn up on either margin in such a way that they could not be consulted without unstitching the whole. They afford us a valuable specimen, throwing precious light on all the Inquisitions throughout Europe, for the methods of procedure were everywhere precisely similar (see Directorium Eymerici, 1358). What especially strikes one in these Registers is not merely the vast number of those punished, but the multitude of persons immured, shut up, that is to say, in a tiny stone cell (camerula), or in a dungeon in pace, on bread and water. Another is the countless number of the Crozats, as they were called, who had to wear the red cross in breast and back. They were the best treated, and were allowed provisionally to live in their own houses. Only every Sunday after Mass they had to go and be whipped by the Cure of their parish (Ordinance of 1326, Archives of Carcassonne, quoted by L.-Langon, iii., 191). The most cruel part, especially for women, was that the common people and children used to jeer them unmercifully. They were liable, apart from any fresh offence, to be taken into custody

[p. 313]

again and immured. Their sons and grandsons were always suspect, and very readily immured.

In the thirteenth century everything is heresy; in the fourteenth magic. The transition is easy from one to the other. According to the rough-and-ready theory of the period, heresy differs little from diabolical possession; erroneous belief of every sort, as well as sin of every sort, is a demon to be driven out by torture or the lash. For the devils are very sensitive to pain (Michael Psellus). The Crozats and all persons suspected of heresy are ordered to avoid any dealings with sorcery (D. Vaissette, Lang). This change from heresy to magic is an advance in terror in which the judge was bound to find his advantage. In trials for heresy--trials of men for the most part--there are assessors and others present. But in those for magic, almost invariably trials of women, he has the right to be alone, tete-a-tete with the accused.

Observe further how under the dread name of Sorcery were included little by little all the minor superstitions, the time-honoured poetry of hearth and meadow, Robin Goodfellow, Brownies, and fairies. What woman can be held innocent now? The most pious believed in all these things. On retiring to rest, before making her prayer to the Virgin, every housewife left out a drink of milk for her little friend. Maid and goodwife offered at night a little bonfire to the fairies, by day a bunch of flowers to the saints.

And for this she is charged as a sorceress,--brought up before the man in black! He cross-questions her,--always the same questions, always the same, those put to every secret society, to the Albigensians, the Templars, all alike. Let her bethink her; the executioner is near by, all ready in the vaulted chamber yonder, the strapado, the wooden horse, the boots, the iron wedges. She faints for fear, and says she knows not what, "It was not I. . . . I will never do it again. . . . It was my mother, my sister, my cousin, forced me, led me on. . . . What was I to do? I was afraid of her, I went there all trembling in

[p. 314]

spite of my own wishes" (Trepidabat; sororia, sua Guilelma trahebat, et metu faciebat multa,--"She was all a-tremble; her sister Wilhelmina betrayed her, and she did many things out of mere terror."--Reg. Tolos. 1307, p. 10, in Limburch).

Few were able to resist. In 1329 a certain Jeanne perished for having refused to denounce her father (Reg. de Carcassonne, L.-Langon, 3, 202). But with rebels of the sort other means were tried. A mother and her three daughters had successfully held out against the question. Then the inquisitor gets hold of the second daughter, makes love to her, and in this way reassures her to such a degree that she tells him everything, and betrays her mother and sisters (Limburch, Lamothe-Langon). The result is, all were burned together!

What broke down the spirit more even than torture was horror of the in pace. Women died of the terror of being walled up in the little black hole. In Paris could be seen the public spectacle of a dog-kennel in the courtyard of the Filles Repenties (Magdalen Refuge), where the Dame d'Escoman was kept immured (except for a slit through which her daily bread was thrown to her), lying amid her own excrements. In some cases their fears were worked upon till epilepsy supervened. For instance, the poor, weak, fair-haired fifteen-year-old child, Madeleine de la Palud, whom Michaelis himself admits having terrified into denouncing her friends, by putting her in an ancient ossuary to lie on dead men's bones. In Spain, more often than not, the in pace, far from being a place of peace, had a door by means of which they could come every day at a certain hour to work the victim, for the good of her soul, by applying the lash. A monk condemned to the in pace begs and prays for death in preference to such a doom (Llorente).

As to the auto-da-fes, read in Limburch what eye-witnesses say of their horrors. In particular consult Dellon, who himself once wore the san-benito (Inquisition de Goa, 1688).

From the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries downwards such was the reign of terror that we find persons of the highest condition

[p. 315]

abandon rank, fortune, everything, the moment they were accused, and take to flight. This is what Dame Alice Kyteler, mother of the Lord Seneschal of Ireland, did when charged with sorcery by a mendicant friar who had been made bishop (1324). She escaped, but her confidante was burned. The Seneschal made apology, and was degraded permanently. (Th. Wright, Proceedings against Dame Alice, etc., 4to, London, 1843.)

The whole system takes shape from 1200 to 1300. It was in 1233 the mother of St. Louis founded the great prison of the Immuratz at Toulouse. What happens? Folk begin to give themselves to the Devil. The first mention of the Covenant with Satan dates from 1222 (Caesar Heisterbach). People are no longer heretics, half-Christians, but satanic, anti-Christians. The wild Sabbatic Round makes its appearance in 1353 (Proces de Toulouse, in L.-Langon, 3, 360), on the eve of the Jacquerie.

NOTE 2. Method of Procedure.

The first two chapters, which are abstracts of my Lectures on the Middle Ages, explain by the general condition of society why humanity despaired, while chapters 3, 4, and 5 explain by the moral condition of the soul why women in especial despaired, and were led to sell themselves to the devil and become Sorceresses.

It was only in 553 A.D. that the Church adopted the atrocious resolution of damning the spirits or demons (the words are synonymous in Greek), inexorably, without room for repentance of any sort whatsoever. In this she followed the African harshness of St. Augustine against the more lenient advice of the Greeks, Origen, and antiquity generally (Haag, Hist. des Dogmes, i., 80-3). From that time on, theologians study and determine the temperament, the physiology of spirits. They possess or do not possess bodies, vanish in smoke, but are fond of heat, fear the rod, etc. Every detail is perfectly well known, and agreed upon in 1050 (Michael Psellus, Energie des esprits ou 

[p. 316]

demons). This Byzantine writer gives precisely the same idea of them as that afforded by the Western legends (see numerous passages in Grimm's Mythologie, Maury's Les Fees, etc.). It is not till the fourteenth century all spirits are declared in so many words to be devils. Nodier's Trilby, and the majority of similar stories, are spoiled by the fact that they all stop short of the tragic instant when the goodwife finds her Robin Goodfellow or friendly Brownie suddenly transformed into a satanic lover.

In chapters 5-12, and onwards, from p. 41, I have endeavoured to investigate the question, How did women become Sorceresses or Witches? It is a difficult and delicate inquiry, and one that none of my predecessors have attempted. They pay no heed to the successive steps by which this humble state of things was reached. Their witch rises full grown, as if from the bowels of the earth, but human nature is not made that way. The investigation involved the most arduous work. The ancient texts are few and far between, and such as can be unearthed in the made-up books of 1500-1600 are hard to distinguish and identify. Having found the texts, how to date them, to say definitely, "This is of the twelfth, that of the thirteenth, the fourteenth century"? I should never have ventured on the ground at all if I had not already had in my favour a long familiarity with those times, my persistent studies in Grimm, Ducange, etc., and my book Origines du Droit (1837). All this has helped me enormously. In these formulas, the Usages that vary so very little, in the Customs that seem fixed everlastingly, nevertheless the historic sense must have its say. Other periods, other forms; these we learn to recognise, to date them psychologically. We can perfectly distinguish the sombre gravity of older times from the pedantic gossipy narrative of periods comparatively modern. If archaeology can decide from the shape of such and such a Gothic arch that a building is of such and such a date, with how much more certainty can historical psychology demonstrate that a particular moral circum-

[p. 317]

stance belongs to a particular century and to no other, that a particular idea, a particular passion, equally impossible in more ancient ages and in more modern epochs, was precisely what was to be expected at a particular date? Indeed, in this latter case the criterion is less liable to be misunderstood. Archaeologists have on occasion been mistaken as to some pointed arch which has been cleverly reconstructed. Moreover, in the chronology of art certain forms may very well be repeated. But in the history of morals and manners this is impossible. The cruel record of the past which I here reproduce will never recreate its monstrous dogmas, its appalling dreams. In bronze, in iron, they are fixed in one and the same place for ever in the fatality of the ages.

Now for my especial sin, where criticism will be down on me. In my long analysis, historical and psychological, of the evolution of the Sorceress down to 1300, in preference to indulging in long-drawn prolix explanations, I have frequently taken a minor thread, biographical and dramatic, the lip of one and the same woman, as it were, down the course of three hundred years. This, please note, only applies to six or seven chapters altogether, and even in this short section it will easily be realised how everything is based on a firm foundation of historical fact. To give a single instance,--if I have given the word Toledo as the sacred name of the capital city of the magicians, I had on my side not only the weight of M. Soldan's deliberate opinion, not only the long passage in Lancre, but two very ancient texts to boot. We read in Caesar von Heisterbach how the students of Bavaria and Suabia go to Toledo to learn necromancy. It is a master of Toledo who originates the crimes of Sorcery prosecuted by Conrad of Marburg.

However, after all, the Saracen superstitions, which came from Spain or from the East (as Jacques de Vitry alleges), exerted only an indirect influence, as did the old Roman cult of Hecate or Dianom. The mighty cry of pain, which is the true and inward meaning of the Witches' Sabbath, reveals quite a

[p. 318]

different state of things. It expresses not only material sufferings, voices, old miseries and wretchedness, but a very abyss of agony. The lowest depths of moral suffering are not sounded till towards the days of St. Louis, Philippe le Bel, particularly among certain classes which felt and suffered even more keenly than the old-time serf. Such must have been in especial the good (well-to-do) peasants, rich villeins, serfs who were mayors of villages, whose existence I have noted as early as the twelfth century, and who in the fourteenth, under the new system of imposts, became responsible (like the Curiales of antiquity) for the taxes, and are doubly martyrised by the king and by the barons, crushed under extortions,--their lives, in fact, made a living hell. Hence the fits of despair that send them hastening to the spirit of hidden treasures, the devil of money. Add in mockery and insult, who do still more perhaps towards producing the "Bride of Satan."

A trial at Toulouse, making in 1353 the first mention of the Sabbatical Round, enabled me to put my finger on the exact date. And what date more likely in the nature of things? The Black Death is heavy on the world, "killing the third part of all mankind." The Pope is degraded. The barons, beaten by the English and prisoners, are extorting their ransom from the unhappy serf, stripping him to the very shirt. Epilepsy is the great scourge of the time, succeeded by the Civil War, the Jacquerie. . . . The folk are so mad with misery, they set to dancing.

NOTE 3. Satan as Physician, Love-philtres, etc.

Reading the admirable works composed in our own day on the history of the sciences, I am surprised by one circumstance. The authors seem to think everything was discovered by the doctors, those half-schoolmen, who at every step were hindered by their cloth, their dogmas, the deplorable habits of mind due to their scholastic training. And others, who walked free of these fetters, 

[p. 319]

the sorceresses and witches, did they find out nothing? It were unreasonable to think so; and Paracelsus states the very opposite. In the little we know of their recipes, a remarkably good sense is apparent. To the present moment the Solanaceae, so freely employed by them, are considered the especial remedy of the dread disease which threatened the world in the fourteenth century. I have been surprised to see in M. Coste (Hist. du Developpement des Corps, vol. ii., p. 55) that the opinion of M. Paul Dubois as to the effects of iced water at a certain moment was in precise conformity with the practice of the witches at their Sabbaths. Consider, on the other hand, the idiotic prescriptions of the great and learned doctors of those times,--the marvellous effects to be expected from mule's urine, and the like (Agrippa, De Occulta Philosophia, vol. ii., p. 24, Lyons edition, 8vo.).

With regard to their love-potions, philtres, etc., it has not been noticed how closely the covenants between lovers resembled those between friends and brothers in arms. For the latter consult Grimm (Rechts Alterthumer) and my Origines; for the first, , Sprenger, Grillandus, and a host of other writers. In all cases they follow identically the same lines. It is invariably either Nature called upon and taken to witness, or the employment, more or less blasphemous, of the sacraments and holy things of the Church, or a feasting in common, such and such a drink, such and such a loaf or cake, shared between the contracting parties. To this add certain forms of communion, by blood, by this or that excretion.

But, no matter how intimate and closely personal these may appear, the sovereign communion of love is always a confarreatio, the sharing of bread which has absorbed magic virtue. It does so, sometimes in virtue of the Mass pronounced over it (Grillandus, 316), sometimes by contact with, and emanations from, the beloved object. On the marriage night, in order to arouse love, the bride's pasty is eaten (Theirs, Superstitions, iv., 548). To rouse a similar feeling in the breast of the man to be 

[p. 320]

tied (such is the phrase), the woman makes him consume a particular sweetmeat she has prepared for him, etc.

NOTE 4. The Last Act of the Witches' Sabbath.

When mankind has completely awakened from its prodigious dream of two thousand years, and can coolly and quietly take stock of Christian society in the Middle Ages, two astounding facts will become apparent, facts unique in the history of the world, viz. 1: Adultery was one of its recognised institutions, normal, established, esteemed, sung and celebrated in all the monuments of literature, noble and bourgeois alike, in every poem and every fabliau, and 2: Incest is the ordinary condition of serfs, a condition of things clearly manifested at the Witches' Sabbath, which is their one and only opportunity of freedom, the expression of their true life, where they show themselves for what they are.

I have questioned whether incest was officially and publicly displayed at these functions, as Lancre maintains. But I make no question as to the fact itself.

Economic in the main this state of things,--a result of the wretched state in which the serfs were kept. Women being less efficient workers, were regarded as so many useless mouths. One was enough for a family. The birth of a girl was lamented as a calamity (see my Origines); and the child received next to no attention. But many could possibly survive. The eldest only of the brothers married, so hiding under a Christian mask the polyandry that was the actual fact. Between them, a thorough understanding and conspiracy of infertility. This is the bottom of the mournful mystery, which so many witnesses attest without comprehending what it really implied.

One of the most weighty of these, in my eyes, is Boguet, serious, upright, and conscientious, who in his remote Jura country, in his mountain district of Saint-Claude, was bound to find the customs of older days better preserved than elsewhere,

[p. 321]

and faithfully followed with all the obstinate tenacity of peasant routine. Boguet also affirms two important facts: 1, incest, even incest between mother and son; 2, unfruitful, undelightful pleasure, child-bearing made an impossibility.

It is appalling,--whole nations of women submitting to such sacrilege. I say nations advisedly; these Sabbaths were enormous assemblages,--12,000 souls in one small Basque canton (see Lancre); 6,000 in one pretty hamlet, La Mirandole (see Spina).

A terrible revelation indeed of the insignificant moral influence the Church exerted. It has been supposed that with its Latin, its Byzantine metaphysics, barely comprehensible to its clergy themselves, it was Christianising the people. And lo! at the only moment when the people is free and can manifest its true nature, it shows itself worse than pagan. Self-interest, calculation, family consolidation, have more effect than all the empty teaching of clerics. Incest of father and daughter would have been comparatively useless in this direction, and less is heard of it. That of mother and son is specially enjoined by Satan. Why? Because among these uncivilised races the young labourer, on the first awaking of his passions, would have escaped from the family control, would have been lost for the common household, just when he was becoming of precious value to it. It was hoped to keep him to bounds, to nail him to the home, at any rate for a long while, by means of this strongly constraining tie, "That his mother incurred damnation for him."

But how could she ever consent to such a thing? We can only say, look at the cases, happily rare, which occur at the present day. The thing happens only under conditions of the extremity of destitution. It is a hard saying, but a true one: excess of evil fortune demoralises and depraves. The spirit once broken has small power of resistance left, it is weak and flaccid. The poor, in their half-savage life, so bare of everything as it is, spoil their children excessively. In the home of the destitute widow and the forsaken wife or mistress, the child is "monarch

[p. 322]

of all he surveys," and the mother has no strength, when he grows up, to oppose his will. How much more so in the Middle Ages! The woman was crushed to the earth on three several sides.

The Church keeps her down at the lowest level of degradation,--she is Eve, and sin incarnate. In the house she is beaten; at the Sabbath immolated, we have read how. At bottom she is neither of Satan nor of Jesus; she is nothing, and has nothing. She would die in her child. But they should beware of making a creature so unhappy, for under this hail of agony, what is not pain, what is sweetness and tenderness, may in revenge turn into the frenzy of despair. This is the horror of the Middle Ages. For all its spiritual aspects, it lifts from the hidden depths incredible things that should have never left them; it goes searching and scrutinising the muddy under-regions of the soul.

Still the poor suffering creature would fain stifle all this. Very different from the high-born lady, she can sin only out of submissiveness. Her husband will have it so, and Satan will have it so. She is afraid, and weeps at the idea; but her reluctance goes for little. But, for all the constraint she is under, the result is not less terrible in the way of perversion of the senses and degradation of the mind. It is a hell on earth. She is left horrorstricken, half wild with remorse and passionate revolt. The son, if success has been realised, sees an enemy in his own father; a breath of parricidal fury haunts the house, tainted with this abomination. One is horrified to picture what a society such as this must have been, a society where the family, so fatally corrupted and divided against itself, went on its way in gloomy dumbness, wearing a heavy mask of lead, under the rod of a witless authority that saw nothing and believed in nothing but its own supremacy. What a flock of spiritless sheep! What senseless, brainless shepherds! They had there before their very eyes a monstrous spectacle of calamity, grief, and sin, a spectacle unheard of before or since. But they only looked in the pages

[p. 323]

of their books, learned their lesson there, and repeated vain words by rote. Words! words! this resumes all their history. Their whole meaning was a tongue; phrasing and phrases, and nothing else. One name will be theirs for ever--Talkmongers.

NOTE 5. Literature of Sorcery and Witchcraft.

Its beginning dates from about 1400. The books composing it are of two kinds and of two periods--(1) those of the monkish inquisitors of the fifteenth century; (2) those of the lay judges of the days of Henri IV. and Louis XIII.

The huge Lyons compilation, composed and dedicated to the inquisitor Nitard, reproduces a crowd of these monkish treatises. I have compared them one with another, and sometimes with the old editions. At bottom there is very little in them; and the everlasting repetitions are wearisome to the last degree. The earliest in date (about 1440) is the prince of fools, a genuine Teutonic dullard, the Dominican Nider. In his Formicarius each chapter begins by drawing out a parallel between ants and heretics or sorcerers, the deadly sins, etc. This comes very near the confines of mere idiocy. He explains most satisfactorily the necessity there was to burn Jeanne d'Arc. This book possessed such attractions that the majority of the rest copied from it--Sprenger in particular, the great Sprenger, whose merits have elsewhere been insisted on. But how say all there is to be said, how exhaust this mine of asininities? "Fe-mina comes from fe and minus; because a woman has less faith than a man." And a few lines further--"She is indeed light-minded and credulous, always ready to believe." Solomon was right when he said, "As a jewel of gold in a swine's snout, so is a fair woman which is without discretion. . . . Her mouth is smoother than oil: but her latter end is bitter as wormwood" (Prov. xi. 22, v. 3, 4). But there, what cause for wonder? Was she not made out of a crooked rib, that is to say, a rib which is distorted, turned against man?

[p. 324]

The Marteau (Hammer) of Sprenger is the representative work, the type, followed as a rule by the other manuals, the Marteaux, Fouets, Fustigations (Hammers, Whips, Cudgellings), issued later by the Spinas, Jacquiers, Castro, Grillandus, etc. The last-named, a Florentine and inquisitor at Arezzo (1520), has some curious particulars as to philtres, and gives some interesting stories. It comes out quite clearly from what he says that there was, over and above the actual objective Witches' Sabbath, an imaginary Sabbath, which many terrified individuals believed themselves to attend, especially women somnambulists, who would get up in the night and scour the country. A young man, crossing the fields at the first peep of dawn, and following the course of a brook, hears a very soft voice hailing him, but in timid, trembling accents. Looking, he sees a pitiful sight--a woman's white body almost naked, save for a scanty pair of drawers. Shuddering and shamefaced, she was hiding among the brambles. He recognises a neighbour; and she begs him to rescue her. "What were you doing there?" "I was looking for my donkey." He expresses incredulity, whereupon she bursts into tears. The poor woman, who had very likely in her somnambulism slipped out of her husband's bed and wandered away, starts accusing herself. The Devil took her to the Witches' Sabbath; while conducting her home again he heard a church bell, and let her fall. She tried to ensure the youth's discretion by giving him a cap, a pair of boots, and three cheeses, but the silly fellow could not hold his tongue, and bragged of what he had seen. She was arrested. Grillandus, being away at the time, could not conduct her trial, but she was burned, for all that. He speaks of it complacently, and says, the carnal-minded butcher, "She was a fine woman and plump" (pulchra et satis pingeris).

From monk to monk the snowball goes on, ever growing. About 1600, the compilers being themselves subjected to compilation, and supplemented by the later recruits, we arrive at an enormous book, the Disquisitiones Magicae, of the Spaniard Del Rio. In his Auto-da-fe de Logrono (reprinted by Lancre),

[p. 325]

he gives a detailed description of a Sabbath, very curious, but one of the silliest productions to be found in writing. At the banquet, for first course, they eat children hashed: for the second, dead wizards' flesh. Satan, who understands his guests' little ways, conducts the company to the door, holding as a candle the arm of a child who has died unbaptised, etc., etc.

Does this exhaust the absurdities? Not a bit of it. The prize and crown of folly belong to the Dominican Michaelis--in the Gauffridi affair, 1610. His Sabbath is undoubtedly the most improbable of all. To begin with, they assemble "by sound of horn"--surely an excellent way of securing their own capture. The Sabbath is celebrated "every day." Each day has its own particular crime, as well as each class of the hierarchy. Those of the lowest class, novices and folk of small account, get their hand in as a beginning by killing babies. Those of the upper class, the gentlemen magicians, are assigned the part of blaspheming, defying, and insulting God. They do not condescend to the trouble of evil spells and bewitchments; these they perform by means of their valets and waiting-maids, who constitute the intermediate class between the well-bred sorcerers and the clodhoppers.

In other descriptions of the same date Satan applies the nice grammatical tests of the Universities, making aspirants undergo severe examinations. After assuring himself of their scholarship, he inscribes them on the registers, and gives them diploma and patent. Sometimes he requires a lengthy preliminary initiation, a sort of semi-monastic noviciate. Or else, again, following the regulations of guilds and corporations of trades, he imposes an apprenticeship, the presentation of a masterwork, etc.

NOTE 6. Decadence, etc.

A fact deserving attention is that the Church, the enemy of Satan, far from vanquishing him, twice over gives him his success.

[p. 326]

[paragraph continues] After the extermination of the Albigensians in the thirteenth century, did she triumph? Just the opposite: Satan is found predominant in the fourteenth. After the St. Bartholomew, and during the massacres of the Thirty Years' War, does she triumph? Just the opposite: Satan is once more in the ascendant under Louis XIII.

The object of my book was purely to give, not a history of Sorcery, but a simple and impressive formula of the Sorceress's way of life, which my learned predecessors darken by the very elaboration of their scientific methods and the excess of detail. My strong point is to start, not from the devil, from an empty conception, but from a living reality, the Sorceress, a warm, breathing reality, rich in results and possibilities. The Church had only the demons. She did not rise to Satan; this was the witch's dream.

I have essayed to epitomise her biography of a thousand years, her successive periods, her chronology. I have described (1) how she comes into existence by the excess of her wretchedness and destitution; how the simple peasant wife, served by her familiar spirit, transforms this spirit in the progressive advance of her despair, is assailed, possessed, bedevilled by him, continually reproduces and incorporates him with herself, at last grows one with Satan. I have described (2) how the Sorceress reigns paramount, but undoes and destroys herself. The Sorceress, full of pride and fierce with hate, becomes, under success, the foul, malignant witch, who heals but yet corrupts, her hands more and more busied, her empiricism more and more in vogue, the agent of love and of abortion; (3) she disappears from the scene, lingering on, however, in country places. What remains, in evidence from famous trials, is no longer the witch, but the bewitched--as at Aix, Loudun, Louviers, in the case of Charlotte Cadiere, etc.

This chronology was not yet firmly established in my own mind, when I attempted in my history to reconstitute the Witches' Sabbath in its several acts. I was mistaken about the

[p. 327]

fifth. The true Sorceress of the original type is an isolated being, a devil's nun, having neither love nor family ties. Even the witches of the decadence do not love men. They submit to unfruitful, licentious embraces, and show it in their persons (Lancre), but their personal predilections are solely those common to nuns and female prisoners. She attracts weak-minded, credulous women, who allow themselves to be enticed to their little clandestine feasts (Wyer, chap. 27). The husbands of these women are jealous, interrupt the pretty mystery, beat the Sorceresses and inflict on them the punishment they most dread, viz. to be got with child. The Sorceress scarcely ever conceives except in her own despite, as the result of outrage and derisive insult. But if she has a son, it is an essential point, so it is said, of the Satanic cult that he become her husband. Hence, in the later periods, hideous family groups and generations of little wizards and witches, one and all cunning and malignant, ever ready to beat or denounce their mother. In Boguet is to be found a horrible scene of the sort.

What is less well known, but not less atrocious, is the fact that the great folk who made use of these perverted races for their personal crimes, keeping them in a continual state of dependence by means of their terror of being delivered over to the priests, extorted heavy revenues from them (Sprenger, p. 164, Lyons edition).

For the decay of sorcery and witchcraft, and the latest persecutions of which it was the object, I refer the reader to two excellent works by Soldan and Thomas Wright respectively. In connexion with its relation to magnetism, spiritualism, table-turning, etc., copious details will be found in that curious book, L'Historie du Merveilleux (History of the Marvellous), by M. Figuier.

NOTE 7.

I have twice spoken of Toulon; but I can never speak enough of a place which has brought me such happiness.

[p. 328]

[paragraph continues] It meant much for me to finish this gloomy history in the land of light. Our works feel the influence of the country where they were wrought. Nature labours with us; and it is a duty to render gratitude to this mysterious comrade, to thank the Genius loci.

At the foot of Fort Lamelgue, which rises commandingly, though unseen, above, I occupied a small and very retired house situated on a sharply descending slope of healthy, rocky ground. The man who built himself this hermitage, a doctor, wrote within its walls a very original book, L'Agonie et la Mort (Death and the Death Agony). He died himself quite recently. Hot of head and volcanic of heart, he used to come thither every day from Toulon to pour out his troublous thoughts. They are strongly impressed on the locality. Inside the enclosure, a large one, of vines and olive-trees, in order to shut himself in within a double isolation, he had constructed an inner garden, narrow in dimensions, with encircling walls in the African fashion, and containing a tiny fountain. He is still present there by virtue of the exotic plants he loved, and the white marble slabs inscribed with Arabic characters which he saved from the ruined tombs of Algiers. His thirty years old cypresses have shot up into giants, his aloes and cactuses grown into immense, formidable trees. The whole very lonely, not at all luxurious, but with a great charm of its own. In winter-time the sweetbriar in flower everywhere, and wild thyme and aromatic scents of all kinds.

The roadstead of Toulon is, as everybody knows, one of the wonders of the world. There are some even greater in extent, but none so beautiful, so finely designed. It opens to the sea by an entrance two leagues across, this narrowed by two peninsulas, curved like crab's claws. All the interior, varied and diversified by capes, rocky peaks, sharp promontories, moorlands, vines, pinewoods, shows a singular charm, nobility, and severity of aspect.

I could not distinguish the inner portion itself of the roadstead, but only its two enormous arms--to right, Tamaris

[p. 329]

[paragraph continues] (henceforth immortal), to left, the fantastic horizon of Gien and the Iles d'Or, where the great Rabelais would have loved to die.

Behind, beneath the lofty circuit of the bare mountains, the gaiety and brilliance of the harbour, with its blue waters and its ships that come and go in never-ceasing movement, afford a striking contrast. Flapping flags and waving pennants, swift-flying despatch boats carrying admirals and other officers to and fro, all is animating and interesting. Every day at midday I would climb on my way to the town from the sea up to the highest point of my fort, whence opens a vast panorama, the mountains beyond Hyeres, the sea, the roads, and in the middle of all the town which, as seen from thence, looks charming. Anyone seeing the sight for the first time, exclaims, "Ah! what a pretty woman Toulon is!" What an agreeable welcome I met with there, what devoted friends I found! The public institutions, the three libraries, the courses held in the sciences, offer numerous resources little suspected by the flying traveller, the passing visitor who is merely on his way to take ship. For myself, settled there for a length of time, and grown into a true Toulonnais, it formed a never-ending source of interest to compare together old Toulon and new, and note the happy progress of the centuries, a progress I never felt more acutely anywhere. The gloomy affair of Charlotte Cadiere, the documents relating to which the learned librarian placed at my disposal, brought only this contrast for me in lively colours.

A certain building in particular daily arrested my attention, the Hopital de la Marine (Naval Hospital), formerly a seminary of the Jesuits, founded by Colbert for the ships' almoners, and which, during the decadence of the French Navy, had occupied public attention in so odious a fashion.

It was well done to preserve so instructive a monument of the contrast between the two periods the former marked by ennui and emptiness disfigured by hateful hypocrisy, the present, bright with sincerity, ardent with activity, research, science,

[p. 330]

and science purely benevolent in this case, directed solely and entirely towards the relief of suffering and the consolation of human life!

Going inside, we shall find the house has been somewhat changed. If the decriers of the present say such progress is of the Devil, they must admit that to all appearance the Devil has altered his methods.

His magic nowadays is, on the first floor, a fine and well-selected medical library, which these young surgeons, with their own money and at the expense of their pleasures, are incessantly adding to, less dancing and fewer mistresses, more science and brotherly love.

Destructive of old, constructive now, in the chemical laboratory, the Devil is hard at work preparing what is to alleviate the poor sailor's pain and cure his ills. If the knife becomes needful, the insensibility the witches sought, and towards which their narcotics were the first essay, is afforded by the art magic of the immortal discovery made by Jackson in America (1847), and Simpson at Edinburgh.

Those days pondered and aspired; these realise. Their spirit is a Prometheus. In that mighty Satanic arsenal, I mean the well-equipped physical installation possessed by this hospital, I see realised in practice the dreams and longings of the Middle Ages, the most apparently chimerical fantasies of former days.--To traverse space, they say, "I would have force. . . ." And behold steam, which is now a flying wing, now a Titan's arm. "I would wield the lightning. . . ." And lo! it is in your land, docile, obedient. It is stored in a bottle, increased, diminished; sparks are drawn from it, it is called here and sent there.--We do not ride on a broomstick, it is true, through the air; but the demon Montgolfier has created the balloon. Last, but not least, the sublimest wish of all, the sovereign desire to communicate afar off, to make one from pole to pole men's thoughts and hearts, this miracle is accomplished. More than that, the whole round world is united by a vast electrical network. 

[p. 331]

[paragraph continues] Humanity as a whole possesses for the first time from minute to minute the full consciousness of itself, a complete communion of soul with soul. . . . This is divine sorcery indeed! . . . If Satan does this, we are bound to pay him homage, to admit he may well be after all one of the aspects of God.

    The Sorceress, by Jules Michelet, [1939], at sacred-texts.com

PRINCIPAL AUTHORITIES

GRAESSE, Bibliotheca Magicae, Leipzig, 1843.

Magie Antique, collection of texts by Soldan, A. Maury, etc.

CALCAGNINI, Miscell., Magia amatoria Antiqua, 1544.

J. GRIMM, Deutsche Mythologie.

Acta Sanctorum,--Acta SS. Ordinis S. Benedicti.

MICHAEL PSELLUS, Energy of Demons, 1050.

CAeSAR VON HEISTERBACH, Illustria Miracula, 1220.

Registres de l'Inquisition (1307-1326), in Limburch; and the Extracts of Magi, Llorente, Lamothe-Langon, etc. Eymerici Directorium, 1358.

LLORENTE, Inquisition d'Espagne.

LAMOTHE-LANGON, Inquisition de France.

Manuals of the Monks Inquisitors of the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Centuries:--NIDER, Formicarius; SPRENGER, Malleus; C. BERNARDUS, Lucerna; SPINA, GRILLANDUS, etc.

CORNELIUS AGRIPPA, Opera, 8vo, 2 vols., Lyons.

PARACELSUS, Opera.

WYER, De Prestigiis Daemonum, 1569.

BODIN, Demonomanie, 1580.

REMIGIUS, Demonolatria, 1596.

DEL RIO, Disquisitiones Magicae, 1599.

BOGUET, Discours des Sorciers, Lyons, 1605.

LELOYER, Histoire des Spectres, Paris, 1605.

LANCRE, Inconstance, 1612; Incredulite, 1622.

MICHAELIS, Histoire d'une Penitente, etc., 1613.

TRANQUILLE, Relation de Loudun, 1634.

Histoire des Diables de Loudun (by AUBIN), 1716.

[p. 332]

Histoire de Madeleine Bavent, of Louviers, 1652.

Examen de Louviers; Apologie de l'Examen (by YVELIN), 1643.

Proces du P. Girard et de la Cadiere, Aix, fol., 1833.

Pieces relatives a ce Proces, 5 vols., 12mo, Aix, 1833.

Factum, Chansons, etc., relatifs; MS. in the Library of Toulon.

EUGENE SALVERTE, Sciences Occultes, with introduction by Littre.

A. MAURY, Les Fees, 1843; Magie, 1860.

SOLDAN, Histoire des Proces de Sorcellerie, 1843.

THOMAS WRIGHT, Sorcery and Magic, 1854.

FIGUIER, Histoire du Merveilleux, 4 vols.

FERDINAND DENIS, Sciences Occultes, Monde Enchante.

Histoires des Sciences au Moyen Age, by SPRENGER, POUCHET, CUVIER, HOEFER, etc.

 

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: sot.txt =====



Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1] [p. 2]

  

SONGS OF THE TEWA

  

TRANSLATED BY

  

HERBERT JOSEPH SPINDEN

  

PRECEDED BY

  

AN ESSAY ON AMERICAN INDIAN POETRY

  

with a selection of outstanding compositions from North and South America

  

Published by The Exposition of Indian Tribal Arts, Inc

  

850 Lexington Avenue, New York, N. Y.

  

[1933]

AN APPENDIX

CONTAINS ORIGINAL TEWA TEXTS

AND EXPLANATORY NOTES

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 3]

  

TABLE OF CONTENTS

          AN ESSAY ON AMERICAN INDIAN POETRY

        

     
         The Indian and His Cosmos

       <page 7>

     
         The Place of Indian Poetry in the Arts

       <page 13>

     
         Reincarnation Lullabies

       <page 17>

     
         Guardian Spirit Songs

       <page 20>

     
         Songs as the Instruments of Magic

       <page 23>

     
         Trial by Poetry

       <page 29>

     
         Love Songs

       <page 32>

     
         Death and Its Mystery

       <page 38>

     
         Vocational Songs

       <page 40>

     
         Songs of Sequence

       <page 41>

     
         Revivalist Verses of the Ghost Dance Religion

       <page 45>

     
         Historical Poems Approach the Epic

       <page 51>

     
         Style in Old American Literature

       <page 56>

     
         On Translating Indian Poetry

       <page 62>

     
         Tewa Poetry as a Typical Exhibit

       <page 68>

     
       

        

     
      SONGS OF THE TEWA

        

     
         I Home Songs

       <page 71>

     
         II Sacred Chants and Ceremonial Songs

       <page 85>

     
         III Magic Songs and Prayers

       <page 101>

     
       

        

     
      APPENDIX

        

     
         Notes on the Introductory Essay

       <page 109>

     
         Notes on Tewa Poems

       <page 112>

     
   

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 4]

  

AUTHOR'S PREFACE

THIS LITTLE BOOK VOICES AN APPRECIATION OF THE ETHICS AND IDEALS OF THE AMERICAN INDIAN AS THESE ARE EXPRESSED IN HIS MOST ENDURING WORDS. I AM INDEBTED FOR ITS PUBLICATION AT THIS TIME TO THE EXPOSITION OF INDIAN TRIBAL ARTS INC., AN ORGANIZATION EFFECTED IN 1930 FOR THE PURPOSE OF PRESENTING THE ART OF THE FIRST AMERICANS AS FINE ART. ASIDE FROM EXPLANATORY COMMENT THE BOOK STANDS, THEN, AS A SUPPLEMENTAL EXHIBIT OF THE REDMAN'S AESTHETICS, GIVING EXAMPLES OF WOVEN AND COLORFUL PHRASES PROPER TO THE SPLENDID COMPANY OF HIS FINE TEXTILES, FINE CERAMICS AND EXQUISITE SIMPLICITIES IN PAINTING AND SCULPTURE.

NOW WHEN THE WHITE MAN'S INTRODUCED CIVILIZATION FALTERS BEFORE A GLUT OF FOOD AND A LAPSE OF ETHICS THE OLD AMERICAN CIVILIZATION OF PRE-COLUMBIAN DAYS HOLDS LESSONS NOT TO BE IGNORED. THE REDMAN'S SOCIAL RESTRAINTS KEPT THE RESOURCES OF THE NEW WORLD INTACT AGAINST OUR COMING. HIS DISTINGUISHED SKILL SET UP SOME OF THE BEST STANDARDS OF CRAFTSMANSHIP. HIS PATIENT HUSBANDRY WON FOR US OUR MOST IMPORTANT CROPS. BETTER STILL HE DEMONSTRATED THAT UPON A WISE USE OF LEISURE SAVED FROM THE PURSUIT OF FOOD AND MERE NECESSITIES REST THOSE INTELLECTUAL, ARTISTIC AND RELIGIOUS COMMONWEALTHS WHICH ARE THE CROWN AND GLORY OF MANKIND.

AFTER THE MANNER OF ANCIENT AMERICA OUR PRESENT SOCIETY SHOULD FIND AN INCREASING PROPORTION OF ITS MEMBERS ENGAGED IN CULTURAL EMPLOYMENT. YET TODAY, SUFFERING FROM TOO MUCH GOOD FORTUNE, WE CURTAIL ART, SCIENCE AND EDUCATION AND BEND EVERY EFFORT TO STIMULATE A SPENDTHRIFT DESTRUCTION OF NATURAL WEALTH IN THE NAME OF BUSINESS AND INDUSTRY. OUR INDIANS OF THE PAST CHALLENGE THE VALIDITY OF OUR SOCIAL PURPOSES.

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 5]

  

AN ESSAY ON AMERICAN INDIAN POETRY

with a selection of outstanding compositions from North and South America

A GIFT of noble art in all its manifestations, destined to gather golden opinions with the passing centuries, forms part of the splendid heritage with which America of the past endows America of the future. The Redman has never received the credit due him for his fundamental contributions to human welfare and permanent civilization. On the utilitarian side stand the remarkable series of economic plants which the Indian brought to a high state of cultivation and the important industrial processes which he invented. On the esthetic side stand beauty in sculpture and architecture, beauty in traditional literature of myths, songs and ritualistic poems, beauty in dances and spectacular ceremonies, and beauty, above all, in the ethical and philosophical attitude of man towards man and of man towards nature.

It is easy enough to show that the useful gifts of the American Indian assume gigantic values today, especially since more than half the present agricultural wealth of the United States comes from plants which he tamed. It is not so easy to estimate the influence of his esthetics upon the present culture of his conquerors, but the coming effect will surely be very great. The Indian has abundantly demonstrated his ability to build up and maintain the social illusions of grandeur. Now between a nation which exists as an accumulation of individual abilities and individual achievements--and we are scarcely more than this today in spite of a certain mechanistic ordering--and a nation which finds a truly artistic and communal expression of its cooperative life,

[p. 6]

capable of enriching and ennobling that life, there is a vast and vital difference. Perhaps in this survey of the poetry of the American Indian I shall be able to define this difference in comprehensive terms.

The creative individuals of the Red race, the poets, the artists, the philosophers, whatever their forgotten names may be, had this in common: they were one and all the architects of mass illusion. They were culture heroes, and to my mind this is the highest purpose to which supreme abilities may be devoted. Seeing in the realities the world about them the indices of divine intention, their minds reached out to win an invisible empire. Although possessing separate abilities they were not individualists in spirit but collectivists, and the self-contained societies which they erected were super-organisms instinct with over-souls.

Perhaps the cultural units of ancient America represent primary or youthful civilization. Such a classification would well fit the first splendid efflorescence of the Mayas which produced writing, astronomical science, permanent architecture and high art. Here, if ever, we find self-sufficiency, a nation growing like a tree. For the Mayas drew wealth from their own soil and developed their supreme arts by an intelligent use of leisure in furtherance of their social ideals. It seems that the same process was repeated elsewhere in America. But also it is clear enough that the Incas and the Aztecs had hit upon the deceptive advantages of aggressive warfare in the quick up-building of their respective states. Their predatory policy was still tentative, for the undeveloped condition of both offensive and defensive military science among the American Indians in general proves that the procedures of conquest, tribute and trade were never fully established. The Redman had to dance

[p. 7]

himself into war or find a just cause for it in the imagined appetites of his gods.

  

THE INDIAN AND HIS COSMOS

IN HIS relations with the immeasurable world about him the American Indian, even today and whatever the state of his culture, exhibits a single psychological attitude. Man is never the lord of creation but always a pensioner on natural bounty. It has been the custom to dismiss the religion of our Indian tribes as animistic in the lower stages and mystic in the higher ones, a classification which certainly emphasizes the supremacy of spiritual forces over material ones. Beginning with a naive belief that a directive mentality combines with a directed physical body in animals, plants and natural objects as it does in man, the first aim of Indian religion has been to make friends with nature whenever possible and when not possible to circumvent in some way the inimical forces. From this universal animism beast gods emerge as the embodiments of natural powers. Ultimately these beast gods combine into composite monster gods which gradually take on human attributes of shape and character. But very early in the development of this system the idea of a single pervasive control makes its appearance, a primal cause, a creator, a modifier, who may deal out rewards as well as punishments.

The Yokuts Indian of California, after appealing to seven vague deities whom he names in order, ends with the request that he may fit into a universal scheme .

My words are tied in one
 With the great mountains,
 With the great rocks,
 With the great trees,
 In one with my body
 And my heart.

Do you all help me
 With supernatural power,
 And you, Day
 And you, Night!
 All of you see me
 One with this world!

[p. 8]

In a closing comment on this primitive Californian prayer, Kroeber says: "A certain vastness of conception and profoundness of feeling rising above any petty concrete desire, cannot be denied this petition."

Out on the Great Plains the mystery which pervades the universe is called Wakonda by several Siouan tribes. The quest of Wakonda by the man who would know things "that are fit to serve as symbols" is thus described in the Osage Rite of the Chiefs :

In the midst of the open prairie, where trees grow not,
 As he sat upon the earth to rest he thought: This spot, also, may be Wakonda's abode!
 Then he inclined his head towards his right side,
 Bent his body low,
 And Wakonda made him close his eyes in sleep.

From the Osage informant who gave Francis La Flesche the important rituals of this tribe comes an explanation of Wakonda . It was the ancients who devised the ritualistic songs, the ceremonial forms and symbols out of their insight into natural mysteries, arising from their power to search with the mind. They noted the -mysteries of the light of day by which the earth and all living things that dwell thereon are influenced; the mysteries of the darkness of night that reveal to us all the great bodies of the upper world, each of which forever travels in a circle upon its own path unimpeded by the others. They searched for a long period of time for the source of life and at last came to the thought that it issues from an invisible creative power to which they applied the name Wakonda." This from one American Indian to another!

Wakonda and his congeners--for the name varies with the language--resides in the heavens and sometimes

[p. 9]

appears to his petitioners in human guise, but aged and austere. In literature dealing with the Indian he is generally referred to as the Great Mystery but he might with equal propriety be called Ultimate Good.

The Pueblo Indians of the Southwest speak of their Earth Mother and Sky Father and in a chant of the Tewa (see number XXIX below) ask for a garment to be woven on the gossamer loom, strung from the sky by the desert rains, that they may walk fittingly in a decent world. If only our materialistic civilizations now stripping the earth in a mad holocaust could pause and take counsel from the calm wisdom of this prayer! But it seems that we accept no lesson from the past and owe no duty to the future. The destruction of forests and all natural resources goes on, the flocks of wild birds and herds of wild animals die and we pollute the streams. Enslaving or exterminating undefended peoples around the world we enslave ourselves to sordid appetites and disillusions.

The Aztecs had a vague supreme deity called Ometeuctli--Lord of Duality--who combined the masculine and feminine principles in one creator god dwelling in a topmost heaven.

Nezahualcoyotl, the emperor-poet of Texcoco, is credited by the Mexican historian, Ixtlilxochitl, with having taught that there was one god supreme above all others named Tloque Nahuaque: "In the ninth tier was the creator of heaven and earth, by whom live the created beings: an only god who created all visible and invisible things." This most famous poet of ancient Mexico also realized the ethical implications of this reduction in his emphasis on just deeds as the proper worship to be offered to an eternal principle. In a poem intended to be sung in his presence we find these verses :

[p. 10]

Little will fame have to tell of this wondrous majesty, worthy of a thousand heralds, the nations will only remember how wisely governed the three chieftains who held the power.

At Mexico Montezuma the famous and valorous, at Culhuacan the fortunate Nezahualcoyotl, and at the stronghold of Acatlapan, Totoquilhuatli.

I fear no oblivion for thy just deeds, standing as thou dost in thy place appointed by the Supreme Lord of All, who governs all things.

A most splendid Thanatopsis, attributed to Nezahualcoyotl, comes to us through an Otomi transcription, offering internal evidence of its pagan origin. I quote the English rendering of Brinton . While faltering here and there in exact phrasing, nevertheless the early American-ist caught the vast scope of this poem. It expresses, as he says, an epicurean philosophy but one permeated by ethical obligations.

1. The fleeting pomps of the world are like the green willow trees, which aspiring to permanence, are consumed by a fire, fall before the axe, are upturned by the wind, or are scarred and saddened by age.

2. The grandeurs of life are like the flowers in color and in fate; the beauty of these remains so long as their chaste buds gather and store the rich pearls of the dawn and saving it, drop it in liquid dew; but scarcely has the Cause of All directed upon them the full rays of the sun, when their beauty and glory fail, and the brilliant gay colors which decked forth their pride wither and fade.

3. The delicious realms of flowers count their dynasties by short periods; those which in the morning revel proudly in beauty and strength, by evening weep for the sad destruction of their thrones, and for the mishaps which drive them to loss, to poverty, to death and to the grave. All things of earth have an end, and in the midst of the most joyous lives, the breath falters, they fall, they sink into the ground.

4. All the earth is a grave, and nought escapes it; nothing is so perfect that it does not fall and disappear. The rivers, brooks, fountains and waters flow on, and never return to their joyous beginnings; they hasten on to the vast realms of Tlaloc, and the wider they spread between their marges the

[p. 11]

more rapidly do they mould their own sepulchral urns. That which was yesterday is not today; and let not that which is today trust to live tomorrow.

5. The caverns of earth are filled with pestilential dust which once was the bones, the flesh, the bodies of great ones who sat upon thrones, deciding causes, ruling assemblies, governing armies, conquering provinces, possessing treasures, tearing down temples, flattering themselves with pride, majesty, fortune, praise and dominion. These glories have passed like the dark smoke thrown out by the fires of Popocatepetl, leaving no monuments but the rude skins on which they are written.

6. Ha! ha! Were I to introduce you into the obscure bowels of this temple, and were to ask you which of these bones were those of the powerful Achalchiuhtlanextin, first chief of the ancient Toltecs; of Necaxecmitl, devout worshipper of the gods; if I inquire where is the peerless beauty of the glorious empress Xiuhtzal, where the peaceable Topiltzin, last monarch of the hapless land of Tulan; if I ask you where are the sacred ashes of our first father Xolotl; those of the bounteous Nopal; those of the generous Tlotzin; or even the still warm cinders of my glorious and immortal, though unhappy and luckless father Ixtlilxochitl; if I continued thus questioning about all our august ancestors, what would you reply? The same that I reply--I know not. I know not; for first and last are confounded in the common clay. What was their fate shall be ours, and of all who follow us.

7. Unconquered princes, warlike chieftains, let us seek, let us sigh for the heaven, for there all is eternal, and nothing is corruptible. The darkness of the sepulchre is but the strengthening couch for the glorious sun, and the obscurity of the night but serves to reveal the brilliancy of the stars. No one has power to alter these heavenly lights, for they serve to display the greatness of their Creator, and as our eyes see them now, so saw them our earliest ancestors, and so shall see them our latest posterity.

The human soul lost in the immensities of a space-time universe has no recourse from oblivion save in those virtues which blossom in the dust. This is the conclusion of the highest paganism. Seeing order in the heavens instills a belief that there may be an ultimate order in the solution of human affairs.

In conformity with the reflections of the great Mexican chieftain are various ancient hymns and orations

[p. 12]

which are ascribed to the kings of the Incas by one Joan de Santa Cruz Pachacuti Yamqui Salcamaygua who wrote shortly after 1600. The hymn to Viracocha, a master deity and creator god of Peru, is an oft-quoted fragment of American Indian literature .

O Viracocha, Lord of the Universe,
 Whether Thou be male or female
 At least lord of heat and generation!
 O such a one as can divine with spittle,
 Where art Thou?
 If only Thou wert near thy son!

Thou mayest be above,
 Thou mayest be below,
 Or round about Thy rich throne or staff.
 O listen to me!

From the sea above in which Thou mayest dwell,
 From the sea below in which Thou mayest be, Creator of the world,
 Maker of man,
 Lord of all lords!

With my eyes on Thee which fail to see Thee
 Yet desiring to know Thee!
 Might I behold Thee,
 Know Thee,
 Consider Thee,
 Understand Thee!
 For Thou beholdest me,
 Knowest me!

The Sun, the Moon
 The Day, the Night
 Summer, Winter
 Not vainly, in proper order,
 Do they march to the destined place,
 To the end!
 They arrive wherever Thy royal staff
 Thou bearest.
 Hear me!
 Heed me!
 Let it not happen
 That I grow tired,
 That I die!

[p. 13]

So all prefiguring of space and time draws down to the focus of human needs, of human understanding, and of human recognition of something that goes beyond this understanding! Man is the animal who learned to wonder, who learned to question the world, who learned to question himself. Through the length and breadth of ancient America we discover this primitive inquisitiveness and even in the songs of our Indians of today. Here is one from the Pawnee :

Let me see, if this be real,
 Let me see, if this be real,
 Let me see, if this be real,
 Let me see, if this be real,
 This life I am living?
 Ye who possess the skies,
 Let me see if this be real,
 This life I am living.

  

THE PLACE OF INDIAN POETRY IN THE ARTS

"ALL POETRY," says Grosse , "comes from feeling and goes to feeling, and therein lies the mystery of its creation and influence." This writer of forty years ago did not have much truly primitive poetry before him nor did he have much sensitive knowledge of the uses to which that little had been applied in the life of primitive man. His basic definition, "Poetry is the verbal representation of external or internal phenomena in an esthetically effective form for an esthetic purpose," implied that the successful uses of words to express great thoughts and tender feelings were, from the first, intentional creations of specially gifted artists. But was this really the case?

Today, as a result of ethnological studies among nearly all the surviving groups of low-cultured humans, we have masses of traditional myths, songs and ritualistic

[p. 14]

proceedings. The native forms of speech have been written out phonetically, translated in the light of local associations, and coordinated with the rhythms of musical accompaniment and with the ordered action of dancing and ceremonial dramatizations in sound-and-sight records. This slow and searching investigation has proceeded without undue benefit from a priori considerations and without undue loyalty to slender and precious definitions of what distinguishes Art in a matrix of Custom.

The idea that the separate fine arts sprang full-armed from the brow of, let us say, Apollo and that artists were, in the beginning or ever, touched with divine afflatus has no more truth in it than the companion concept that kings operate under a heavenly sanction. Anthropological science can demonstrate easily enough that beauty emerges from use, and that many ancient things which according to our specialized appreciations are merely and completely beautiful were nevertheless conceived for some magical or pseudo-practical service.

Poetry can hardly be called a primary art, at least that class of it which needs only to be spoken or read. As used by the American Indians and other so-called primitive groups, such as the Polynesians, poetry is still a servant of music and ceremony rather than a freestanding utterance. Perhaps this was also its former state in those classic lands where lyrics no longer need the lyre and where ballads are seldom actually sung to dancing feet. Owing to the lack of stringed instruments in ancient America and the slight development of wind instruments the drum exerted an outstanding influence on song, with some help from the steady pulsations of canoe paddling, corn grinding and similar exercises.

Among the Eskimo is found the Arctic tambourine

[p. 15]

and throughout the New World drums of one kind or another are in use. In ancient Mexico the two-lipped log drum had a double pitch and was capable of producing a wide variety of sound patterns through manipulation of the double tones in light and heavy strokes and changing tempo . We must imagine that melodic measures coincided with these drum beats and furnished a still more intricate lay-out into which it was the poet's job to fit intelligible words. The drum rhythms are indicated imitatively for a considerable number of old Mexican songs and their variety may be guessed from three examples . While the iambic meter goes especially well with the Aztec language, other meters were also employed: else how can the following onomatopoeia of drum strokes be explained?

Tico, tico, toco toto, and as the song approached the end, tiqui, titi, tito, titi.
                   *         *         *
 Quititi, quititi, quiti, tocoto, tocoti, tocoto, tocoti, and then it is to turn back again.
                   *         *         *
 Toto, tiquiti, tiquiti, and then it ends, tocotico, tocoti, toto, titiqui, toto, titiquiti.

Modern examples of the ways in which words are forced into inflexible moulds of music have been studied in phonographic records of songs from the Eskimo, the Ojibwa and other tribes. Often the distortion is so great that a song has meaning only for the composer. The expression may be obscure enough in itself with farfetched figures of speech and various poetic licenses. On top of this the warping of the words to the rhythmic pattern sometimes calls for drastic syncopations and reduplications, not to mention the interpolation of meaningless syllables. Poetry schooled under such rigid restraints, and finally overcoming them, inevitably becomes

[p. 16]

differentiated from prose. There is a survival of the fittest expressions until a standard of poetic phrasing becomes fixed.

The common use of extra, meaningless syllables to dilute the intelligible parts of speech is illustrated in a Mide song of the Ojibwa analyzed by Miss Densmore. The words are :

Ni wa wake abog'
 We wendji dji wun'

A bubbling spring
 Comes from the hard ground.

The pulse of the drum is regular and the quarter note is maintained except for the fifth and sixth measures. To fit a combination of 2-4, 3-4 and 4-4 time the words of the song are repeated and stretched out as follows, the italicised syllables being interpolated.

        ....Wac

       ke a bog

       o ho ho ni

     
      wa a ac

       ke a bog

       o ho ho ho ho ho ho ho   ni

     
      wa ha ha

        wac ke a bog

       o ho ho ni

     
      wa ha ha

       wac ke a bog

       o ho ho ni

     
      wa a ac

       ke a bog

       o ho ho ni

     
      wa a a

       wac ke a bog

       o ho ho

     
      we wen

       dji dji wun

       e he he

     
      we wen

       dji dji wun

       e he he he ne

     
      wa ha ha

       wac ke a bog

       o ho ho ni

     
 There are many songs in which the burden is carried entirely by meaningless syllables but it is not clear that such songs intergrade as a class between instrumental music and songs with intelligible words. In some cases the meaningless syllables may represent old songs, the words of which have been distorted and forgotten, or foreign songs, the words of which never were learned. It would help if we could really measure the life of a song. We only know that the rich repertory of the Aztecs and the Incas has been finished for centuries and that long life in an unmodified state cannot be proven

[p. 17]

for European ballads. Yet there is a common belief that the songs and ceremonies of lowly cultured peoples are maintained from ancient times. "The Amazonian," says Thomas Whiffen , "treasures the songs of his fathers and will master strange rhythms and words that for him no longer have meaning; he only knows they are the correct lines, the phrases he ought to sing at such functions, because they have always been sung." This assumption of longevity for traditional songs is, I believe, nothing more than a romantic exit for ignorance. Rather, it seems that generations of song and ceremony succeeded each other like generations of human beings, albeit with a longer natural life, and that survival of traits, or at best survival of broken fragments, is all that should be expected across a span of several centuries. A constant process of leavening the present with the past is sufficient to explain all certain facts.

Words adjusted to the metronome of the throbbing drum, or embodying a rhythmic formality once removed, were composed by the American Indians for various purposes and occasions. Many songs were framed for the uses of magic, others to vivify ceremonies, others to express the deep religious feelings of the social group. Relatively few Indian poems have the strictly individualistic cast which distinguishes so many products of our super-civilized nation. It seems that Indian singers did not consciously cultivate the violent personal emotions for the trade, but ventured only to put into words the social illusions in which they were immersed. Now to examine the outstanding classes of Indian poetical compositions.

  

REINCARNATION LULLABIES

INDIAN MOTHERS generally sing their children to sleep with wordless songs but sometimes they use true lullabies

[p. 18]

as may be seen from the Tewa examples given below. There is, moreover, a very special kind of lullaby which deals with reincarnation.

The Eskimo and several other northern tribes believe that the soul of a dead relative enters into a new born child and watches over it during its tender years. This person may be addressed, therefore, in the child's lullaby and, vice versa, the child's prattling tongue may drop words of wisdom, thanks to its experienced soul. While the lullabies of eastern Greenland, which Thalbitzer calls petting songs, are of this type they mostly lack artistic form and some are frankly licentious, ascribing to the infant child the vices and ailments of its spiritual tutor, perhaps as preventive magic. There are a few exceptions. A widow whose dead husband had entered into his brother's son saw in this male child her future provider, and addressed him with a song more befitting our idea of what a lullaby should be. I quote the first of three similar verses :

How bland he is and gentle, the great little one there!
 How bland he is and gentle--
 How amazing he is, the dear little creature!

Among the Tlingit of southern Alaska and the Haida of Queen Charlotte Island are found reincarnation lullabies of dignified phrasing which Swanton has translated . One such song apologizes for the mean life of the present as compared with the exalted past; it is addressed to an old woman whose spiritual personality continues its existence in a baby girl.

I

You need not think that the smoke of your house in the middle of Skeedans will be as great as when you were a woman.

II

You need not think they will make a continual noise of singing in Skeedans Creek as they used to when you were a woman.

[p. 19]

In still another reincarnation lullaby the fond mother beholds a famous chieftain in her crawling infant.

I

He says it is Nankilslas's great father moving along so greatly

Halloo, great chief moving about!

II

Halloo, he moves along greatly like something extending to the sky.

Halloo, great chief moving about!

We must now note that as the child grows older his proper soul gradually gets control over the body and the reincarnated adult soul fades away into nothingness. So these northern peoples also have other songs fitted to the understanding of little boys and girls. For instance the Ammassalik Eskimo have a myth for children which tells how a raven teased the geese and how the geese in revenge enticed the raven far out over the sea. When they settled on the water, he was unable to swim. A song describes his fate :

Halloo, I sink, help me up, Ugh!
 Now the water reaches my great ankles,
 Hallow, I sink, help me up,
 Ugh! Now it reaches my great knees. 
 Hallow, I sink, help me up, !
 Now it reaches my great groins 
 Hallow, I sink, help me up, Ugh!
 Now it reaches my great navel 
 Hallow, I sink, help me up, Ugh!
 Now it reaches my great breasts 
 Hallow, I sink, help me up, Ugh!

And so on until the water reaches the great eyes of the insolent raven; then the song ends with an expressive Ugh!

Elsewhere songs for children and songs in myths which are used largely in the education of children

[p. 20]

emphasize the magical factor. A selection of songs for children from the village of Picuris in New Mexico has been published by John P. Harrington and Helen Roberts . A story tells how a child-stealing giant is overcome by a youth's magical songs. The boy's first song sung while he is being carried away in a basket, ends with the phrase:

A person who is very kind is carrying me on his back.

[paragraph continues] This has the magical effect of increasing the load and tiring out the giant. Later when the giant covers the youth with pitch and throws him in the fire a second song is sung the burden of which is:

A person who is very kind has put me in a warm place.

[paragraph continues] This has the magical effect of lulling the giant to sleep and the youth steps out of the fire and kills him. The point of this tale is that songs are more potent than common prose, a lesson which the Indian carries through life.

  

GUARDIAN SPIRIT SONGS

INDIAN BOYS of many tribes, and sometimes girls as well, were accustomed to pass through the supreme experience of having revealed to them in a vision a guardian spirit, their special link with the mystical hinterworld. The oldest and best songs of the Plains tribes are said to have been "composed in dreams'' and Miss Frances Densmore thinks that this is only the Indian's way of expressing what we mean by "poetic inspiration." But there was perhaps more method in the Redman's madness.

The Indian youth sought his vision with hope and faith, keeping a lonely vigil till common realities faded and subconscious desires became manifest as spiritual realities. The guardian spirit song of one of my old

[p. 21]

[paragraph continues] Nez Perce friends was a vividly descriptive phrase or two set up in the midst of meaningless syllables. His vision revealed Coyote returning from successful warfare and the intelligible part of the song ran as follows:.

Ravening Coyote comes,
 red hands, red mouth,
 necklace of eye-balls!

The man's sacred name was Silu-we-haikt which means Eyes-Around-the-Neck. The dream song was first revealed by the dreamer in the annual Guardian Spirit Dance where each dancer costumed himself according to the nature of his vision. Guardian spirit songs could be inherited and so might pass into a tribal thesaurus of poetic expressions. There was undoubtedly a bond between persons with the same protecting animal, a fact of interest in relation to the origin of totemic clans and esoteric societies. Among the Nez Perce, where neither clans nor warriors' societies had developed, there was an unusual number of mad coyote songs, the result of visions which ensured military success. One ran about like this:

Mad Coyote,
 madly sings,
 then roars the west wind!

and another:

Day break finds me,
 eastern day break finds me
 the meaning of that song:
 with blood-stained mouth,
 comes mad Coyote!

Among the Teton Sioux the men who had the unusual success of obtaining a Thunder-bird vision fell in a special group called Heyoka and at certain times had

[p. 22]

to express themselves in an opposite fashion from normal people. Lone Man of this tribe put on record the details of his vision and the four songs given him by the Thunder-bird people who appeared as horsemen in the clouds. The last one can be arranged as follows :

Friends, behold!
 sacred I have been made.
 Friends, behold!
 in a sacred manner I have been influenced.
 At the gathering of the clouds
 sacred I have been made.
 Friends, behold!
 sacred I have been made.

A Thunder-bird song of the Ojibwa seems to depart still farther from the realities of earth :

Sometimes
 I go pitying
 myself
 while I am carried by the wind across the sky.

Thunder-bird songs were also developed in connection with the Ghost Dance Religion which I discuss in another place. Such a piece from the Arapaho has always had for me a strong appeal :

My children, my children,
 It is I who make the thunder as I circle about--
       The thunder as I circle about.
 My children, my children,
 It is I who make the loud thunder as I circle about
       The loud thunder as I circle about.

Among some of the Plains tribes there were dream societies formed by men who had visions of the buffalo, the elk, the bear, etc., which were believed to convey special powers and faculties. Thus the men who dreamed of the bear had songs which helped in curing ceremonies.

[p. 23]

  

SONGS AS THE INSTRUMENTS OF MAGIC

Believing in the spirituality of plants, animals and even stones it is not surprising that the Indians found ways to make special appeals to the personalities in nature who exemplified special faculties and who might be induced to tutor man. Thus the Eskimo hunter sings :

What animal's sharp sight
 Have I for my sharp sight?
 The gull's sharp sight
 Have I for my sharp sight!

This song is not to be construed as a boast but as a petition. It seems that mere statement when made in the form of a song is compulsive. Indeed, "to sing" often means "to make magic," and back of it all lies the idea that the song has been ordained. The Pima put the matter thus :

Earth Magician now comes hither,
 Earth Magician now comes hither.
 From the depths the songs are rising
 And by him are here established.

The hunting animals sing their songs in myths and on inquiry it transpires that these same songs are re-sung by men who wish to have success in hunting.

Of course this procedure is merely an aspect of sympathetic magic in which descriptive words in a musical setting are held to be as potent as painted symbols in other circumstances. A myth of the Pawnee tells how a boy recovered a stolen robe bearing symbols of the storm, invoking the storm itself to destroy the thief. I quote a portion of this myth .

The young man went through the village from one tipi to the other asking for his robe. The people had not seen it. At last he went up to the Witch-Woman and asked if she had

[p. 24]

seen anything of his robe. She said: "No, I have not seen your robe." At the same time she made faces at the young man, saying to herself: "You will never find the robe. I now have it for a skirt." The young man went through the village again. He stood in the west, then walked through the village singing:

I am hunting a robe.
 My painted robe I am hunting.
 The heavens are painted upon it.
 Attention! It is among the people.
 Attention! It is among the people.
 Attention! It is among the people.

When the old woman heard this she began to clap her hands and said: "The robe must be a wonderful one, but you shall never again have it in your hands, for the robe is my skirt." The boy sang again:

I am hunting a robe.
 Who picked it up?
 Flocks of swallows are painted upon it . . .

When the woman heard it she said: "It must be a wonderful robe, but you shall never have it again, for I now have it for my skirt." The boy continued to sing:

I am hunting a robe.
 Who has picked it up?
 Dragon-flies are painted upon it . . .

At last the boy began to sing:

I am hunting a robe.
 Who has picked it up?
 The lightning is painted upon it . . .

I am hunting a robe.
 Who has picked it up?
 The thunders are painted upon it . . .

I am hunting a robe.
 Who has picked it up?
 The winds are painted upon it.
 Attention! It is among the people.
 Attention! It is among the people.
 Attention! It is among the people.

[p. 25]

The Witch-Woman heard this song and she said: "Do you think I am going to be blown away when I have more power than you have?" The boy cried again. As he finished he blew his breath from the west to where the woman stood. Then he cried again and this time clouds were seen coming from the west. Clouds blew over the land. When the boy cried the fourth time the old woman took the robe off and threw it down and said: "My grandchild, there is your robe. You must not let the storm blow me away." Just about that time the wind caught the old woman and whirled her up into the heavens as if a whirlwind had struck her. It began to rain all over the land.

When we find in Indian poetry what seems to be an individual's emotional reaction to natural beauty, in keeping with our own romantic traditions, we should ask whether this is not a purposeful appreciation of the friendly aspects of nature in keeping with the Redman's philosophy that to imitate the way in which good is done is to insure the repetition of that good. For instance, take a Papago song recorded by Frances Densmore :

By the sandy water I breathe the odor of the sea,
 From there the wind comes and blows over the world.
 By the sandy water I breathe the odor of the sea,
 From there the clouds come and the rain falls over the world.

To us these simple and majestic lines present a moving picture. From the given objective facts we construct some old experience and feel the immensity of the roaring ocean while storm racks pile up from below the horizon. Perhaps there comes over our minds a shadow of loneliness for we are accustomed to be sad in the presence of natural beauty--as though we had lost an animal birthright on getting civilized. We may even recall the similar lines which Gustavo Becquer wrote while starving in his garret in Madrid. But what a difference between the two songs when one scans the innermost

[p. 26]

sense. The first verse of Becquer's rhyme can be put in English as follows:

Waves gigantic that break yourselves roaring
 On beaches deserted and distant,
 Wrapped in the sheet of the seafoam,
       Carry me with you!

[paragraph continues] In this verse, and the three others that follow it, the German-Spanish romanticist dramatizes his personal despair.

Sometimes I think that individualism is only another social mode, and that it is made possible as a literary method by the psychic unity of mankind. Each person may find in himself a microcosm or miniature world and by correctly representing his own emotions discover a key to the microcosm, or great world. Nevertheless the individualist goes through the motions of being antisocial, using society's words and society's conventions and shouting independence in accepted patterns through the bars of his prison cell. But the Papago song of the salt-gatherers is no enactment of personal joy or anguish but a rehearsing of nature's drama for the good that it may bring. This ulterior thought does not impair the validity of the esthetic experience and its proper expression any more than a fulfillment of function impairs the perfection of a wild rose. To be sure artificial cultivation for either a poem or a flower may proceed at the expense of function and end in sterile beauty.

It is difficult to say at what point beauty is recognized for itself alone, as a purely sensuous gratification. Of course, it is often possible to construe an Indian poem as a mere lyrical outburst. For instance, there is this one :

As my eyes search the prairie,
 I feel the summer in the spring.

[p. 27]

[paragraph continues] Yet we are informed that this belongs in the magical category of dream songs.

By and large, the more backward tribes of both North and South America pay much attention to magic songs and some tribes possess little else. On the higher planes of culture the magical uses of poetry expand into great religious pieces. The Osage invocations to their sacred animals, patrons of tribal divisions, friends and benefactors of man are examples of this expansion. I quote the first and last passages in the wi-gi-e or introduction to the ceremony of incensing the seven sacred skins in the Rite of the Wa-xo-be. The lynx, the gray wolf, the puma, the black bear, the buffalo, the elk and finally the deer are set forth as symbols of courage .

What shall the little ones make to be their symbol of courage as they travel the path of life? it has been said, in this house.
 The little mottled lynx that lies outstretched, they said,
 He who is their grandfather, a person of great courage, they shall make to be their symbol of courage, it has been said, in this house.
 At break of day
 My grandfather rushed forth to attack a deer with curved horns.
 My grandfather struck the deer and made it lie outstretched in death.
 My grandfather approached the fallen deer with an air of exultation;
 He gave a cry of triumph, and spake saying:
 When, towards the setting sun the little ones go forth to strike the enemy,
 In this manner they shall always triumph.
 Their hands shall ever be upon the foe, as they travel the path of life,
 Here he made a curve it is said in this house.
                 *    *    *    *    *
 What shall the little ones make to be the symbol of courage, as they travel the path of life? it has been said, in this house.
 The little animal that lies outstretched, they said, He who is their grandfather, although he has no gall,

[p. 28]

They shall make to be their symbol of courage.
 It was he who came upon four villages.
 Close along their borders he ran swiftly without harm.
 Even when he runs close to the borders of a village,
 The arrows of his pursuers flying about him,
 He escapes all dangers.
 He it was who said: When the little ones make of me their symbol of courage,
 They shall always escape dangers,
 So shall it be even with one of the little ones,
 They shall cause their hands to be ever present upon the foe,
 as they travel the path of life, it has been said, in this house.

I suppose the average modern city-dweller sees in these sentiments of primitive religion merely the workings of the pathetic fallacy. Properly here are shifting lights from an old American world of ordered loyalties, which a hundred generations past our own forefathers of weald and down might also have understood. But with hard-bitten logic and under the sovereignty of our own destructive powers we have withdrawn from all democratic contact with the animate children of Mother Earth--except, perhaps, when a lonely man finds something unpurchasable in the companionship of a dog. Even those plants and animals which are necessary to our well-being are no longer the recipients of our gratitude. Our religious sentiment outlaws them as it outlaws the sun and rain. Nature and all its works are merely materials to be taken, wasted and destroyed without responsibility to the past or to the future. But let us not make the mistake of thinking that the throwing off of natural bonds has been an act of wisdom or of intellectual freedom, for today we make a less worthy obeisance to our own inanimate machines, setting up a thousand nervous gods of speed and death and a thousand fleshy gods of comfort and decay. Have these things given a truer purpose to our lives and a finer inward happiness?

[p. 29]

Under the inspiration of religion, albeit pagan, the makers of ceremonies, as Emerson says, "built better than they knew." One finds passages of great beauty in the rituals of the Redman. In the Osage Rite of the Chiefs there are descriptive touches such as the following :

In the fourth valley
 He beheld seven bends of a great river
 Enwrapped in a cloud of white smoke from many fires.
 Seven villages he saw among the seven bends of the river
 Enwrapped in a cloud of white smoke from many fires.

But are not ceremonial vestments embroidered and sacred altars enriched?

  

TRIAL BY POETRY

In the Far North enemies engage in poetic duels and intone their pleas for the public ear to the beat of the Arctic tambourine. Here nith songs, also called juridical songs and drum-contest songs, take the place of courts of law, the two contestants having it out with each other in a rival display of argument and vituperation. Undoubtedly the Eskimo in general get much pleasure in listening to these contests and the contestants themselves are not moved by bitter feelings alone. The airing of grievances and the gaining of public sympathy were undoubtedly the original purposes of the drum-contests but the theatrical opportunities were too great not to be seized upon. Drum-contest songs are still in use from Eastern Greenland to Western Alaska and their influence continues well down the Pacific coast.

Something of the yearning to excel in this strange practise is expressed in the following verses which tell how a man on shore sees a stranger on the sea and desires him as a drum-contest opponent .

[p. 30]

Again, it seems that he down there will come ashore,
 That that great kaiak down there will come ashore.
 Will he not come this way, too, he down there,
 One from another place than ours, will he not come here?
 What a surprise! I can not forbear looking at him.
 Will he not come this way, he down there, who does not belong here?
 It's as if he down there is suspicious and wary of one,
 How often has lie down there sung drum-fight songs?
 How many opponents in the drum-fight has he had?
 What if he also made me one of his opponents!

An old pair of juridical songs concerns antagonists by the names of Pulangit-Sissok and Savdlat, who rail at each other in the approved fashion. The text was collected by Rink in the late '60's but the first half of the dialogue was recovered by Thalbitzer some 80 years later in a somewhat softened form .

Savdlat speaks:
 The South shore, O yes, the South shore I know it;
 Once I lived there and met Pulangit-Sissok,
 A fat fellow who lived on halibut, O yes, I know him.
 Those South-shore folks can't talk;
 They don't know how to pronounce our language;
 Truly they are dull fellows;
 They don't even talk alike;
 Some have one accent, some another;
 Nobody can understand them;
 They can scarcely understand each other.

Pulangit-Sissok speaks:
 O yes, Savdlat and I are old acquaintances;
 He wished me extremely well at times;
 Once I know he wished I was the best boatman on the shore;
 It was a rough day and I in mercy took his boat in tow;
 Ha! ha! Savdlat, thou didst cry most pitiful;
 Thou wast awfully afeared;
 In truth, thou wast nearly upset;
 And hadst to keep hold of my boat strings,
 And give my part of thy load.
 O yes, Savdlat and I are old acquaintances.

The drum contest songs were used by both men and

[p. 31]

women and the next example shows one woman paying her respects to another. It seems that the "poor Saatina" could not sing but was efficient enough at playing the tom-boy .

I recognized the poor Saatina
 Who could not sing.
 I recognized the poor Saatina
 Who could not make drum songs.
 No, she was not such a one.
 A right merry person,
 A bright woman,
 Who always sang on the island Aaluib,
 Who always squalled with all her might.

It was doubtless through the training received in drum-contest songs that the Eskimo reached their rather exceptional ability at expressing moods. Also the Eskimo lack the intensively developed ceremonialism of American Indians in general, although possessing its rudiments, and they live close to hard realities. Take for instance the following piece which exhibits a quality of subjective insight rarely met with in primitive poetry .

Great grief came over me--
 Great grief came over me,
 While on the fell above us I was picking berries.
 Great grief came over me
 My sun rose quickly over it.
 Great sorrow came over me.
 The sea out there off our settlement
 Was beautifully quiet--
 And the great, dear paddlers
 Were leaving out there--
 Great grief came over me
 While I was picking berries on the fell.

A much quoted poem exhibits a love of natural beauty apparently for itself alone. But there may have been in the author's mind an ulterior thought concerning seasonable weather .

[p. 32]

I look toward the south, to great Mount Koonak,
 To great Mount Koonak, there to the south;
 I watch the clouds that gather round him;
 I contemplate their shining brightness;
 They spread abroad upon great Koonak;
 They climb up his seaward flanks;
 See how they shift and change;
 Watch them there to the south;
 How the one makes beautiful the other;
 How they mount his southern slopes,
 Hiding him from the stormy sea,
 Each lending beauty to the other.

  

LOVE SONGS

While genuine love songs doubtless exist among some Indian tribes, their importance has been over emphasized in many articles dealing with Indian poetry. Indeed love songs are most in evidence in those localities where the Indian women have been exposed to make-and-break contacts with whalers, fur-traders, buccaneers and whatnot. Thalbitzer has no divisions devoted to love songs in his work on the poetry of the isolated Ammassalik Eskimo, nor do they exist among the Yuma. In southern Alaska and British Columbia where fur-traders and whalers began to congregate after the voyages of Cook and Vancouver there are songs of stranded and forsaken women, some in the jumbled words of the Chinook trade jargon and others in the native languages. The so-called love songs of the Northwest Coast which seem most authentic fit into the pattern of the poetic duel ridiculing persons who have inflicted harm and with their answers are more like public quarrelling than expressions of tender passion.

The following piece is translated from the Kwakiutl by Franz Boas and is entitled a love song. It was sung by a jilted man .

Oh, how, my lady-love, can my thoughts be conveyed to you, my lady-love, on account of your deed, my lady-love? [p. 33]
 In vain, my lady-love, did I wish to advise you, my lady-love, on account of your deed, my lady-love.
 It is the object of laughter, my lady-love, it is the object of laughter, your deed, my lady-love.
 It is the object of contempt, my lady-love, it is the object of contempt, your deed, my lady-love.
 Oh, if poor me could go, my lady-love! How can I go to you, my lady-love, on account of your deed, my lady-love?
 Oh, if poor me could go, my lady-love, to make you happy, my lady-love, on account of your deed, my lady-love!
 Now, I will go, my lady-love, go to make you happy, my lady-love, on account of your deed, my lady-love.
 Farewell to you, my lady-love! Farewell, mistress on account of your deed, my lady-love!

In another example a woman complains that her lover goes to Japan to hunt for seals. Her plaint brings a rejoinder from the man that he is returning post haste. Then there is a third song by him showing him dismissed for all his pains. I give part of the song of Menmenlequelas after Tsak Edek deserts him .

Ye yaa ye ya ha!
 You are cruel to me, you are cruel to me, you are cruel to me, my dear!
 Ye yaa ye ya ha!
 You are hard-hearted against me, you are hard-hearted against me, my love!
 Ye yaa ye ya ha!
 You are surpassingly cruel, you are surpassingly cruel against me, for whom you pined.
 Ye yaa ye ya ha!
 She pretends to be indifferent, not to love me, my true-love, my dear.
 Ye yaa ye ya ha!
 Don't pretend too much that you are indifferent of the love that I hold for you, my dear!
 Ye yaa ye ya ha!
 Else you may be too indifferent of the love that I hold for you, my dear!
 Ye yaa ye ya ha!
 My dear, you are too indifferent of the love that I hold for you, my dear!
 Ye yaa ye ya ha!
 My dear, you go too far, your good name is going down, my dear! [p. 34]
 Ye yaa ye ya ha.'
 Friends, it might be well if I took a new true-love, a dear one.
 Ye yaa ye ya ha.'
 Friends, it might be well if I had a new one for whom to pine, a dear one.
 Ye yaa ye ya ha!
 I wish she would hear my love-song when I cry to my new love, my dear one!

Among the Ojibwa are found songs which can hardly be called love songs in the ordinary sense since they are magical formulae with a practical rather than a sentimental value. Frances Densmore gives four examples to be used against the males, each song having its mnemonic picture on birch bark .

I

What are you saying to me?
 I was arrayed like the roses.
 And as beautiful as they!

II

I can charm the man
 He is completely fascinated by me!

III

I can make that man bashful.
 I wonder what can be the matter
 That he is bashful?

IV

In the center of the earth
 Wherever he may be
 Or under the earth!

There are, however, real love songs among the Ojibwa. These songs, according to Miss Densmore, "mark a distinct phase in the development of music as a means of expression." The words frequently run through the entire song with little repetition and may be impromptu in their exact form. The Ojibwa sing their love songs with a nasal twang which also characterizes the

[p. 35]

songs of the scalp dance although this similarity may be fortuitous. Some of them are known to be old and may be sung with slight changes by either men or women. Here is a good example :

Although he said it
 Still
 I am filled with longing
 When I think of him.

Schoolcroft gives us an Ojibwa love song of a hundred years ago, which whether strictly aboriginal or not, does have the iterative Indian style .

I will walk into somebody's dwelling,
 Into somebody's dwelling will I walk.
 To thy dwelling, my dearly beloved,
 Some night will I walk, will I walk.
 Some night in the winter, my beloved
 To thy dwelling will I walk, will I walk.
 This very night, my beloved,
 To thy dwelling will I walk, will I walk.

Love songs, except those which are supposed to have a magical and coercive quality of gaining affections and which might better be called love medicine, are not common among the tribes of the Great Plains. Nor are such songs listed by Ruth Bunzel among the kinds in use at Zuni. The Tewa have them and I secured several examples in the forms of soliloquy and colloquy. While these are clearly enough of Indian composition, I believe the ultimate inspiration to have been Spanish. The same may be said of numerous pieces in Mexico and Guatemala.

European influence of a still different sort has been noted on the Mosquito Indians of Nicaragua. Cape Gracios a Dios and the hidden lagoons on either hand were long the haunt of pirates and buccaneers, and I

[p. 36]

fancy these cutthroats might, in their softer moments, have been sentimental enough. At any rate, in the middle of the last century the natives of this adventurous shore had love songs, several of which were written down by English residents. At the present time such songs are rare for in several journeys to eastern Nicaragua I could not secure a single example.

A fine piece, with original text and translation, is found in Charles Napier Bell's Tangweera . He explains that "the young men and women are melancholy, and it is singular that all their music is melancholy. Cheerful music is quite beyond them. Their love songs are plaintive and sad, always the same tune and time, but the words are extemporized by them with a facility which to us would be almost impossible.

I

My girl, some days as you walk with your companions,
 When the mist settles over the river mouth,
 And the smell of the pitch-pine woods comes from the land,
 Will you think of me and say:
 "My lad have you really gone away?
 Alas! my lad have I seen the last of you?
 Shall I really never hear your voice again?
 Alas! Alas! Alas!"

II

My girl I am very sad for you,
 I remember the smell of your skin.
 I want to lay my head on your lap,
 But here I am lying under a tree.
 In my ear I only hear the noise of the sea
 The surf is rising in the offing;
 But I cannot hear your voice.
 Alas! Alas! Alas!

The Mosquito Indians were at the time of Columbus' Fourth voyage about the most uncivilized people in Central America. Originally from the wooded lowlands of South America they still have ceremonies which point to their first home.

[p. 37]

The Tupi, of the lower Amazon and the coast of Brazil, have long had a reputation for poetic compositions especially among the French. This may date from 1550 when a large band of Tupi Indians took part in a festival at Rouen. In 1557 Jean de Lery recorded during voyage in Brazil several fragments of songs which had impressed him deeply. Much later the eminent Montaigne was provided with a few examples of Tupi songs by a man who had spent several years among these Indians, and was moved to declare that the verses were worthy of Anacreon.

Couto de Magalhaes publishes the text and translation of two Tupi songs which are clearly love charms. One is addressed to Ruda who figures in the myths of the Tupi as a warrior residing in the clouds. He creates an amorous melancholy in the hearts of men, making them return home from long canoe trips. The song is translatable about as follows :

O Ruda, O Ruda,
 Thou who art in the skies
 And who lovest the rains,
 Make it so that he,
 No matter how many women he has
 Will think them all ugly.
 Make him remember me
 This afternoon
 When the sun gets in the west.

Another song, addressed to the Moon, also must be regarded as a magical prayer rather than a mere outpouring of emotion. It takes this form:

New Moon, Oh, New Moon
 Remind that man of me!
 Here am I in your presence;
 Cause it to be that only
 I Shall occupy his heart.

[p. 38]

The Brazilian ethnologist of half a century ago was quick to realize that many pieces in the Tupi language were nevertheless inspired by Portuguese models. He went so far as to demonstrate how, even in these secondhand compositions, there was a definite deterioration. Portuguese words replaced Indian ones until, finally, only a few meaningless syllables of the original Indian phrases were retained as a refrain. He might have gone farther and shown, how, in the breakdown of the truly Indian mode, magical prayers are replaced by sentimental praises.

  

DEATH AND ITS MYSTERY

Not all Indian songs about death are mourning songs; perhaps the most remarkable and beautiful ones are songs in which the dead reappear in dreams. Mourning songs are common enough among some tribes while among others they are eliminated by the taboo which forbids mention of a dead person's name. When permissible they have a somewhat broader appeal than love songs. The latter are, or should be, a private matter between two lovers while the former are a family or clan matter which often touches the entire community. The theme of communal loss is struck in the beginning lines of a Tlingit dirge :

The nation's canoe is drifting ashore with him
 My uncle is already dead . . .

Another one, following Swanton's text, deals with the all-encompassing mystery :

I always think within myself
 There is no place where people do not die.
 I do not know where my uncle is:
 Down into the spirits' cave around the world
 The spirits threw my uncle.

[p. 39]

More poignant and less philosophical are the ending lines of a woman's song about her drowned brother :

Perhaps he went into the sun's trail
 So that I can never see him again.

I quote a mourning song of the Kwakiutl relating to a certain Moda'ena, member of the Cannibal Society, who was drowned with his sister. It was sung at his house by all the people of his village .

Ye he he ya!
 It deprived me of my mind when the moon went down at the edge of the waters.
 Ye he he ya! Ye he he ya!
 It deprived me of my breath when the mouse-dancer began to gnaw on the water.
 Ye he he ya! Ye he he ya!
 It deprived me of my mind when Moda'ena began to utter the cannibal-cry on the water.
 Ye he he ya!

From the icy shores of Greenland comes an Eskimo song, translated by Thalbitzer, which voices the pretense that death is a new thing and not so bad at that .

People have begun a new custom.
 People die now at intervals,
 Chopping out the little step,
 People die at intervals,
 After they have stepped through their heavy troubles.

The Papago believe that the dead return in dreams and teach curing songs. Many spiritualistic pieces are accredited to definite individuals and it is said that the dreams in which the songs were received usually took place immediately after death although in some cases months or even years elapsed before the spirit of the

[p. 40]

dead person returned to deliver his vital message. Some of the most striking songs seem to picture the last thoughts or, more daringly still, the flight of the soul. I give several examples in the fine renderings of Frances Densmore 

In the great night my heart will go out,
 Towards me the darkness comes rattling,
 In the great night my heart will go out.
                  *    *    *    *    *
 A low range of mountains, towards them I am running
 From the top of these mountains I will see the dawn.
                  *    *    *    *    *
 I am dead here, I die and lie here,
 I am dead here, I die and lie here
 Over the top of Vihunput I had my dawn.

One gathers that elegies were common in ancient Mexico and in ancient Peru as well. This is natural enough in regions where aristocracy was recognized.

  

VOCATIONAL SONGS

Purely vocational songs are relatively unimportant in American Indian poetry partly because nearly every vocation is drawn into the ceremonial or religious field. There are paddling songs in the Far North while in New Mexico and Arizona men often sing to the scraping of hand stones while the women grind corn. More widespread still are gambling songs. Washington Matthews gives some of the songs used in connection with the moccasin game of the Navaho, played at night in the winter time. There are many animal songs, mostly derisive in character, the following ground squirrel song being typical 

The squirrel in his shirt stands up there,
 The squirrel in his shirt stands up there;
 Slender, he stands up there; striped he stands up there.

[p. 41]

The playing is terminated at the first streak of day when the magpie song is sung .

The magpie! The magpie! Here underneath
 In the white of his wings on the footsteps of morning.
 It dawns! It dawns!

Perhaps under vocational songs it would be well to place the curing songs of medicine men. Most of these are dream songs, however, or follow the pattern of songs used in magic.

  

SONGS OF SEQUENCE

Songs of sequence is a term applied to sets of songs dealing with the same theme and following each other in a definite traditional order. Long ceremonies having such songs are especially developed in the Southwest whence the idea seems to have spread rather widely over the Plains and into some parts of California but without the same richness of detail as in the place of origin. The Mountain Chant of the Navaho has thirteen sets comprising 161 songs, the greatest number in a sequence being 26 and the lowest seven. Says Washington Matthews :

But how does the shaman remember the order of these songs of sequence? Does he possess any mnemonic key? He does. There is a myth for each set of songs, and this myth is the key. The song myths of this tribe are very numerous, and few songs except extemporaneous compositions, exist independently of a myth. In some instances the myth is the more important part of the work, and we are impressed with the idea that the myth maker composed his story first, and introduced his songs afterwards as embellishments; but in more cases the myth is a trifling element, and seems devised merely as an aid to the memory or as a means of explaining or giving interest to the songs.

I give an example from the myth of the Mountain Chant of the Navahos to show the relation of prose and poetry :

[p. 42]

The clouds hung over the mountain, the showers of rain fell down its sides, and all the country looked beautiful. And he said to the land "Aqalani!" (greeting) and a feeling of loneliness and homesickness swept over him, and he wept and sang this song:

That flowing water! That flowing water!
 My mind wanders across it.
 That broad water, that flowing water!
 My mind wanders across it.
 That old age water, that flowing water!
 My mind wanders across it.

The First and Twelfth Song of the Thunder in the Mountain Chant are translated by Matthews as follows . They show an artful use of repetitions and parallel constructions.

First Song of the Thunder

I

Thonah! Thonah! There is a voice above,
 The voice of the thunder.
 Within the dark cloud,
 Again and again it sounds,
 Thonah! Thonah!

II

Thonah! Thonah! There is a voice below,
 The voice of the grasshopper.
 Among the plants,
 Again and again it sounds,
 Thonah! Thonah!

Twelfth Song of the Thunder

I

The voice that beautifies the land! The voice above,
 The voice of the thunder
 Within the dark cloud
 Again and again it sounds,
 The voice that beautifies the land.

[p. 43]

II

The voice that beautifies the land!
 The voice below;
 The voice of the grasshopper
 Among the plants
 Again and again it sounds,
 The voice that beautifies the land.

The Night Chant by the same author is an even more monumental handling of the songs of sequence in a great curing ceremony of the Navaho. Here there are twenty four sequences with a total of 324 songs, strung like beads upon strings. Again we find the parallel constructions which seem to produce stanzas, as in the Last Song in the Rock .

I

At the Red Rock House it grows,
 There the giant corn-plant grows,
 With ears on either side it grows,
 With its ruddy silk it grows,
 Ripening in a day it grows,
 Greatly multiplying grows.

II

At Blue Water House it grows,
 There the giant squash-vine grows,
 With fruit on either side it grows,
 With its yellow blossom grows,
 Ripening in one night it grows,
 Greatly multiplying grows.

Next we have a song to Nayenezgani in two stanzas .

I

The Slayer of the Alien Gods,
 That now am I.
 The Bearer of the Sun
 Arises with me,
 Journeys with me,
 Goes down with me,
 Abides with me;
 But sees me not.

[p. 44]

II

The Child of the Water,
 That now am I.
 The Bearer of the Moon
 Arises with me,
 Journeys with me,
 Goes down with me,
 Abides with me;
 But sees me not.

A second pair of poems to the same personage:

I

I am the Slayer of the Alien Gods.
 Where'er I roam,
 Before me
 Forests white are strewn around.
 The lightning scatters;
 But 'tis I who cause it.

II

I am the Child of the Water.
  I roam,
 Behind me
 Waters white are strewn around,
 The tempest scatters;
 But 'tis I who cause it.

While a third concerns the bluebird :

I

He has a voice, he has a voice.
 Just at daylight Sialia calls.
 The bluebird has a voice,
 He has a voice, his voice melodious,
 His voice melodious, that flows in gladness.
 Sialia calls, Sialia calls.

II

He has a voice, he has a voice.
 Just at twilight Sialia calls.
 The bird tsolgali has a voice.
 He has a voice, his voice melodious,
 His voice melodious, that flows in gladness
 Sialia calls, Sialia calls.

[p. 45]

Also in this ceremony there are songs and prayers in which repetitions are made in accordance with colors, plants, and so forth, assigned to the four directions.

If the formal use of songs of sequence, as the first stage in ceremonial consolidations, extended across Mexico and down into South America no satisfactory evidence exists at the present time. F.P. and A.P. Penard report from Surinam that the Caribs have songs which are the aula or "word" of various spiritual beings. These may well belong in such a category. The word of the Snake Spirit they give in parts :

I am the force of the spirit of the lightning eel, the thunder axe, the stone.
 I am the force of the fire fly; thunder and lightning have I created.

The word of the Thunder they give entire:

I am the thunder, the terror of the earth reflects my one-ness.
 The earth I do vibrate, I the Thunder.
 All flesh fears, that reflects the one-ness of the Thunder.
 I pass along my field.
 With swiftness all must clear the way.
 The lightning precedes me.
 The thunder-axe I have made, I the Thunder.

  

REVIVALIST VERSES OF THE GHOST DANCE RELIGION

The Ghost Dance Religion was a rather recent and most startling manifestation of Indian mass psychology, producing much fine poetry during the brief span of its existence as an organized cult. It was the united answer of the wilder tribes of the western states to alien aggressions which had destroyed the economies of Indian existence but had not yet completely broken the Indian morale. The new religion rested upon ancient fundamentals, upon ideas of coersive magic expressed in the forms of art. It attempted to reapply these ideas, as it

[p. 46]

were, to the violently new conditions of life. Perhaps it drew something from Christianity.

There were two cycles in the spread of the Ghost Dance Religion. The cult began either in western Nevada or eastern Washington about 1870 and the first expansion was towards the west. The originator of the movement is generally stated to have been a certain Tavibo, a minor chieftain of the Paiute tribe in the Walker Lake region, largely because he was the reputed father of Wovoka, hailed twenty years later as the Indian Messiah when the rejuvenated Ghost Dance was sweeping eastward over the Great Plains. But the evidence concerning the part that Smohalla, a medicine man living near Priest's Rapids on the Columbia River, played in the formation of the cult is more explicit and of earlier date than that of Tavibo.

The Indian office took notice of Smohalla in 1870, although the following clear statement of his beliefs is not so early :

They have a new and peculiar religion, by the doctrines of which they are taught that a new god is coming to their rescue; that all the Indians who have died heretofore, and who shall die hereafter, are to be resurrected; that as they will then be very numerous and powerful, they will be able to conquer the whites, recover their lands, and live as free and unrestrained as their fathers lived in olden times.

This was still the essence of the Ghost Dance Religion when it swept the Plains in 1890 but along the Columbia it was always referred to as the Dreamer Religion. The credo from the lips of Smohalla himself was taken down in 1884 by Major MacMurray who had been commissioned to persuade the Indians to take up homesteads and abandon their free life .

[p. 47]

You ask me to plow the ground! Shall I take a knife and tear my mother's bosom? Then when I die she will not take me to her bosom to rest.
 You ask me to dig for stone! Shall I dig under her skin for her bones? Then when I die I cannot enter her body to be born again.
 You ask me to cut my hay and sell it, and be rich like the white men! But how dare I cut off my mother's hair? . . .
 All the dead men will come to life again. Their spirits will return to their bodies again. We must wait here in the homes of our fathers and be ready to meet them in the bosom of our mother.

But Smohalla is said to have begun preaching "his peculiar theology" about 1850 and to have been instrumental in consolidating the western Shahaptin tribes in the Yakima war of 1855-56. If the story is true that he made a great pilgrimage down the Pacific coast to Mexico about 1860 and returned to his own people by way of Arizona and Nevada, he must, I think, be given the credit for spreading the seeds of the Ghost Dance Religion.

Both the first and second stages of the Ghost Dance Religion responded to a psychology of protest against an overwhelming material power. Smohalla's teachings were the result of aggressions which came thick and fast after the Nez Perce had extended an invitation to Spaulding, Whitman and their fellow zealots to preach at Lapwai and other missions. For other white men came to trade, to settle and to seek gold. The Modoc War of 1873-74 and the Nez Perce war of 1877 were the result of wrongs and coercions by the whites but perhaps the Indians found spiritual aid in their new religion.

Unfortunately there is a dearth of recorded songs of an early Ghost Dance type unless we imagine that unmodified Guardian Spirit songs were in use. If Kroeber is correct in stating that the first spread of the cult into California in the early '70's gave immunity against its

[p. 48]

second spread in the late '80's then the following piece from the Yokuts may be old, although I suspect it really belongs to the second epoch. The song was received in a dream by a shaman named Mayemai from his father :

Listen to me
 Mayemai!
 There in the east I shall emerge
 Twirling
 My hand feathers.

The second stage began with revelation of Wovoka when he was ill with fever during an eclipse of the sun. "When the sun died," he said, "I went up to heaven and saw God and all the people who had died a long time ago." He was hailed as a Messiah largely because the economic condition of all the tribes who had lived on the buffalo was then desperate.

The destruction of the great buffalo herds--millions of valuable food animals being slaughtered for petty profit on their hides alone within the space of four years (1880-84) by the whites--illustrates how inevitable was the clash between two philosophical systems of man's relation to nature. The Indian has ever abjured the waste of natural bounty and his religion has sought to give thanks for this bounty and at the same time assure its continuance. The white man's civilization, on the other hand, has most unwisely subordinated the conservation of public wealth to the acquisition of private wealth. A rapid exploitation and liquidation of natural resources in all parts of the world is now being carried on by the dominant white nations threatening the exhaustion of many materials. But if the Indian idea that nature is benevolent be a naive untruth then the white man's idea that nature is inexhaustible is just as naively untrue

[p. 49]

and much more menacing to the future welfare of mankind.

The Ghost Dance Religion in its second phase spread out from the Paiute tribe and the earliest and simplest songs must therefore be sought there. Mooney, in preparing for his sympathetic study of the Ghost Dance, was able to secure but nine Paiute songs. Reduced to their briefest statements these sacred pieces are but two lines long. Always there are repetitions, however, which enlarge this briefest length. The first song refers to the open dance place in the dead of winter with the stars overhead. The Milky Way among American Indian tribes is the Spirit Road or the Pathway of Dead Warriors .

The snow lies there, ro-ra-ni!
 The snow lies there, ro-ra-ni!
 The snow lies there, ro-ra-ni!
 The snow lies there, ro-ra-ni!
 The Milky Way lies there.
 The Milky Way lies there.

Then come simple invocations to elemental forces. In one song the line ''the wind stirs the willows" is repeated thrice and "the wind stirs the grasses" is also repeated thrice. Another invocation goes:

Fog! Fog!
 Lightning! Lightning!
 Whirlwind! Whirlwind!

The change is coming like a great storm and is pictured by the simplest but most powerful words, the songs rising to a climax.

The whirlwind! The whirlwind!
 The whirlwind! The whirlwind!
 The snowy earth comes gliding,
 The snowy earth comes gliding,
 The snowy earth comes gliding,
 The snowy earth comes gliding. [p. 50]

There is dust from the whirlwind,
 There is dust from the whirlwind,
 There is dust from the whirlwind,
 The whirlwind on the mountain,
 The whirlwind on the mountain,
 The whirlwind on the mountain.

The rocks are ringing,
 The rocks are ringing,
 The rocks are ringing.
 They are ringing in the mountains,
 They are ringing in the mountains,
 They are ringing in the mountains.

Then, after the storm has passed, comes a picture of spring, implying the happy ending of the cataclysmic change.

The cottonwoods are growing tall,
 The cottonwoods are growing tall,
 The cottonwoods are growing tall,
 They are growing tall and verdant,
 They are growing tall and verdant,
 They are growing tall and verdant.

Among other tribes who took the Ghost Dance ceremonial from the Paiute the songs are generally more elaborate. Repetition still serves to give a strange form to some of the songs, but as a rule one restatement is deemed sufficient. The subject matter becomes more specific with references to the Crow, the Eagle or Thunderbird, the Buffalo, etc., as well as to psychic experiences in meeting the dead.

Mooney gives 73 songs for the Arapaho tribe, most of them based on individual dreams and resembling the old time Guardian Spirit songs. But they often refer to encounters in the spirit world with dead friends at which games were played over and happy hunts were renewed. And there are some pieces which advance the argument in other ways. For instance, the following

[p. 51]

song tells how the father will withdraw his favors from the whites and give them again to his red children .

My children, when at first I liked the whites,
 My children, when at first I liked the whites,
 I gave them fruits,
 I gave them fruits.

Or this piece which thrills with the joy of living.

My children, my children,
 The wind makes my head feathers sing--
 The wind makes my head feathers sing--
 My children, my children.

Then there are sudden turns from ecstasy to pathos.

Father, have pity on me,
 Father, have pity on me,
 I am crying for thirst,
 I am crying for thirst;
 All is gone--I have nothing to eat
 All is gone--I have nothing to eat.

Next to the end comes a song to the Morning Star.

Father, the Morning Star!
 Father, the Morning Star!
 Look on us, we have danced until daylight,
 Look on us, we have danced until daylight.
 Take pity on us--Hi-i-i!
 Take pity on us--Hi-i-i!

  

HISTORICAL POEMS APPROACH THE EPIC

Poems which deal with historical characters or events were rather common in ancient America and some of them approach the epic as giving extensive narratives lighted by nationalistic ideals. For instance among our northern Indians there are such pieces as the Walum Olum or Red Score of the Delaware which presents historical traditions reaching back several centuries and has

[p. 52]

some passages of literary merit. Then there is the Iroquois Book of Rites which memorializes the Great League, a consolidation of related tribes following the breakdown of the Mound Builder civilization. This wide-spread calamity may have been brought about by the introduction of European epidemic diseases after the voyage of Columbus. The Great League rested on the teachings of Hiawatha for its ethical features while its legal form was evolved in council and over much opposition. The Book of Rites, composed long after the events, is essentially a recitation broken by occasional hymns and dirges. Perhaps the most notable is a summary which in poetic form is arranged as follows by Hale :

Woe! Woe! Hearken ye!
 We are diminished!
 Woe! Woe!
 The cleared land has become a thicket
 Woe! Woe!
 The clear places are deserted.
 Woe!
 They are in their graves--
 They who established it--
 Woe!
 The Great League,
 Yet they declared
 It should endure--
 The Great League
 Woe!
 Their work has grown old.
 Woe!
 Thus we are become miserable.

Probably the oldest fragments of New World literature are laments for the great Toltec captains of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries . The best preserved hymn refers to the rise of the Toltec power in Yucatan and its fall in the valley of Mexico, corresponding to the winning of the Maya city of Chichen Itza by Nacxitl-Quetzalcoatl

[p. 53]

in 1191 and the abandonment of Teotihuacan by Matlaxochitl and other Toltec lords in 1220 A.D.

A Toltec Lament

Here begins the kettle-drum hymn
 Tico, tico, toco, toto, and the hymn ends
 With tiquiti, titi, to titi.
 In Tollan, alas! stood the House of Beams,
 Where still the serpent columns stand.
 But Nacxitl, our noble lord, has departed,
 He has gone into the far country.
 (Already our lamented princes have departed!)
 And there in the Red Land he is undone.
 In Cholula we were when we set forth
 For Poyautecatitlan to cross the water in boats:
 The wept for ones have departed!
 I have come to the foreign boundaries
 I, Ihuiquecholli, I, Mamaliteuchtli:
 I am sad for my lord Ihuitimalli is gone.
 He deserts me, I who am Matlacxochitl.
 Weep, weep! O, weep, weep, weep!
 That the mountains tumbled, I wept
 That the sea rose up in dust, I lamented,
 Wailing that he, my lord, had gone.
 In the Red Land, alas! thou art awaited
 And there thou art bidden to sleep!
 O only weep, weep!
 Thou hast already set forth my lord Ihuitimalli,
 Xicalango-Zacanco has passed to thy command.
 Alas and nevermore! Weep, weep!
 Thy house will remain forever, thy palace
 Carried across the sea will always stay.
 Thou hast left Tollan of the boundaries
 Desolate here, weep, ah weep!
 Without ceasing that lord, that Timallo wept:
 Thy house will remain forever.
 Thou first didst paint the stone and wood in Tollan
 There where thou earnest to rule, Nacxitl our noble lord!
 Never will thy name be forgotten,
 Always will thy people mourn thee, bewail thee!
 The Turquoise House, the Serpent House
 Thou alone didst set it up in Tollan,
 There where thou earnest to rule, Nacxitl our noble Lord!

[p. 54]

The Maya Prophecies of the Katuns contain some references to early times since they are arranged in cycles of 13 katuns of 7200 days each according to the idea that events repeat themselves. These prophecies are constructed in the form of chants. The Prophesy of Katun 9 Ahau, covering events from 1556 to 1575 belongs to the era of persecution under the Spanish Inquisition. History furnishes few more telling indictments directed at their conquerors by a conquered people than this outcry of the disillusioned Mayas. I make three slight changes in Roys' translation  of the latter part of this prophesy although aware that more extensive re-phrasing would emphasize the poetic character of the satirical statement.

Then began the building of the church
 Here in the center of Tihoo:
 Great labor is the destiny of the katun.
 Then began the execution by hanging,
 And the fire at the ends of their hands.
 Then also came ropes and cords into the world.
 Then came the children of the younger brothers
 Under the hardship of legal summons and tribute.
 Tribute was introduced on a large scale,
 And Christianity was introduced on a large scale.
 Then the seven sacraments of God's word were established.
 Receive your guests heartily; our elder brothers come!

No epics pure and simple have survived from ancient America but there are epic-like compositions. The Cakchiquels of Guatamala have an Odyssey which tells how people under valiant leaders set out from Tollan, overcoming natural and supernatural difficulties. Most of this tribal narrative displays a poetic imagery and some of it a distinctly poetic form. If this be history then it is history in a cosmogonic setting with heroes who bulk large in a twilight of the gods. An early passage is about as follows :

[p. 55]

And soon the divination began with them. A bird called the guard of the ravine began to complain within the gate of Tollan as we were going forth from Tollan.

"You shall die, you shall be lost, I am your portent," said this brute to us. "Do you not believe me? Truly your state shall be a sad one." Thus spake to us this brute as is related.

Then another bird called the owl, seated on a red tree, complained and said thus: "I am your portent," he said. "You are not our portent, although you would like to be." we answered this owl. Such were the messengers who gave them their idols said our fathers, our ancestors of old.

Then another bird called the parroquet complained in the sky and said: "I am your portent, you shall die." But we said to the brute, "Do not speak thus: you are but the sign of spring. You wail first when it is spring; when the rain ceases, you wail." Thus we spoke to him.

Even more remarkable is the Popul Vuh or Sacred Book of the Quiche tribe for here there is, as Alexander points out, "the element of critical consciousness, giving the flavor of philosophical reflection." The recital of Creation resembles that of the Bible, nevertheless we cannot be sure that it is not a pagan parallel.

The self-glorification motive is put to scorn in a passage of the Popul Vuh which relates the unkingly end of a certain Vukub-Cakix. He was perhaps a Toltec overlord who hoped to lead the Quiche to the light in a cultural sense 

I will be their sun, I will be their light, I will be the moon to illumine them . . .
 For of silver are the balls of my eyes and their sockets are set with resplendent jade; my teeth shine like precious stones, like the clarity of heaven . . .
 In this manner, then, I am the sun and the moon, the cause that civilizes and makes wise the sons and daughters of the land.
 So spake Vukub-Cakix. But really he was not the sun, and it was only the pride of plumes and metallic glitterings that make him speak thus.

[p. 56]

Next it is explained how two young heroes despoiled Vukub-Cakix of his glory by pulling his teeth!

No examples of pre-Columbian drama have come down to us, but there are references enough to plays and pageants. Father Coto says of the Cakchiquel: "They are friendly to making colloquies and speaking verses in their dramas." At Copan we find theater-like constructions and at Chichen Itza there are platforms upon which it is presumed dramas were enacted. Several post-Columbian plays after the European religious models have been reported in Central America while from eighteenth century Peru comes the famous drama of Ollanta. It shows no traces of pre-Spanish poetic style and seems to have been modelled directly upon a mediocre European work. While agreeing with Hills  that it has little intrinsic merit, I certainly cannot agree with him when he says "Ollanta is the most important literary work that has been composed in any language indigenous to America." Rather its European reception was a reflection of Victorian taste.

  

STYLE IN OLD AMERICAN LITERATURE

Hundreds of mutually unintelligible languages are spoken by natives of the New World and even if most of the consolidations suggested by scientific linguists hold true, there must remain fifty or more unrelated linguistic stocks. For practical purposes each strongly defined language is an independent analysis--the terms of which exist only in the group mind--of all the material facts, actions, mental states and social conventions in settings of time and space, of which the members of the group are conscious, and concerning which they wish to exchange communications.

Language, like any other social tool, refines itself

[p. 57]

through use and takes on appreciated characters of ease and beauty. The deliberate application of the more precise and pleasing ways of communicating thought everywhere gives rise to high style and fine art. Style is so intimately involved in the organic possibilities of a particular language that it cannot, properly speaking, be translated except in so far as it concerns the sequence and arrangements of materials. It can be matched in general effect, and that is about all. In translating poetry, then, the thought and the emotional environment of the thought, can be restated but not the poetic style per se.

But, it seems that ideas, quite aside from the streams of sound which impart them, may have absolute distinction, crystalline simplicity and other gem qualities. Ideas can be looked upon as arrangements of thought stimuli and sometimes a single simile, which we call poetic, may hold a vital comparison or imagery capable of passing freely across the frontiers of speech. It is style of thought rather than style of words which principally concerns the translator.

Indeed, it is difficult enough even to define style in any particular language. Speaking of the esthetic character of Mohave myths Kroeber says in one place :

We are thus face to face with a style of literature which is as frankly decorative as a patterned textile. The pattern is far from random; but it is its color and intricacy, its fineness and splendor, that have meaning, not the action told by its figures.

In another place the same writer speaks more broadly :

For centuries hundreds of thousands of human beings have been forming a style, a variety of styles, according to

[p. 58]

nation and occasion, in which they expressed some of their profoundest feelings; and we cannot make a single exact and intelligible remark about their accomplishments.

It is of course true that we cannot judge style in the Redman's use of words except in so far as it is discernible in concentration or picturesqueness of thought above the mill-run of ordinary speech and in unusual rhythmic effects and balanced logical constructions. Among the Tewa, for instance, the poetic style is much more concentrated than the colloquial one and it contains "high words" and ceremonial phrases. Sahagun complained that Aztec poems and religious chants were esoteric to a degree. "They were composed," he says, "with such deceit that they proclaim only what the demon demands." When, however, an Aztec poet uses such a phrase as "I, the singer, polished my noble, new song like shining jade" we may be assured that style had passed out of the stage of natural selections and into the stage of purposeful cultivation.

The device of rhyme seems not to have been used by the most cultivated Americans of pre-Columbian times, although some interesting uses of it are found in post-Columbian poems from Peru. Nor were there any certain stanza forms except such as were brought about by the repetition of phrases. The outstanding feature of American Indian verse construction comes from parallel phrasing, or, let us say, repetition with an increment, which gives an effect not of rhyming sounds but of rhyming thoughts. Sometimes the ceremonial pattern demands a repetition for each world direction with formal changes involving the color, plant, animal, and so forth, associated with each station on the circuit. But there are other manifestations of parallelism of a more subtle cast. For instance, the Osage ritualist threads the labyrinth

[p. 59]

of apparent fact to reach ultimate truth in the Little House of Mystery in the following parallels :

Towards what shall they direct their footsteps as they travel the path of life? They said, as has been said, in this house.

It is toward four little valleys that they shall direct their footsteps as they travel the path of life.

Verily, it is not four little valleys that is meant.
 It is towards four herds of animals that they shall direct their footsteps as they travel the path of life.

Verily, it is not four herds of animals that is meant.
 It is the little house toward which they shall direct their footsteps as they travel the path of life!

I have explained how poetry is racked upon musical frames and how it develops artistically out of what survives with least mutilation from the bed of Procrustes. While rhythm might conceivably arise as an absolute esthetic invention, actually in American poetry it is induced by drummings and other pulsations. "The rhythmic sense of primitive people," says Franz Boas , "is much more highly developed than our own." He adds: "It requires careful study to understand the structure of primitive rhythm, more so in prose than in song because in this case the help of the melodic pattern is lacking." Here rhythm is conceived as a complex undulation in spoken or chanted words which represents ease and is capable of producing an effect of pleasure. But I think a close analogy holds between the esthetics of poetic diction superimposed on music and the esthetics of decorative art superimposed on a textile fabric. In both cases there is a regulating order which reveals the certain road to beauty.

Many figures of speech and circumlocutions have their origin in the uses of religion, and perhaps we might

[p. 60]

say that the emotional enlargement of religious concepts gives the poet his first opportunity. Aztec ceremonies, grim and grisly with human sacrifice, albeit spectacular and dramatic to the last degree, gained little from the plastic art of the sculptor but much from the euphemistic phrasing of the singer. The latter was able to disclose the hidden spirituality and sincerity of acts, which judged out of their context, could only arouse the sensation of cruel horror.

Take, for example, the Aztec hymn to Xipe Totec, Lord of the Flayed, a foreign god who acquired a wide vogue among Mexican tribes. His ritual challenged all others in the sheer achievement of grewsomeness. But except for the opening passage the hymn addressed to this god deals with returning springtime and the green of corn fields which must be brought to maturity 

Song to Xipe Totec, Lord of the Flayed

Thou Night-toper, who so bashful?
 Then don thy masquerade,
 The golden raiment, put it on!

Let thy jade waters descend, my Lord:
 To green plumes the cypress turns,
 To green plumes the fire-snake turns,
 And the season of hunger leaves me.

Perhaps I shall be stricken
 Upon the ground, I, the young maize stem.
 My heart is like jade but I would
 It were golden. Joyous! when first
 It is ripe and the war-chief born!

With a plenteous maize field, my Lord,
 Thy worshipper looks to thy mountain
 And thee! Joyous! when first
 It is ripe and the war-chief born!

There are phrases here which may seem somewhat cryptic. The golden raiment is, of course, the skin of the

[p. 61]

flayed victim. In the second verse the fire serpent of the dry season changes to the feathered serpent of the rainy season.

More occult still is the hymn addressed to the Fire God of the Aztecs, here called the Yellow-faced One but also known as the Turquoise Lord.

Song of the Yellow faced Ones

In Tzommolco, my fathers, shall I affront you?
 In Tetemocan shall I affront you?

In the House of Music, oh my Lords, the yucca tree booms
 In the House of Disguises the masquerade has come down.

In Tzommolco they have begun to sing;
 In Tzommolco they have begun to sing.
 Why come they not hither,
 Why come they not hither?

In Tzommolco human beings shall he given,
 The Sun has come up!
 Human beings shall be given.

In Tzommolco now ceases the song,
 Without effort he has grown rich, to lordship he has attained,
 It is miraculous his being pardoned.

Oh, little woman utter the speech,
 Lady of the House of Mist, utter the speech abroad!

His priests prepare a sacrifice to the Sun in Tzommolco, a temple in the ward of the travelling merchants in ancient Mexico City (Tenochtitlan). In the House of Music the shell trumpets and the drums were kept: "the yucca tree booms'' refers to the latter, for the hollow log drums of the Aztecs were commonly made of this wood. At the conclusion of the human sacrifice to the rising Sun the offerer of the ceremony receives his reward in wealth and honors. These the Sun has power to convey while a mountain goddess of the morning mist broadcasts his action.

[p. 62]

Concentration of thought reached its peak in the monosyllabic language of the Mayas. The original text of the Maya chant printed below has 90 syllables, while Brinton's English rendering contains 118 syllables or thirty per-cent more . But English is itself a speech which excels in brevity.

Eat, eat, while there is bread,
 Drink, drink while there is water;
 A day comes when dust shall darken the air
 When a blight shall wither the land,
 When a cloud shall arise,
 When a mountain shall be lifted up,
 When a strong man shall seize the city,
 When ruin shall fall upon all things,
 When the tender leaf shall be destroyed,
 When eyes shall be closed in death;
 When there shall be three signs on a tree,
 Father, son and grandson hanging dead on the same tree;
 When the battle flag shall be raised,
 And the people scattered abroad in the forest.

The one thing that remained to be developed in the poetic expression of the American Indian was the individual point of view. But perhaps the world is richer by reason of this lack which leaves the social mode uncompromised.

  

ON TRANSLATING INDIAN POETRY

It is perhaps inevitable that many translators of Indian poems should color, or discolor, primitive ideas with civilized conventions, and this without any intention to deceive. Often their renderings depart so widely from the original texts--as ethnologists know the sense of them--as to leave nothing that is validly Indian, especially when rhyme or warping verse forms are employed. It is well, therefore, to consider the translator's handicap, and also to establish standards of success.

[p. 63]

First of all it must be admitted that some pieces are falsely called Indian, being actually nothing more than compositions by whites in what is fondly believed to be a savage mode. The Taensa songs perpetrated by Parisot in a fabricated language were an elaborate fraud but most writers of spurious Indian songs do not bother with native texts.

Longfellow's Song of Hiawatha is not itself a translation but it has affected translations. It is essentially a literary creation in a peculiar style which the public has come to accept as one befitting Indian materials. Longfellow had before him only Schoolcroft's stilted transcriptions of a few Indian myths. He did not know that Hiawatha flourished about 1600 A.D. and was one of the founders of the original League of the Iroquois. Also he wove into this poem, with its strange medley of mythological incidents mostly taken from the Ojibwa, a love theme which joined the Iroquois of New York with the Sioux of far-off Dakota. He patterned his verse form, with its effective iterations, on the Scandinavian Eddas. It is irony indeed, that Longfellow's Indian Edda--to use his own phrase--should be accepted as archetype not only of Indian expression but also of the Redman's sentiment.

Four great recorders of American Indian poetry have established standards by which the work of others may be judged. The first and greatest of these is Bernardino de Sahagun, conservator of the soul of ancient Mexico. This Spanish priest arrived in Tlaltelolco in 1529, only eight years after Cortes had taken the nearby capital of the Aztecs. He devoted a long life to compiling information on the pre-Spanish culture. The second is Dr. Washington Matthews who served for many years as a physician on the Navaho Reservation. His lasting monuments

[p. 64]

are The Mountain Chant and The Night Chant. The third is Francis La Flesche, himself an Indian of the Omaha tribe and the best student of his race. During the last years of his life La Flesche freed himself from earlier subordinating influences and achieved a great triumph in recording and translating the sacred chants of the Osage tribe. The fourth most eminent achievement in the field of primitive American poetry is that of William Thalbitzer for his thorough study of the songs of the Ammassalik Eskimo. Although a Dane he exhibits remarkable felicity of expression in putting Eskimo over into English.

Sahagun recorded the Mexican songs in the Mexican language and in the same tongue he added glosses to explain symbolic passages in everyday words. He did not make translations of these pieces into Spanish, which is fortunate, for had he done so it is highly probable that his manuscript would have been destroyed. As it was no publication of this or any other part of his splendid compilation was permitted during his lifetime for fear that it would keep alive pagan beliefs and practices which the church was trying to stamp out. The manuscripts lay unnoticed until the end of the eighteenth century. The part containing the ancient songs was first translated into English by Brinton under the title of Rig Veda Americanus. A better translation has been made into German by Seler but it seems that there are archaic expressions which even Sahagun could not explain in his glosses.

The other writers whose works are to be commended from the double standard of fidelity to the original sources and artistic quality in the rendering belong to the school of modern ethnology. They preserve a golden mean while many other moderns incline to one of two

[p. 65]

extreme: some give prosaic renderings of poetic texts and some give poetic renderings which wander so far from originals that they no longer serve as true indices of Indian mentality. After all translation is the carrying over of the totality of expressed thought from the terms of one language to the terms of another.

There is over translation and under translation. Let us consider examples of each for the purpose of defining somewhat more precisely the personal equation of the translator. The Hako Ceremony of the Pawnee possesses dignity and poetic quality of high order and its interpretation with all covert meanings was an achievement of Alice Cunningham Fletcher at the turn of the century. She was assisted by James R. Murie as interpreter and Tabirussawitchi, an elder of the Pawnee tribe, as interpreter. The songs were recorded by phonograph and transcribed into scale music. This Hako Ceremony was an elaborate prayer for children and the welfare of the tribe expressed in symbolical language and action. The fertility of the earth responding to sun and rain produces human food and human happiness. The Corn Mother is the intermediary between man and the cosmic powers.

Admitted that more is meant than the language conveys, nevertheless it is perhaps unfortunate that the English words used by Miss Fletcher in her "rhythmic renditions" go so far beyond the Pawnee words. Implications in regalia, in ceremonial objects and in the pantomime of dancers may form a running commentary in an Indian ceremony and may have esoteric significance in accordance with a veritable philosophy of illusion. But is it wise to enrich the actual text in such fashion as to bring out the context?

Let me illustrate with the first stanza of a typical song as translated by Miss Fletcher :

[p. 66]

Tirawa harken! mighty one,
 Above us in blue silent sky!
 We standing wait thy bidding here.
 The Mother Corn standing waits,
 Waits to serve thee here;
 The Mother Corn stands waiting here.

The Pawnee text out of which this stanza is constructed is mostly a repetition of the simple phrase,

Mother, now I standing, hold.

How then did Miss Fletcher obtain her opening address to the supreme deity of the Pawnee and her varied renderings of the other lines? Well the Corn Mother is an object held in the hand of the performer consisting of an ear of corn fastened to a stick with a plume at the top and with the uppermost kernels painted blue. The ear is therefore a combination of supernatural powers in earth below and heaven above, since blue is the color of the sky. The feather is a cloud or perhaps Tirawa. Also, according to Miss Fletcher, the symbolism is continued in the bowl of sacred blue paint. There is, I suppose, no reason for doubting that the ceremony as a whole is addressed to Tirawa. Nevertheless the re-assemblage of these intimations into the specific phrase:

Tirawa hearken! mighty one
 Above us in blue silent sky!

seems to me to go far beyond the proper rights of translation. The expansion found in this poem is characteristic of the method used for the entire ceremony with its twenty rituals.

But under translation is also found. For instance, Frank Russell's translations of Pima songs are a sort of blanc mange which do not do justice to the material.

[p. 67]

Take the Wind Song which he translates as follows in one of his better renderings :

Wind now commences to sing;
 Wind now commences to sing.
 The land stretches before me,
 Before me stretches away.

Wind's house now is thundering;
 Wind's house now is thundering;
 I go roaring o'er the land
 The land covered with thunder.
 Over the windy mountains;

Over the windy mountains,
 Came the myriad legged wind;
 The wind came running hither.
 The Black Snake Wind came to me;
 The Black Snake Wind came to me
 Came and wrapped itself about
 Came here running with its song.

On the basis of the interlinear words the following is a closer and certainly more interesting rendering of this piece.

Here the wind begins to sing.
 There before me stretches the land.
 Here the wind begins to sing.
 There before me stretches the land. Begins to sing,
 There before me stretches the land.

Wind-house thunder! wind-house thunder!
 I go there in the thunder-covered land.
 Wind-house thunder! wind-house thunder!
 I go there in the thunder-covered land.
 Wind-house thunder!
 I go there in the thunder-covered land.

Over windy mountain! Over windy mountain!
 Everywhere centipede gusts came running.
 Over windy mountain! Over windy mountain!
 Everywhere centipede gusts came running.
 Over windy mountain!
 Everywhere centipede gusts came running. [p. 68]

Black Snake Wind! Black Snake Wind!
 Here came running in a song, tied up in a song.
 Black Snake Wind! Black Snake Wind!
 Here came running in a song, tied up in a song.
 Black Snake Wind!
 Here came running in a song, tied up in a song.

In their study of American Indian Poetry Eda Lou Walton and T. T. Waterman go into a fuller examination of the discrepancies between Russell's literal texts and his literary renderings and also call attention to a Navaho poem doubly translated by Mathews in the Night Chant and by Goddard in Navaho Myths, Prayers and Songs, as poetically very different. But Goddard was able to give considerable distinction to the words of Apache ceremonies where his work stands alone. The short songs by Frances Densmore in her numerous papers on American Indian music are often very fine as are those of Thomas Mooney in his classical Ghost Dance Religion. Ruth Bunzel must certainly be praised for her handling of Zuni material, where Frank Hamilton Cushing and Matilda Coxe Stephenson had preceded her. William Jones has treated the shamanistic material around the Great Lakes in more delicate fashion than some other writers. As a rule the professional linguists are prosaic: it seems that they pay attention merely to structures and to the denotation of words, neglecting the connotation. It is the old story of botanists not seeing the beauty of flowers.

  

TEWA POETRY AS A TYPICAL EXHIBIT

In the Southwest the social and spiritual entities of ancient America have survived to our times but today the more precious elements are rapidly disintegrating under manifold contacts. The Navaho retain the traditions of a semi-nomadic life and the Pueblo tribes those

[p. 69]

of sedentary life reaching back to the times of the Cliff Dwellers. The ceremonial and artistic life of Zuni is better known than that of any other Pueblo group. The other Pueblo groups, including the Hopi villages, the Keres villages and the Tiwa and Tewa villages have been indifferently reported upon, mostly by persons whose ceilings--to use an aeronautic term--are low.

The Tewa constitute a linguistic division of the Tanoan stock and live in the five villages of Tesuque, Nambe, San Ildefonso, Santa Clara and San Juan in the Rio Grande valley north and northwest of Santa Fe. They have been in contact with the white man since the Coronado Expedition and continuously since 1598 when the Spaniards took up residence across the river from San Juan of the Gentlemen--except for the interval of the Pueblo Rebellion (1680-1694). The native culture, always accepting some ideas from the outside, nevertheless managed to intensify its own religious and social life. This was the case until the era of railroad communication when an influx of the whites brought disease and economic pressure. Despoiled of much of their land and water, and burdened with tuberculosis and tracoma, the dwindling villages reached a low level about 1910. Since then there has been some increase in population but the uses of money have struck at the most sacred institutions from the inside.

The examples of Tewa poetry presented in this volume were collected in the years 1909, '10, '11 and '12 while I was engaged in ethnological field work for the American Museum of Natural History. The songs were taken down in native texts, with inter-linear translations and then converted into direct and simple English . Fortunately the Tewa language presents no unusual difficulties in translation.

[p. 70]

While this collection does not by any means exhaust the repertory of the Tewa, it does, I believe, furnish examples of all types of poetic expression in use by them. As regards the secular and esoteric poems the reader will find material for comparison in the recent study of Ruth Bunzel entitled Introduction to Zuni Ceremonialism. There are other publications which might be mentioned but space does not permit. I close with an invocation to the Makers of Storms recorded at Zuni .

Cover my earth mother four times with many flowers.
 Let the heavens be covered with the banked-up clouds.
 Let the earth be covered with fog; cover the earth with rains.
 Great waters, rains, cover the earth. Lightning cover the earth.
 Let thunder be heard over the earth, let thunder be heard;
 Let thunder be heard over the six regions of the earth.

Brooklyn Museum

September 18, 1933.

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 71]

  

Part I

  

HOME SONGS

          I

       The Road of Magic

     
      II

       That Mountain Far Away

     
      III

       I Wonder How my Home Is

     
      IV

       The Willows by the Water Side

     
      V

       Banter

     
      VI

       Lost Love

     
      VII

       Thamu's Song

     
      VIII

       Shadows

     
      IX

       The Inconstant Lover

     
      X

       Disillusion

     
      XI

       Regret and Refusal

     
      XII

       Rags are Royal Raiment . . . . .

     
      XIII

       When the Trading Party Sets Out

     
      XIV

       When the War Party Sets Out

     
      XV

       Corn-grinding Song of Tesuque

     
      XVI

       The Blue Flower Basket

     
      XVII

       The Rabbit by the River

     
      XVIII

       Rains for the Harvest

     
      XIX

       The Cloud Flower Lullaby

     
      XX

       A Lullaby of Nambe

     
      XXI

       Lullaby of Cannibal Giants

     
      XXII

       Sleepy Bird Lullaby

     
      XXIII

       Children's Flower Song of Nambe

     
   

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 72]

  

I

  

THE ROAD OF MAGIC

Yonder on White Mountain Plain
 It was good in the long ago!
 San Juan girls and San Juan boys,
 Together they used to walk
 Where lies the Road of Magic.

Yonder on Cactus Stalk Plain
 It was good in the long ago!
 Together we used to walk,
 San Juan girls and San Juan boys,
 Where lies the Road of Magic.

Yonder on Painted Mountain Plain
 It was good in the long ago!
 San Juan girls and San Juan boys,
 With them I used to walk
 Where lies the Road of Magic.

Here on Medicine Hill Plain
 Again we walk together!
 San Juan girls and San Juan boys,
 Again we walk together
 Where lies the Road of Magic!

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

II

  

THAT MOUNTAIN FAR AWAY

My home over there, my home over there,
 My home over there, now I remember it!
 And when I see that mountain far away
 Why, then I weep. Alas! what can I do?
 What can I do? Alas! what can I do?
 My home over there, now I remember it.

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 73]

  

III

  

I WONDER HOW MY HOME IS

In San Juan I wonder how my home is.
 Surrounded by green cottonwoods my home is,
 Now I remember all and now I sing!
 Now I remember how I used to live
 And how I used to walk amid my corn
 And through my fields. Alas! what can I do?

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

IV

  

THE WILLOWS BY THE WATER SIDE

My little breath, under the willows by the water side we used to sit
 And there the yellow cottonwood bird came and sang.
 That I remember and therefore I weep.
 Under the growing corn we used to sit,
 And there the little leaf bird carne and sang.
 That I remember and therefore I weep.
 There on the meadow of yellow flowers we used to walk
 Oh, my little breath! Oh, my little heart!
 There on the meadow of blue flowers we used to walk.
 Alas! how long ago that we two walked in that pleasant way.
 Then everything was happy, but, alas! how long ago.
 There on the meadow of crimson flowers we used to walk.
 Oh, my little breath, now I go there alone in sorrow.

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 74]

  

V

  

BANTER

Oh, somewhere yonder in the west
 You go away to gather wood.
 And now you shout and now you sing.
 Oh yes, I remember! Abruptly you left me!
 Laughing was I, nevertheless, you left me!

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

VI

  

LOST LOVE

At Su k'wa k'e there used to bloom a flower--
 That flower, that flower, whene'er I see it now
 Alas, so far away, why then I weep;
 That flower, that flower, whene'er I see it now,
 For yellow, fresh and full-blown once it bloomed.

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

VII

  

THAMU'S SONG

Alas! this man of mine!
 His words were like truth
 When he talked to me.
 His words were like truth,
 But right away he proved
 To be an arrant liar!

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 75]

  

VIII

  

SHADOWS

That somebody, my own special one,
 Even his shadow and his voice are loved.
 His foot fall even! But what can I do?
 That other one, O how I hate his shadow!
 His shirt is fine and white, his hat is gray,
 His leggings and his shoes are beaded bright,
 His neckerchief is gay and yellow--but
 For all his clothes, his face, his face is black!

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

IX

  

THE INCONSTANT LOVER

He speaks
 Oh, Little Blue, at your door I wish to be,
 At your door that once was blue and open wide,
 But now is closed. At your door, I wish to be
 Oh, my little breath! Oh, my little heart!

She speaks
 To Comanche girls you paid those words, those eyes!
 Your wish concerns me not and I can't be blamed
 For that! It was under guns that you dared to pay!

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

X

  

DISILLUSION

Long ago how fine was everything!
 Fat mutton was all I ate,
 Coffee and sugar were all I ate,
 But now all I eat is the whip!

[p. 76]

  

XI

  

REGRET AND REFUSAL

The boy speaks
 All round about the door of your house
 The red and full blown flowers grow
 And there are striped ones of yellow
 And there are striped ones of white!
 About your door how gay it used to be,
 My little pony, even he had flowers,
 Alas, alas, and woe is me!

The girl speaks
 Once at my house how yellow, fresh
 And full blown was the flower you had!
 How green and fresh and full-blown
 Was the flower that once you had!

The boy speaks
 My woman also she has many flowers
 Yonder in Truchas, yonder in Seha.

The girl speaks
 So now he comes back to his sweetheart.
 So now you remember me and come back!
 Yes, yonder you thought again of your sweet-heart
 For they sang you a song of corn grinding,
 Those young men there, on Saturday afternoon!

The boy speaks
 Alone with myself and seeing you never
 What can I do, alas what will avail?
 Because you leave me now, you leave me,
 But ever when I think of you I weep.

[p. 77]

The girl speaks
 My foolish one, you cannot hold me now:
 No more will I remember. It is done.

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

XII

  

RAGS ARE ROYAL RAIMENT . . . . .

"That dirty one, that ragged one."
 Thus do they deride us two.

But you, you have good fortune;
 Yellow clothes, pink clothes, blue clothes.
 These are the only kinds you wear!

But you not mind to be a mule!

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

XIII

  

WHEN THE TRADING PARTY SETS OUT

The men speak:
 On the road to the north
 We go with our packs.
 And there we will shout
 And there we will sing!

The women speak:
 Many things you have to remember,
 So that is why you leave us!

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 78]

  

XIV

  

WHEN THE WAR PARTY SETS OUT

So we have bad luck
 For we are men,
 You have good luck now
 For you are women!

To Navajo towns we go
 Ready for war, Goodbye!

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

XV

  

A CORN GRINDING SONG OF TESUQUE

There towards the north,
 There the fog is lying,
 There the fog is lying.
 In the middle stands Blue Corn
 Happily, prettily, she is singing
 Ha-we-ra-na na-a-se

There towards the west
 There the fog is lying,
 There the fog is lying,
 In the middle stands Yellow Corn
 Happily, prettily, she is singing
 Ha-we-ra-na na-a-se

There towards the south
 There the fog is lying,
 There the fog is lying,
 In the middle stands Red Corn
 Happily, prettily, she is singing
 Ha-we-ra-na na-a-se

[p. 79]

There towards the east
 There the fog is lying,
 There the fog is lying,
 In the middle stands White Corn
 Happily, prettily, she is singing
 Ha-we-ra-na na-a-se

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

XVI

  

THE BLUE FLOWER BASKET

The blue flower basket
 On the top of heaven seems.
 It gleams and all is done!
 Agowaha ne-e-e
 Esha ha'we rana
 Ma-a-si

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

XVII

  

THE RABBIT BY THE RIVER

There by the river runs a little rabbit.
 Why did you not catch him?
 Why did you not kill him?
 We feel like doing just that!
 Bent over like a little old man
 Off he goes with a watermelon;
 Bent over like a little old man
 Off he goes with a muskmelon!

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 80]

  

XVIII

  

RAINS FOR THE HARVEST

Over there in your fields you have
 Musk-melon flowers in the morning.
 Over there in your fields you have
 Corn-tassle flowers in the morning.
 In your fields now the water bird sings
 And here in your village the fogs
 And the black clouds come massing.
 They come here to see! They come here to see!
 Mbe'e a-ha we-o-'e

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

XIX

  

THE CLOUD-FLOWER LULLABY

In the north the cloud flower blossoms,
 And now the lightning flashes,
 And now the thunder clashes
 And now the rain comes down!
 A-a-aha, a-a-aha, my little one.

In the west the cloud flower blossoms,
 And now the lightning flashes,
 And now the thunder clashes,
 And now the rain comes down!
 A-a-aha, a-a-aha, my little one.

[p. 81]

In the south the cloud flower blossoms,
 And now the lightning flashes,
 And now the thunder clashes,
 And now the rain comes down!
 A-a-aha, a-a-aha, my little one.

In the east the cloud flower blossoms,
 And now the lightning flashes,
 And now the thunder clashes,
 And now the rain comes down!
 A-a-aha, a-a-aha, my little one.

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

XX

  

A LULLABY OF NAMBE

Go to sleep,
 Go to sleep,
 Lest something come,
 To take away
 My little one.
 So you must sleep,
 My little one.

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 82]

  

XXI

  

LULLABY OF CANNIBAL GIANTS

Stop crying! Go to sleep, my little boy Primrose.
 That Saveyo Sendo will take you if you cry.
 Over there he will eat you, if you do not stop crying;
 Right now he will eat you, if you do not stop crying.
 That Saveyo Sendo in his bag he will put you.
 Stop crying! Go to sleep, my little boy Primrose.
 Over there he will take you, then I will be crying!
 Very thick now are the leaves of the cottonwood,
 Very thick now are the leaves of the willow,
 There he will take you in under the willow,
 That Saveyo Sendo whose teeth we all fear.
 Over there now, if you do not stop crying,
 Over there now, on the crest of the mountains,
 Those Saveyo walk and they hear every sound.
 And there in the mountains that one he will take you
 Where now they are taking the big boys and girls.

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

XXII

  

SLEEPY BIRD LULLABY

There are many sleepy little birds,
 Sleepy little birds, sleepy little birds,
 So go to sleep, my little girl,
 My little Frosted-Cockle-Burr,
 O, come you sleepy little birds
 And slumber on her hollow eyes
 That she may sleep the livelong day,
 That she may sleep the livelong night.

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 83]

  

XXIII

  

CHILDREN'S FLOWER SONG OF NAMBE

Prettily we wear flowers.
 Little flowers of the muskmelon we wear,
 Little flowers of the watermelon we wear,
 So now we wear flowers.

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 84] [p. 85]

  

Part II

  

SACRED CHANTS AND CEREMONIAL SONGS

          XXIV

       Initiation Chant of the Kwirana K'osa

     
      XXV

       Initiation Chant of the Tewa K'osa

     
      XXVI

       Lake Song of the Tewa K'osa

     
      XXVII

       How the Gods are Brought, a Dramatic Fragment

     
      XXVIII

       Uru-tu-sendo's Song

     
      XXIX

       Song of the Sky Loom

     
      XXX

       The Corn-Silk Women's Song

     
      XXXI

       Rain Magic Song

     
      XXXII

       Songs in the Turtle Dance of Nambe

     
      XXXIII

       Songs in the Turtle Dance of Santa Clara

     
      XXXIV

       Songs of the Race Dance

     
      XXXV

       Song of Avanyu, the Storm Serpent

     
      XXXVI

       Scalp Dance Song

     
   

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 86]

  

XXIV

  

INITIATION CHANT OF THE KWIRANA K'OSA

Here and now we bring you, oh our old men gods,
 Sun Fire Deity and Blue Cloud Person of the North,
 Sun Fire Deity and Yellow Cloud Person of the West,
 Sun Fire Deity and Red Cloud Person of the South,
 Sun Fire Deity and White Cloud Person of the East,
 Sun Fire Deity and Dark Cloud Person of the Below,
 Sun Fire Deity and All-colored Cloud Person of the Above,
 Here-at we bring you now your special prayer stick,
 We make for you an offering of sacred meal,
 A little bit for all, we make these offerings to you!

Stand ready, then, at dawn to walk
 With rain upon the northward mountain top,
 Upon the westward mountain top of the great lake dell,
 Upon the southward mountain top where the Tshu people sit,
 Upon the eastward mountain top of the great dawn,
 Upon the mountain top that rests below the earth,
 Upon the mountain top of the Sky Universe above!

Bring cloud flowers that are not barren of rain,
 Set them upon the far off northward mountain top,
 Set them thereat upon the westward mountain top,
 Set them thereat upon the southward mountain top,
 Set them thereat upon the eastward mountain top,
 Set them thereat upon the mountain top below the Earth,
 Set them thereat upon the mountain top above the Sky,
 Thereat set them, those cloud flowers not barren of rain!

[p. 87]

There on the middle mountains first lay fogs.
 That is why from there to San Juan town ready at dawn
 You bring your lightnings, thunders and your rains together,
 Transforming with magic the fields that in the middle are!
 And that is why the stretched-out plain is now revived,
 And that is why the hills of the plain are now revived,
 And that is why your shrinking lakes, your lakes
 Where they are lying, are now revived thereat!

May all tame animals increase and children all,
 For little people are we all to be loved of the Gods
 As far away as our Great Mother's sound of breathing
 Reaches. Even to the Utes, Apaches, Navajos,
 Kiowas, Comanches, Cheyennes, even to all of them!
 To the Mexican people, even to them it reaches!
 To the people of America, even to them the sound
 Of our Great Mother's breathing reaches. So now
 They are loved of the Gods and each by the other loved!
 So that is why we hope to find our living here,
 We mortal men! Then place good summers and
 Good days and nights of harvest! For each
 The same, place then good days and nights of harvest!

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 88]

  

XXV

  

INITIATION SONG OF THE TEWA K'OSA

The K'osa make pantomime
           In Pine Tree Glade
           It rained this much
           In a water-hole amid the rocks.

The K'osa address Kakanyu Sendo
           Old Man Kakanyu!
           The big yellow eye
           Runs off in the water!

The K' osa make pantomime
           In Pine Tree Glade
           It rained this much
           In a water hole amid the rocks.

The K'osa address Uhu Sendo
           Old man Uhu!
           The big yellow eye
           Runs off in the water.

The Cloud People pursue the K'osa
           No, my man! No, my man.
           The yellow biscuit with a hole--
           That is all I mean!

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

XXVI

  

LAKE SONG OF THE TEWA K'OSA

Towards Leaf Lake we are going
 Under the farthest lightening we are going,
 Under the thunder we are going,
 Under the rain and the dew we are going,
 Even now we are arriving.

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 89]

  

XXVII

  

HOW THE GODS ARE BROUGHT

A Dramatic Fragment

Argument: This is the culminating episode of a long myth which tells how the two Little People, miraculous twins, defeated the False Priests and established the true rituals. They have been successful in earlier tests but now comes the supreme test of bringing the gods into the underground ceremonial lodge. The ritual here described is used by the K'osa. They blow ashes from the open hand to imitate a cloud and on this cloud they see the rain gods walking.

The Twins hold dialogue

Then they two went to the fireplace, and out of it took handfuls of ashes.
 And standing where they were one said to the other:
 "Yes, my twin, you go first, you try your magic first!''
 So that one threw the ashes in his hand towards the north.
 And he said: "Nothing at all I see there so next your turn it is to make magic; and in what direction do you mean, my twin?" he said.
 "Well somewhere towards the east," that one said deceitfully, but really towards the west he threw his ashes. "Nothing at all I see there, brother twin.''

The False Priests make side remarks

Then the others said to one another. "From where could those two bring something? Why do they talk so uselessly?"

The Twins resume

"Yes, now you try it again, and in what direction, my twin?"

[p. 90]

"Well, somewhere over there, " he said and made ready to throw towards the north but really towards the south he threw the ashes. Then he said, "Nothing at all appears, so next you try again."

The False Priests make side remarks

"What can those two bring from anywhere? Just watch how they pretend! Pretty soon they should be finished off!

The Twins resume

Again it is the older twin's turn. "Slowly now you try it, my twin brother, but in what direction?"
 "Well, somewhere towards the west" and westward he made like to throw the ashes, but really to the east he threw them.
 "Up yonder," he said, "up yonder at Stone Man Lake the troubled waters go tsha' ama! tsha'a ma! tsha'a ma!
 "That is what I see and hear, so now quickly, my twin; quickly, my twin; you must hurry!"
 So next that one threw ashes, "But where," he said, "but where?" and yonder towards Stone Man. Lake he likewise threw his ashes.
 "Now, my twin, the water moves" he said, "tsha'ama! tsha' ama! tsa' ama! You said so, yes! but there in the middle of the lake one is peeping out! I see him! From there now they come out, they come out, they come out around the edge of the lake! This way and that they walk about!"

[p. 91]

"From there now they lift up their fog rainbow and to the north on Fish Ridge where the ditch-head lies, they rest their fog rain- bow. Now on the top of it they come to that mountain where the ditch-head lies! They come, my twin brother! So hurry, twin brother!''
 And next that one threw ashes towards Fish Ridge where the ditch-head lies. "There they come,'' he said. "From there they lift their fog rainbow again and on Fish Summit they rest their fog rainbow! Now on top of it they keep coming!"
 "And now a cloud flower is seated there on Stone Man Mountain top! Now it thunders hard! a light gleams, the lightning flashes! And now at Yunge village, the people are seeing it. So now, my twin brother, you try it."
 And next that one threw ashes towards Fish Summit Lake. "There they have come, just as you said. From there they lift up their fog rainbow and at the town on the end of Cedar Face they rest their fog rainbow. Still on the top of it they keep coming! And now it thunders strongly, hail and great rain waters fall here at Yunge village!

The False Priests make side remarks

Then the others said to one another, "What can those two bring? Even now they should be made what they will soon be made--universe wanderers in the void!

[p. 92]

Rattle flower Youth and Flint-Corn youth speak

Then Tini povi enu and Khu mbi enu said "Wait, all of you! Just wait, all of you!"

The Twins resume

"Quickly, my twin," he said to him and threw ashes towards the town at the end of Cedar Face. "As you said, they come! From there next they lift their fog rainbow and towards Muddy Water Lake and there at Muddy Water Lake they rest their fog rainbow and on top of it they keep coming!"
 And more and more the lightning flashes entered the lodge where they were sitting as if destruction were coming. And now on the roof of the lodge the footsteps of the watchers sounded and they entered.
 "Next quickly, my twin brother! There as you said they come to Muddy Water Lake! and now they lift their fog rainbow to Blue Willow leaf Lake and rest."
 And then even the houses shook with thunder.

The False Priests make remarks

And now those others looked at one another and spoke. "But what can those two bring?" And though they were seeing, still they were not believing.

Battle flower Youth and Flint-Corn Youth speak

"But wait a little! but wait! You will see what you will see," they said.

[p. 93]

The Twins resume

"Then quickly" he told him, "my twin brother, they have come to Blue Willow Leaf Lake, as you say! From there now they lift up their fog rainbow and here, where the stone gods of Yunge live, they rest their fog rainbow. Now they come on! Here they come, now!"
 So those two said. And the hail was thrown suddenly into the lodge.
 And the White Corn Girls stood there with baskets of meal ready to give an offering of food!
 Then quickly he said to his twin brother: "Here in Yunge where the Stone Gods live you said they were coming. And now they lift their fog rainbow right to the lodge. At the head of the ladder now they put down their fog rainbow. Here they come now! Enter! Enter our Old Men Gods!

So now those false ones were walled in by the lightnings. They were struck by the lightnings and their entrails were riven.

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

XXVIII

  

URU-TU-SENDO'S SONG

Yonder comes the dawn,
 The universe grows green,
 The road to the Underworld
 Is open! yet now we live,
 Upward going, upward going!

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 94]

  

XXIX

  

SONG OF THE SKY LOOM

Oh our Mother the Earth, oh our Father the Sky,
 Your children are we, and with tired backs
 We bring you the gifts that you love.
 Then weave for us a garment of brightness;
 May the warp be the white light of morning,
 May the weft be the red light of evening,
 May the fringes be the falling rain,
 May the border be the standing rainbow.
 Thus weave for us a garment of brightness
 That we may walk fittingly where birds sing,
 That we may walk fittingly where grass is green,
 Oh our Mother the Earth, oh our Father the Sky!

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

XXX

  

THE CORN-SILK-WOMEN'S SONG

Ones of the Northern Lake
 Corn-Silk-Women ye are,
 And now ye come to us!

Then lay long life at once upon us,
 And upon our children
 The love of all the gods!

May our children have many children
 And our girls of San Juan live long!

And now we seek to hear
 The Corn-Silk-Women say
 Such words as we have said!

[p. 95]

Long life now we ask,
 And to be loved,
 And to rear many children,
 And to be given kindly fates!

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

XXXI

  

RAIN MAGIC SONG

Ready we stand in San Juan town,
 Oh, our Corn Maidens and our Corn Youths!
 Oh, our Corn Mothers and our Corn Fathers!

Now we bring you misty water
 And throw it different ways,
 To the north, the west, the south, the east
 To heaven above and the drinking earth below!

Then likewise throw you misty water
 Toward San Juan!
 Oh, many that you are, pour water
 Over our Corn Maidens' ears!
 On our Wheat Maidens
 Thence throw you misty water,
 All round about us here!

On Green Earth Woman's back
 Now thrives our flesh and breath,
 Now grows our strength of arm and leg,
 Now takes form our children's food!

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 96]

  

XXXII

  

SONGS IN THE TURTLE DANCE OF NAMBE

First song

Yellow Flower Girl!
 Blue Flower Girl!
 Mottled Corn Girl!
 Blue Corn Girl!
 Thus on the plain,
 Thus on the plain,
 Everything they revive,
 And hither return!

Second song

Out over Great Dawn Canyon Lake
 The various fog plains be scattered
 And now from there Cloud Boys come walking
 And now from there Cloud Girls come walking.
 With little ones they come to Nambe town
 To make the children live and grow
 That, one and all, we may be happy.

Third song

Rain waters now are falling
 Afar the thunders crash,
 Afar the lightnings gleam,
 Afar the lightnings flash
 And quickly now return.

Fourth song

The red round fruits
 We gather in!
 The red round fruits
 We gather in!

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 97]

  

XXXIII

  

SONGS IN THE TURTLE DANCE AT SANTA CLARA

First song

Long ago in the north
 Lies the road of emergence!
 Yonder our ancestors live,
 Yonder we take our being.
 Yet now we come southwards
 For cloud flowers blossom here
 Here the lightning flashes,
 Rain water here is falling!

Second song

A ha haya, ehe he,
 A ha haya, ehe he!
 Fog clouds and cloud flowers
 On various mountains lie,
 Cloud flowers are blooming now
 Te he kwa, te he kwa!
 From the north the lightning
 Now makes flashes,
 The thunder rumbles now,
 Rain water now is falling!
 A ha we ahe, aha we ahe,
 Aha a a a, e e he e heye!

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 98]

  

XXXIV

  

SONGS OF THE RACE DANCE

The Summer People

Old Man of the Sun
 Stand ready at dawn
 On Cactus Ridge!

Old Man of the Moon!
 Stand ready at dawn
 On Cactus Ridge!

Stand ready at dawn,
 Thence for San Juan!
 Stand ready at dawn,
 For Eagle-Tail-Rain-Standing Road!

The Winter People

Little Twin White Men,
 Of Stone Man Mountain,
 Stand ready at dawn!

Thence for San Juan
 Thence for Rain-Standing Road
 At San Juan!

Man of the Great Night-Star
 Stand ready at dawn
 Thence for San Juan!

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 99]

  

XXXV

  

SONG OF AVANYU, THE STORM SERPENT

Storm Serpent Old Man
 Come hither now
 For here we are dancing.

Laden with rain
 Now you arrive!

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

XXXVI

  

SCALP DANCE SONG

Next after comes Coyote, Stretched-Out-in Dew,
 Next after braves of yesterday or the day before!
 To Blue Earth town of the Navahos we go
 And arriving we shall kill. So that is why
 Coyote, Stretched-Out-in Dew, sits straight and ready.
 Wi-ya-he-na, a-nde-a-a. The next scalp!

Navajo youths! your fault alone it is
 That now you die fallen along your house.
 Your fault alone it is that now you die
 Fallen along your house with earth-streaked thighs,
 That now your mouths are stopped and streaked with earth.
 Ho-o-wi-na, a-ye-a-a. The next scalp!

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 100] [p. 101]

  

Part III

  

MAGIC SONGS AND PRAYERS

          XXXVII

       That Buffalo May Come

     
      XXXVIII

       Song of the Hunter's Wife

     
      XXXIX

       With Dangling Hands

     
      XL

       When the Deer Come

     
      XLI

       Eagle Song

     
      XLII

       Speech for Good Trading

     
      XLIII

       When the First Fruits are Taken

     
      XLIV

       When the Corn Mothers are Fed

     
      XLV

       Three Prayers for Long Life

     
      XLVI

       When the Child is Named

     
      XLVII

       When the Man Takes Office

     
      XLVIII

       Last Words at the Grave

     
      XLIX

       When the Scalps are Fed

     
      L

       Dead on the War Path

     
   

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 102]

  

XXXVII

  

THAT BUFFALO MAY COME

From far away frozen Buffalo Country
 Hither now they come with their little ones,
 Rapidly now they walk, rapidly they walk.
 Even now they reach the Red Bird Cap.

Oh Buffalo Old Man! Oh Buffalo Old Woman!
 Come hither rapidly with your little ones.
 To Y'o pha k'ewe come with your little ones.

They bring to us long life together
 And even now they reach Tesuque!

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

XXXVIII

  

SONG OF THE HUNTER'S WIFE

Now comes the deer up to our house
 He brings the needed food of life,
 While we give needed food to him.

Old women deer, old men deer,
 We love you! So now come hither,
 On the road that we have laid!
 Come hither to our house where we
 May love you! Eat now this little!

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 103]

  

XXXIX

  

WITH DANGLING HANDS

Come all game animals large,
 Come all game animals small,
 Hither come with dangling hands
 To Nambe town! So now come all
 To Nambe town with dangling hands!

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

XL

  

WHEN THE DEER COME

So the deer will hear
     Our elder brother deer,
     Our elder sister deer,
     We are going to meet you,
     We are going to meet you.

They meet the deer
     Then deer will come,
     Then deer will come,
     Come on with us
     Come on with us.
     Na-e-e-e, Ya-e-a-e-na
     Na-e-e-e, ya-e-e-e-na.

When the deer dance.
     Now you follow us
     Now you follow us
     Here we are dancing
     Here we are dancing
     In this manner
     In this manner
     Yo-ha-ri-yo, yo-ha-ri-yo
     A-a-a-he-yo-o.

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 104]

  

XLI

  

EAGLE SONG

On Leaf-Long Mountain
 Rabbit Old Woman, Old Man!
 Hereabouts they walk.
 They are my dear ones!
 Ya'a heya, heya
 E'e ni ya, ni ya he.

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

XLII

  

SPEECH FOR GOOD TRADING

Now round about I guess you are,
 You enemy peoples of strange speech
 Such as you O Utes, such as you, O Kiowas,
 Such as you O Comanches, such as you O Cheyennes,
 Such as you O Pawnees, where you are,
 Such as you, O warring peoples all!

So now from here I think of you,
 From here I call aloud your names,
 With money to trade for your good work
 Of aching backs and sweating brows.
 And when your village we have reached,
 And you have something not for sale,
 Easily may it come into our hands!

That is what we wish and therefore
 I speak now that this to us may happen!

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 105]

  

XLIII

  

WHEN THE FIRST FRUITS ARE TAKEN

Oh Summer Leaf! Our old man,
 Now I bring you fruits
 From our weary labors.
 Then eat and being strong
 Give food again to us!

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

XLIV

  

WHEN THE CORN MOTHERS ARE FED

The Bear Priest sings and throws meal on the altar
     Now and here
     My gods I give you
     This corn meal
     And thank you.

The People join and throw meal on the altar
     Now and here,
     Our old women Gods,
     Take this!
     Long life give us
     And our children!

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 106]

  

XLV

  

PRAYER FOR LONG LIFE

Our old women gods, we ask you!
 Our old women gods, we ask you!
 Then give to us long life together,
 May we live until our frosted hair
 Is white; may we live till then
 This life that now we know!

Our old women gods,
 Come hither,
 Take this!
 Long life give us
 And our people!

We bring you meal
 For arm-leg nourishment
 Then grant to us
 Our span of life
 And to our children also!

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

XLVI

  

WHEN THE CHILD IS NAMED

The mother and godmother on the housetop before dawn:
     the godmother speaks:

        My Sun!
         My Morning Star!
         Help this child to become a man.
         I name him
         Rain-dew Falling!
         I name him
         Star Mountain!

The mother throws a live coal: the godmother throws sacred meal.

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 107]

  

XLVII

  

WHEN THE MAN TAKES OFFICE

The summer cacique speaks:
         Here and now my arm,
         Painted Sand-burrs Bringing,
         Of the Sun People, chosen
         Old-woman, old-man to be:
         Accept this governor's staff,
         Agree now to help it
         Protect it, obey it, love it.

The new governor replies:
         Here and now, my fathers,
         Summer priest, Winter priest,
         I hear your words and obey them.

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

XLVIII

  

LAST WORDS AT THE GRAVE

Eat the food that now we bring you
 And remember us no more!
 Give us ample food, and now
 No longer we remember you!

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 108]

  

XLIX

  

WHEN THE SCALPS ARE FED

Down yonder at their village
 The Navaho youths lie scalped,
 The young men of Santa Clara
 Those blue-bird skins stripped off.

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

  

L

  

DEAD ON THE WAR PATH

This very day, a little while ago, you lived
 But now you are neither man nor woman,
 Breathless you are, for the Navahos killed you!
 Then remember us not, for here and now
 We bring you your food. Then take and keep
 Your earth-walled place: once! twice!
 Three times! four times! Then leave us now!

Songs of the Tewa, by Herbert Joseph Spinden, [1933], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 109]

  

APPENDIX

Abbreviations used in referring to articles:

A.A. American Anthropologist. References to volume number, old series (O.S.) and new series (N.S.).

A.M.N.H. American Museum of Natural History--Memoirs (Mem.) and Anthropological Papers (Anth. Pap.) referred to by number.

B.A.E. Bureau of American Ethnology, Annual Reports (Ann. Rep.) and Bulletins (Bull.) referred to by number.

J.A.F. Journal of American Folk-Lore.

L.A.A.L. Library of American Aboriginal Literature, edited by D. G. Brinton, referred to by author and separate title.

M.A.F.S. Memoirs of the American Folk-Lore Society.

P.A.E.S. Publications of the American Ethnological Society.

U.C.P. University of California Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology.

  

NOTES ON INTRODUCTORY ESSAY

^1 Kroeber, A. L. Handbook of the Indians of California, B.A.E., Bull. 78, p. 511.

^2 La Flesche, F. The Osage Tribe, Published in four parts: I, B.A.E., 36th Ann. Rep. II, B.A.E., 39th Ann. Rep. III, B.A.E., 43rd Ann. Rep. IV., B.A.E., 45th Ann. Rep. Reference in I, pp. 85-86.

^3 Idem, III, p. 530.

^4 Brinton, D.G. Ancient Nahuatl Poetry, L.A.A.L., vol. VII, p. 41.

^5 Idem, pp. 45-47.

^6 Rendered from the Spanish of Lafone Quevado, S. A., El Culto de Tonapa, Revista Museo de la Plata, III, pp. 323-379, with reference to the translations of Markham, Sir C. R., The Incas of Peru, London, 1910, pp. 100-101 and Means, P. A., Ancient Civilizations of the Andes, New York, 1931, pp. 437-438. Other Peruvian poems are admirably discussed in the last mentioned work, and their sources given.

^7 Wissler, C., The American Indian, New York, 1917, pp. 143-144.

^8 Grosse, E. The Beginnings of Art, New York, 1897, pp. 224.

^9 A study of the musical tones of two-lipped drums has recently been published by the National Museum of Mexico: Castaneda, D. and Mendoza, V. T. Los Teponaztles en las civilizations precortesianas, Anales del Museo Nacional de Archeologia, Historia y Ethnografia, Vol. VIII, No. 1, pp. 1-80. John E. Cornyn insists that the Aztecs employed the trochaic meter; in his Song of Quetzalcoatl he uses Hiawatha-like versification.

^10 Brinton, D. G. Op. cit., pp. 106, 121, 125.

^11 Densmore, R. Chippewa Music; Published in two parts: I, B.A.E., Bull. 45, II, B.A.E., Bull. 53. This reference in I, p. 41.

^12 Whiffen, T. The Northwest Amazons, p. 190.

^13 Thalbitzer, W. The Ammassalik Eskimo, Part II, No. 3, Language and Folklore, Copenhagen, 1923, p. 206.

This report is published in a Danish serial devoted to the scientific description of Greenland, some articles being in Danish and some in English.

^14 Swanton, J. R. Haida Songs, P. A. E. S., III, pp. 5 and 22.

^15 Thalbitzer, W. Op. cit., pp. 211-212.

[p. 110]

^16 B.A.E., 43rd Ann. Rep., pp. 341-343.

^17 Densmore, F. Teton Sioux Music; B.A.E., Bull. 61, pp. 165-166.

^18 Densmore, F. Chippewa Music, I, p. 127.

^19 Mooney, T. The Ghost Dance Religion and the Sioux Outbreak of 1890, B.A.E., 15th Ann. Rep., p. 976.

^20 Thalbitzer, Op. cit., pp. 260-261.

^21 Russell, F. The Pima Indians, B.A.E., 26th Ann. Rep., p. 290.

^22 Dorsey, G. A. The Pawnee-Mythology, Pub. 59 Carnegie Inst. of Washington, pp. 222-225.

^23 Densmore, F. Papago Music, B.A.E., Bull. 90, p. 173.

^24 Densmore, F. Chippewa Music, II, pp. 253-254.

^25 La Flesche, F. The Osage Tribe, IV, pp. 544-547.

^26 Idem, I, p. 211.

^27 Thalbitzer, W. Op. cit., p. 241.

^28 Rink, H. J. Tales and Traditions of the Eskimo, London, 1875, pp. 67-68. The poem is recast in the form printed above in Brinton, D. G. American Aboriginal Poetry, Proc. Numismatic and Antiquarian Soc. of Philadelphia, pp. 21-22. For comparison I give Rink's translation which has a prose form but with dots to indicate the omission of the meaningless refrain. With the help of these dots the verses can be reconstructed as follows:

Savdlat

The south, the south, oh the south yonder.
 When settling on the midland coast I met Pulangitsissok
 Who had grown stout and fat from eating halibut.
 Those people from the midland coast they don't know speaking,
 Because they are ashamed of their speech.
 Stupid they are besides.
 Their speech is not alike,
 Some speak like the northern, some like the southern;
 Therefore we can't make out their talk.

Pulangitsissok

There was a time when Savdlat wished that I should be a good kayaker,
 That I could take a good load on my kayak,
 Many years ago some day he wanted me to put a heavy load on my kayak
 (This happened at the time) when Savdlat had his kayak tied to mine (for fear of being capsized)
 Then he could carry plenty upon his kayak.
 When I had to tow thee, and thou didst cry most pitiful,
 And thou didst grow afeared,
 And wast nearly upset,
 And hadst to keep thy hold by help of my kayak strings.

^29 Thalbitzer, W. Op. cit., p. 329.

^30 Idem, pp. 246-247.

^31 Rink, H. J. Op. cit., p. 68. Also recast by Brinton in the article referred to in note 28.

^32 Boas, F. Ethnology of the Kwakiutl, B.A.E., 35th Ann. Rep., pp. 12981299.

^33 Idem, pp. 1304-1306.

[p. 111]

^34 Densmore, F. Chippewa Music, I, pp. 88-90.

^35 Densmore, F. Chippewa Music, I, p. 154.

^36 Brinton, D. G. Aboriginal American Authors, Philadelphia, 1883, p. 48.

^37 P. 89.

^38 Couto de Magalaes--O Selvagem, Rio Janeiro, 1876, pp. 140-142.

^39 Swanton, J. R. Tlingit Myths and Texts, B.A.E., Bull. 39, pp. 409-410.

^40 Idem, p. 410.

^41 Idem, p. 411.

^42 Boas, F. Op. cit., p. 1292.

^43 Thalbitzer, W. Op. cit., p. 407.

^44 Densmore, F. Papago Music, pp. 126, 129, 130.

^45 Matthews, W. Navaho Gambling Songs, A.A., Vol. 2, O.S., p. 15.

^46 Idem, p. 9.

^47 Matthews, W. Songs of Sequence of the Navajos. J.A.F. Vol. VII. p. 186.

^48 Matthews, W. The Mountain Chant, B.A.E., 5th Ann. Rep. p. 393.

^49 Idem, p. 459.

^50 Matthews, The Night Chant, A.M.N.H., Mem., Vol. 6, pp. 78-79.

^51 Idem, pp. 279-282.

^52 Idem, p. 294. Sialia, I may say, is the scientific name for the genus and therefore a latin word. Matthews puts it in italics.

^53 Penard, A. P. and T. E. Popular Notions Pertaining to Primitive Stone Artifacts in Surinam, Jour. Am. Folk Lore, Vol. 30 (1917), pp. 251261. I make two slight changes in the texts, using "lightning eel" instead of the native term Pulake and "clear the way" for "move out of the way."

^54 Mooney, T. Op. cit., p. 711.

^55 Idem, p. 721.

^56 Kroeber, A. L. Op. cit., p. 515.

^57 Mooney, T. Op. cit., p. 1052, Song No. 1. The other Paiute songs given below are Nos. 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9 on pages 1054-1055.

^58 Idem, p. 961 et seq. Arapaho songs Nos. 3, 8, 28, and 72 on pages 958-1011.

^59 Hale, H. The Iroquois Book of Rites, L.A.A.L., Vol. II, p. 153. Other examples of Iroquois religious chants are found in the writings of Arthur C. Parker, etc.

^60 Lehmann, W. Eine Tolteken-Klangesang, Festschrift Eduard Seler, Stuttgart, 1892, pp. 281-319, reviews the texts of these ancient pieces.

In the Popul Vuh of the Quiche a Toltec lament is given in part, for we read: And here they started their hymn called "We See the Dawn." They sang the dirge and their hearts, their vitals, mourned its burden.

"Alas! we have lost each other in Tollan!
  We are dispersed and our younger brothers,
  Our elder brothers, are left behind!
  Indeed we have seen the sun-
  Where are the others now that light has come."

^61 For the chronological significance of these prophesies see my Maya Dates and What they Reveal, Brooklyn Museum, Science Bulletin, Vol. IV., No. 1, pp. 18-21.

^62 Brinton, D. G. The Annals of the Cakchiquels, L.A.A.L., Vol. VI, p. 77.

^63 Brasseur de Bourbourg, Popul Vuh, Paris, i861, pp. 31-33. There is a recent Guatamalan edition by Villacorta and Rodas entitled [p. 112] Popul Buj. Also discussed in Alexander's volume on Latin America in The Mythology of All Races, Boston, 1922. Vol. XI, pp. 159 et seq.

[p. 112]

^64 Hills, E. C. The Quechua Drama Ollanta. The Romanic Review V, pp. 127-176 covers the subject of the date of this work very fully.

^65 Kroeber, A. L. Op. cit., p. 757.

^66 Idem, p. 96, but also see his critical notes on pp. 659-660 in the same volume.

^67 La Flesche, F. The Osage Tribe, I, p. 288. In the four great sections of La Flesche's work the idea of the proper choice to be made in a field of material advantage finds expression over and over again. For a somewhat fuller version see II, pp. 258-259.

^68 Boas F. Stylistic Aspects of Primitive Literature. J.A.F., Vol. 38, p. 330.

^69 Seler, E. Die Religiosen Gesange der alten Mexicaner, Gesammelte Abhandlungen, Vol. II. The Song to Xipe Totec, p. 1071-1078, the Song of Xochipilli in my wife's recent study of The Place of Tajin in Totonac Archaeology in A.A., vol. XXXV, N.S., pp. 255-256.

^70 There are two slightly different renderings by D. G. Brinton, the first in his Maya Chronicles, pp. 126-127 and the second, which is used here in his Essays of an Americanist, Philadelphia, 1890, p. 303.

^71 Fletcher, A. C. The Hako: A Pawnee Ceremony, B.A.E., 22nd Ann. Rep. Pt. II, pp. 42-48 and 290-291.

^72 Russell, F. Op. cit., p. 324.

^73 Spinden, H. J. Home Songs of the Tewa Indians, The American Museum Journal, Vol. XV, pp. 73-78, contains Songs II to X, as well as XVII, XXI and XXII. In Indian Dances of the Southwest in the same volume, pp. 103-115 I give the first stanza from the Turtle Dance at Nambe (No. XX): In The Forum of September, 1925 the Song of the Sky Loom, No. XXIX in the present collection. The remaining poems have never before been put to print.

^74 Stephenson, M. C., The Zuni Indians, B.A.E. 23rd. Ann. Rep. p. 176.

  

NOTES ON TEWA POEMS

In translating the Tewa language I have made use of the ordinary conventions of phonetic writing, putting down the sounds as my ear caught them It is to be expected that  should occur owing first to the varying enunciation of different informants from the same village an secondly to the dialectic variation among the five villages of Tesuque, Nambe, San Ildefonso, Santa Clara and San Juan. The dialectic differences are partly seen in the musical pitch or accent which I have made no effort to record. Tewa has many one syllable words and these are distinguished from each other by subtle modulations of the voice: but as a rule the context shows which one of several homonyms is meant.

The Tewa language is richly vocalized, although the vowels often have nasal qualities. The nasalization when present may be soft, or it may be harsher and more ringing. These differences can be written by a small n or ng above the affected vowel. It happens that both the musical pitch and the qualities of nasalization vary somewhat among the villages of the Tewa group and the present writer makes no claim for using all the marks of a perfect record.

In general the vowels have Continental rather than English values, to wit: a as in ah, e as in eight, i as in machine, o as in rose, and u as the final sound in who. Also there is a common a umlaut (a), as in man, and another

[p. 113]

[paragraph continues] (a) with a very broad sound, the a in all. Also it will be noted by those who examine the original texts that vowels are frequently doubled in Tewa with an apostrophe written between. This apostrophe indicates a closing of the glottis and the second vowel is generally much shorter than the first, like a kind of echo. Some of the consonants are found in three forms, normal, aspirated and glottally affected. For instance we find k, kh, and k', the first like the English consonant, the second a k stop followed by a breathing and the third having a somewhat explosive sound to the common ear. Pretty clear stress accents are used in the longer Tewa words.

Now follows a brief comment on each Tewa poem under the Roman numerals which designate them. Space does not permit a full record of the native texts but typical ones are given.

  

I

This ki kha'a or shouting song is sung by men at work in the fields or coming home from the hunt. It refers to the annual rabbit drive and the places mentioned are favorite hunting places of the San Juan Indians corresponding to the four directions. The Road of Magic is the Road of Life. But also it runs before the cradle and beyond the grave and is travelled by the souls of the unborn and the ghosts of the dead. Along this Magic Road come the Rain Gods, passing through lakes that are gateways of the underworld.

1

Owe P'in tsa akonu
 Yonder-at Mountain-white Plain
 He hayago he mbo'o
 Long-ago-very it was good.
 O'ke 'anyu O'ke 'enu nda
 San Juan girls San Juan boys and
 Ndi arang yi nde'e
 They used to walk together.
 Haran Tsi p'o na k'o inge
 Where Magic-road its-lying-at.

2

Owe Yo phe akonu . . . . .
 Yonder-at Cactus-stalk Plain

3

Owe Thun'un p'i akonu . . . . .
 Yonder-at Painted-mountain Plain.

4

Nawe Wombi ri akonu
 Here-at Medicine-hill Plain
 Ho'o ngi arang yi'i
 Now we walk together
 O'ke 'anyu O'ke 'enu nda
 San Juan girls San Juan boys and
 Ho'o ngi arang yi'i
 Now we walk-together
 Haran Tsi p'o na k'o inge
 Where Magic-road its-lying at.

[p. 114]

  

II

The Tewa Indian easily becomes homesick even when distant a few miles from his native village. This little song, which brought tears to the eyes of one of my Tewa friends when I repeated it to him on his own hearthstone, might be called Home Sweet Home. The text given below was secured at Nambe, but I have heard a close variant at San Ildefonso. It has a perfect poetic structure with what almost amounts to rhyme although this is perhaps accidental. The Tewa singer depends upon repeated phrases for the essential pattern of his verses.

Navi owin nawa owin nawa
 Navi owin nawa ndi on sha
 O'in p'in ndo mu'ire ka nyi nanandi
 Na re sita: ahiyohe'e ewa,
 Ahiyohe' ewa, ahiyohe' ewa,
 Navi owin nawa ndi on sha.

I may say that the reduction of songs to a written text is not always easy, nor can accuracy be guaranteed. Distortions of the words are often caused by the musical measures which may be rationalized by different informants in somewhat different fashion.

  

III

This second song of homesickness, coming from San Juan, is the complete expression of a mood. It seems that memory is kindled, bursts into flame and burns down to gray ashes in the short space of six lines.

  

IV

The use of affectionate diminutives such as ha e, breath-little, and pi'e, heart-little, is characteristic of Tewa love songs. There is emotional purity without a touch of physical passion. The text, which is followed closely in the translation, makes use of a sort of color symbolism to vary the repeated phrases. The Tewa name for a love song is se kane kha'a, and this very beautiful one comes from the village of Santa Clara.

  

V

The note of banter in this little love song gives a picture of rustic happiness to which no amount of fine phrases could add. The Tewa men in their cornfields sing "shouting songs," such as this, which are sometimes faintly audible to the women in the village.

  

IV

The comparison of a maiden and a flower is perhaps as old as any form of poetic speech. Yet one may wonder whether the excessive use of "flowery speech" by the Aztecs may not have set a fashion which spread to the north.

I give the Tewa words with the stress accents:

Su K'wa K'e we na povi tsha nde
 In povi, in povi, ndo mu iri
 Kanyi na nandi na re si ta!
 In povi, in povi, ndo mu iri
 Ts'e, oki, t'agi, na povi tsha.

[p. 115]

  

VII

Thamu or Dawn was an old man of Santa Clara who died when my informant was a child. He would sing this derisive song to the girls as they ground corn and retreat when they pelted him.

U a wa na i sen
 Alas! this man
 Mbi hi'i t'u
 His words voice
 Nda tage wage
 And truth-like
 Ndi hi'i an
 When he talked to me.
 He mbo wese
 But right away
 Wi hoyo sha,
 You liar found
 Wi hoyo sha!
 You liar found!

  

VIII

When the wrong man comes forward and the right one hangs back, comparisons are in order. This is a relatively modern song from Nambe and lacks the essential brevity--and clarity--of the accepted classics.

  

IX

The device of the colloquy is fairly common in Tewa poetry as it is in that of ancient Mexico, without, of course, any interpolation of the speaker's name. The girl in this case was nicknamed Little Blue because the door frame of her house was painted that color. Her dismissal of the errant but repentant swain ends with the phrase ''it was under guns that you dared to pay", which means something done at a foolish risk.

  

X

Perhaps the lady doth protest too much--but at least she achieves a precise expression of bitterness.

  

XI

The story behind this colloquy is that of an Indian youth of San Juan who married a "Mexican" woman and went to live in Truchas. Again the flower motive is used and by comparing this piece with VI and IX it is at once apparent that here is a definite literary tradition.

  

XII

Two girls express their opinion of a third more fortunate one--and it does not matter whether the aspersion was just or not.

  

XIII

Here is a brave pretense on both sides and might be called a teasing song of parting:

T'owepiye poge we nga he'i na
 Ngo we'i nga kh a'a to ni
 Ito ki ha nyu mbai ye kin on sha
 An ki rang ndi yo'an.

[p. 116]

  

XIV

This khe ma'i kha'a--ready-to-go song is not particularly war-like but the Tewa seem never to have been a warlike people. The Navaho were, of course, the common scourge of all the sedentary tribes. I secured two variant texts, the shorter one running:

Na'imbi kwiyo'in unda iha
 Na' in se nan wigi ha pi
 Wa save owinge piye i khe ma

  

XV

This song has been transcribed by Alice Corbin Henderson in her Red Earth. The Tewa text runs about as follows:

Na t'o me impi yere
 Na so'okuwa ko
 Na so'okuwa ko
 Yare Khun tsa wai'i
 Yagi wani na kha tu'un
 Ha we rana na' a se.

For each verse the Corn Maiden of another quarter is named according to the accepted symbolism of colors.

  

XVI

This is a corn grinding song. I think the blue flowers which grow around the sacred lake of Nambe on Lake Peak arc meant. The significant words are:

Povi tsa wa t'u
 Opa keri tu na sa
 Tsi ko wa tin ki na sa

Corn grinding songs are of two kinds. The Ta kha's are sung by the girls themselves keeping time to the strokes of the hand stones. The other kind called Nu to kha's, night grinding songs, are sung by the men.

  

XVII

Another corn-grinding song.

  

XVIII

This was described as War Captain's Song, this officer having charge of the work outside the town.

  

XIX

The 'e kha'a, meaning child song is, of course, our lullaby. The verses vary only in accordance with the circuit of the four directions. The text for the last verse is:

Tampiye okhuwa povi napovisa
 In the east cloud flower the blossom stands
 Nda ng'u tsiguweno ko'in mu we'a
 And then the lightning begins to flash
 Nda ng'u kwan ta'a ita'a
 And then the thunder it thunders
 Nda ng'u kwa'a pose yemu
 And then the fine rain falls
 A' a' a ha.

[p. 117]

  

XX

No comment is called for.

  

XXI

Here the little boy born in the spring, as we may know from his springtime name Primrose, is old enough to have experienced the discipline of the Cannibal Giants. These terrifying masked creatures come to the village with whips and children who have been disobedient do not enjoy their performances.

  

XXII

Here the little girl has an autumnal name. The sleepy little birds, which are caught on the mountain and kept as pets, are supposed to have a sympathetic influence on the child.

  

XXIII

This song is sung by children at play.

Sagi wo nging povi sa,
 Mbe ndu nde'e nging povi sa,
 P'o pe'e nging povi sa,
 I 'ang ho' nging povi sa.

  

XXIV

The K'osa or Delight Makers belong to three orders, the Kwirana K'osa, the Tewa K'osa and the Tema K'osa. This initiation chant of the Kwirana K'osa expresses the high spiritual purpose of these sacred clowns. It seems that the institution is distributed among all the village Indians of the Southwest. Mrs. Matilda Cox Stephenson gives ceremonial material on the Kwirana organization at Sia and I quote for comparison part of a song secured by her:

White floating clouds, clouds like plains,
 Sun, Moon, Puma, Bear, Badger, Wolf
 Eagle, Shrew, Elder War Hero, Younger War Hero,
 Warrior of the North, Warrior of the West,
 Warrior of the South, Warrior of the East,
 Warrior of the Above, Warrior of the Below,
 Medicine Water Bowl, Cloud Bowl, Ceremonial Water Bowl,
 I make a road of meal, the ancient road, the ancient road.

At the Hopi villages the order is called Pai-a kya-muh according to Fewkes (A Journal of American Ethnology II pp. 10-11), a name which seems to have been derived from Than phaiya tchamu of the Tewa text. Of course Hano on the First Mesa is really a Tewa village.

Nawe ho'o we ma'a na imbi sendo'in
 Here-at now we bring you Oh our old men
 Than phaiya tshama Okhuwa tsa wa'in
 Sun-fire- deity Cloud person blue
 Than phaiya tshama Okhuwa tse'nyin
 Sun-fire- deity Cloud person yellow.
 Than phaiya tshama Okhuwa p'i'in
 Sun-fire- deity Cloud person red
 Than phaiya tshama Okhuwa tsa'in
 Sun- fire- Cloud person white

[p. 118]

Than phaiya tshama Okhuwa nu khu win
 Sun-fire deity Cloud person dark
 Than phaiya tshama Okhuwa tsa neg'in
 Sun-fire-deity Cloud person all colors
 Na we we ma'a ho'o ovi pi tuwa phe
 Here at we bring you now your heart-hunt-stick
 O mi gi'in ovi p'o sa k'u wiri 
 We make it for you tobacco to smoke
 O mi gi'in ovi khu khi ko puri
 We make it for you cornmeal to eat
 Ha wo'a omi gi'in ovi
 Little bit for all we make it for you
 Thamu khe nyi ye'gi'in p'in piye p'in k'eri
 At dawn ready to walk be northward mountain top
 Tso mpi ye hwage yoge p'in k'eri
 Westward lakewards great mountain top
 O ko mpiye tshu sogi p'in k'eri
 Southward where the Shu sit mountain top
 Than piye thamu yogi p'in k'eri
 Eastward dawn-great mountain top
 Opa makori p'in k'eri
 Universe-sky mountain top
 Nan soge nuge p'in k'eri
 Earth-sit-under-at mountain top
 Okhuwa povi phi si ni nge p'i
 Cloud flowers that are not barren
 Oving okhuwa povi pi ye iwe
 You-them cloud flowers when you bring there-at
 We to p'in piye p'in k'eri
 Far off northward mountain top
 Oving okhuwa povi soge iwe
 You-them cloud flowers set there-at
 Tsom piye p'i k'eri
 Westward mountain top
 Oving okhuwa povi soge iwe
 You-them cloud flowers set there-at
 Akom piye p'i k'eri
 Southward mountain top
 Oving okhuwa povi soge iwe
 You-them cloud flowers set there-at
 Than piye p'in k'eri
 Eastward mountain top
 Oving okhuwa povi soge iwe
 You-them cloud flowers set there-at
 Opa makori p'in k'eri
 Universe-sky mountain top
 Oving okhuwa povi soge iwe
 You-them cloud flowers set there-at
 Nan soge nuge p'in k'eri
 Earth-sitting-below mountain top
 Oving okhuwa povi soge iwe
 You-them cloud flowers set there-at

[p. 119]

P'in pinu oving sokhuwa pa'are k'u'u iwe
 Mountain middle you-them fogs first lay there-at
 Iwe ha ndi re Ok'e owinge piye
 There-at that is why San Juan town towards
 Oving tha mu khe ma iwe
 You-them at dawn ready bring there-at
 Umbi tsigu wanu kwa to kwa p'o wogi
 Your lightning thunder rain together
 Khi ye nava k'u p'in nge heri
 Transform farms lying-in-middle and
 Ovi thamu khe kang ndiwe
 You dawn ready have come there-at
 He ndi ri ako na k'o igi heri
 That is why plain where-it is lying and
 Ha ndi ri ako p'in wo'o pa k'wone
 That is why plains-mountains revived lie
 Ha ndi ri ho'o umbi t'a p'o kwin
 That is why now your drying lakes
 Un k'wo ni nge ho'o
 Your where they are lying now
 Oving wo'a pa k'wo ne iwe
 You-them revived lie there-at
 Tsing we nu ha pang ri mbo'e
 Tame animals one-and-all children
 T'a t'o wa 'e gin sigi muni
 All little people to be loved by the gods
 We nge naimbi kwiyo
 Till where our Great Mother's
 Ndi ha sa k'a 'a po wa in ge heri
 Her breath-sound reaches even-till there
 Yuta, Savi, Wa savi, Kai wa,
 Utes, Apaches, Navajo, Kiowa
 Komantsi, Tsaiyena iwe ri mbo'o
 Comanche, Cheyenne there-at all
 K'wa k'u towa ndi mu in iwe ri mbo'o
 Mexican people they are the ones there-at all
 Americano t'owa ndi mu'in
 American people they are the ones
 We nge naimbe kwi yo'un
 Till there our Great Mother's
 Ndi ha sa k'a'a powa mge heri
 Her breath-sound reaches even-till there
 Ho'o ri sigi mu ni ndi seka ni
 Now they loved by the gods, they by each other
 Ina hai ndi ri ngi piva
 So that is why we expect
 Ngi hu na sata t'o wa k'eri
 We will eat here we-mortals-on-earth
 Nya ra'i pa yo, nya ra'i i phoye khu tha
 Good summer good harvest night-day
 Ha'a ming pho ye tha-khu nding k'u we
 The-same-kind harvest day-night, may they place.

[p. 120]

  

XXV

In this Initiation Song of the Tewa K'osa the novitiate jests at Kakanyu Sendo and Uhu Sendo, two of the Cloud People who wear masks with large, ring-shaped eyes. When the K'osa exclaims that the round eyes are being carried off in the water the implication is that the rain gods themselves arc being swept away. When pursued by the seemingly angry gods he makes quick disclaimer. He declares that he meant only the little cakes strung on a string which symbolize these round eyes.

To mba mbuge i'kwa na
 'I ha ha enyu ip'o k'u re
 Ka kanyu sendo tsi ts'e thagi 'o p'o ho
 To mba mbuge i'kwa na
 'I ha ha enyu i p'o k'u re
 Uhu sendo tsi ts'e thagi 'op'o ho
 Yo navi sendo! yo navi sendo!
 Ka paweno ndo toma.

  

XXVI

This is described as a very sad pi nan kha'a or magic song of the Tewa K'osa which all the Indians know but are afraid to sing. It means the K'osa are going in under a sacred lake to the place where the rains and the lightnings are made, all lakes being regarded as entrances to the underworld. This song is sung on the shore of a certain lake in the Santa Fe mountains especially sacred to Nambe.

  

XXVII

This passage is taken from a long myth of Nambe. It illustrated several ceremonial usages of the K'osa: one is that they sometimes say the opposite of what they mean such as designating one direction and performing in another. The "lakes" where the gods dwell may be only green spots. But the path of the rainbow upon which they travel is thrown from one such station to the next.

  

XXVIII

This song is from the Flood Myth and is sung by Urn-tu-sendo, Walking Stick Old man, who may be described as the Tewa Adam. When the flood comes his daughters, the Blue Corn Girls are floated upward to the sky in a basket and after adventures in the Sky World are lowered again to earth by the Spider Woman.

  

XXIX

The sky loom I have already explained in the general introductory essay as referring to the small desert rains which resemble a loom hung from the sky. There are indications that this idea was applied elsewhere in the Southwest and of course the symbolical decoration on the white cotton mantle, once the regular dress but now put to ceremonial uses, is in accordance with this chant or prayer for well-being.

  

XXX

The Sang khiu kwiyo or Corn Silk Women of San Juan are probably more or less the same as the Pun kha kwiyo of Nambe and the Nan hwa kwiyo Tesuque. They are a society who play a special role in certain very sacred dances connected with fertility. They appear in the Kwiyo or Woman's Dance. In this chant there are several examples of what my informants call "high words" such as wowa tsi, literally "life eye" but really "hale old age," 'e t'owa sowe, literally "children people grow up" but with the

[p. 121]

normal meaning of "rear many children". Si ge muni means "under the loving protection of the gods".

P'in piye P'o kwinge'in
 Northward Lake ones
 Sang khiung kwiyo i mu 'in
 Corn-silk Old Women ye are the ones
 Na we ho ipowa
 Here-at now ye have come
 Wowatsi ho'e k'un ku'u
 Long-life at once trade-lay
 'E gin sigi muni
 Children they to be loved of the gods
 Ma'imbe'e ndivi'e t'owa sowe
 Our children their children people grow up
 O'ke 'anyu nda wowa tsi
 San Juan girls they long-life.
 Ho'e nu wa na we ho
 At once we seek here-at now
 Sang khiung kwiyo nda
 Corn silk Old women say
 Tung wage ho ivi an
 Words like now we did
 Wowatsi ho ngin ka'a po
 Life-long now we ask
 Ho ngin sigi muni
 Now we to be loved
 I vi 'e t'owa sowe
 We children people grow up
 Nya ra'ing ha ndi ma ni
 Good fate to us give.

  

XXXI

This is a kwa pinan kha'a or Rain-Magic song, from the Than khohe share or Sun-Hummingbird Dance of San Juan. The humming bird is a symbol of the flowering season and this magic song is accompanied by the sprinkling of water with feather aspergils. Here the action of the ceremony is designed to suggest similar action by the gods.

O'ke owinge na we ho ngi win
 Na'imbi Khun 'anyu, Khun 'enu,
 Khun yiya'in, Khun ta'in
 Na ho ngi ekang kwa p'o se
 Tchanu nde tame piye
 P'in piye, Tsan piye, Akon piye, Than piye,
 Opa makori, Nan suge u'unge,
 Ha ndiri nawe ring kwa p'o se yemu ire
 O'ke owinge maimbe Khun 'anyu.
 Ndi oye phoge p'o kwire
 Tata 'anyu nding p'ose tchanu
 Iwe ire hawi ta ki nari
 Nan otchu kwi mbi tu' k'igi na sa'in
 Naimbe tu han na mui we ho na pa'in
 Na'in wi kho khun ami rin ho na in eko'in

[p. 122]

The words for the six directions are interestingly different. Below is Nan suge u'unge, earth drinking below. The Underworld is personified as male, as is the Sky, while the Earth itself is female. Here the earth is Nan otchu kwiyo, Earth-fresh-green-woman.

  

XXXII

The Oku share or Turtle Dance is a winter ceremony having to do with fertility, the Ok huwa or Cloud People who come to this ceremony bring with them the seeds of various plants and they are also asked to ensure that children will be plentiful: the dance is there also called 'E pinan share. Children's Magic Dance. I give four songs from the sets used at Nambe which refer to the revival of the vernal season and the rains which will bring the harvest to maturity.

  

XXXIII

Two songs from the Turtle Dance at Santa Clara give further indication of the nature of the magical prayers, made in the form of songs, to perfect the lot of human beings. The second song, omitting meaningless refrains, has the following words:

So'okuwa okhuwa povi
 Fog clouds, cloud flowers
 Ta ma p'in na
 Various mountains on Okhuwa
 povi sa ho'o
 Cloud flowers put forth now
 P'in pha geri tsigu wanu
 From the north lightning
 Ho'o re mu wa'a
 Now it flashes
 Kwa t'an ho'o re ta'a
 Thunder now rumbles
 Kwa p'o ho'o re yemu.
 Rain water now is falling.

  

XXXIV

The Tewa villages are all divided into two groups of clans, one commonly known as the Summer People and the other as the Winter People. The Race Dance seems to be a special magical effort to relieve the Sun in its travels, especially while the Sun seems tired at the solstices. Some idea of the astronomical significance appears in the words. The Great-Star of the Dark Night Man appears to be Jupiter.

Summer People's Song

Than sendo i thamu khe winu Yophe k'ewe
 Sun Old Man he at dawn ready must stand Cactus Stalk Ridge on.
 P'o sendo wa'a i thamu khe winu Yophe k'ewe
 Moon Old Man also he at dawn ready must stand, Cactus Stalk Ridge on
 Mba i thamu khe winu iwe ra han O'ke owinge
 And he at dawn ready must stand thence going San Juan toward
 I thamu khe ho'o tse hwa kwa wi p'o.
 He at dawn ready now Eagle Tail Rain Standing Road.

[p. 123]

Winter People's Song

Towa'e tsa'i'i seng K'u seng p'i neri
 Little People White Men Stone-Man-Mountain from
 Mbi thamu khe winu O'ke owinge piye
 You two at dawn ready must stand San Juan town towards
 Kwa wi p'o ge O'ke owinge piye
 Rain Standing Road at San Juan town towards
 Agoyo nu khu seng i thamu khe winu
 Great-Star-Dark-Night Man at dawn ready must stand
 O'ke owinge piye.
 San Juan town towards.

  

XXXV

Avanyu or P'o anyu is pictured as a horned serpent often with clouds attached to his body and a tongue of barbed lightning. He is a dreaded god of storms, sometimes glimpsed in dark swirling clouds. Once this water monster threatened to flood the world but he was turned from this evil intention by twin war gods, called Towa'e or Little People, who slew him with their arrows and left his body lying as the rocky barriers of Nambe falls. The diminished flood still pours out of his great mouth and offerings are made to appease him if the stream rises suddenly. In another conception he resides in sacred lakes and moves in storm clouds. Almost certainly the various plumed and horned serpents of the Southwest are a far-off echo of the feathered serpent of the Mayas and Mexicans.

As a rule the name Avanyu is anathema. This short religious song in which he is appealed to comes from the Than kwa share, or Sun-Rain Dance, of Nambe held just before the sun reaches his northern Sun House at the summer solstice. At San Juan foot races are held in connection with the same event.

Avanyu Sendo
 Storm Serpent Old Man
 Ho'o ka'a
 Now come hither
 Mbe na we ivi yare nde'e
 For here we are dancing
 Umbi kwa wogi
 Your rain-with
 Nawe u powa
 Here you arrive!

  

XXXVI

The Scalp Dance was especially developed at Santa Clara or perhaps a memory of the ceremony has survived there in more perfect state than elsewhere. It seems that Coyote gets his ceremonial name Stretched-Out in-Dew as a devourer of slain warriors. The text of the second part of this song is as follows:

Wasavi 'e nu wi mbo'o
 Navajo youths but yourselves
 Ha nyi ipi nda'a ri
 That way you have to blame
 Umbi te'e hwa wige'e
 Your house along the end of

[p. 124]

Itshu hwa k'o ho'o
 You die stretched-out lying now
 Wembo'o ipi na'a ri
 But yourselves you have to blame
 Pu nan kang ngi wagi
 Thighs earth-covered-and-streaked
 Itshu hwa k'o ho'o
 You die stretched-out lying now
 Umbi te'e hwa wige'e
 Your house along the end of
 So nan kang ngi wagi.
 Mouth earth-covered and streaked!

  

XXXVII

This piece is entitled Ko'on pinan kha'a ndi a iri--Buffalo Magic Song, Making Come. It is an example of the coercive use of song. The first place name Ko'on tsi pogi is a name for part of the Great Plains, Phi yo pi wi i is a pass near the head of the Pecos River and Yo pha k'ewe is an old town belonging to Tesuque.

Kaya 'a wimba'a Ko'on tsi pogi
 Far over yonder Buffalo-Ice-Water-at
 Na piye ho'o ye ma a imbi 'e wogi
 Hither now they-them bringing their children together
 A 'nyugi ho'o vi a a tuye
 Quickly now they-with-them walk quickly
 Heri ho'o ndi powa Phiyo pin wi'i.
 And now they arrive Red Bird Gap
 Ko'on sendo, Ko'on kwiyo
 Buffalo Old Man, Buffalo Old Woman
 A'n yuge ho'o vi ka'a ve umbi'e wogi
 Quickly now ye-with-them come your children together
 Na piye Yo'pha k'ewe owingi umbi 'e wogi
 Hither Cactus-row-ridge town-at your children together

Ndin k'on wowatsi wogi
     They-to-us bring life together
 Na we ho'o in powa Te tsuge owinge.
     Here-at now they arrive Tesuque town-at.

  

XXXVIII

While her husband is hunting the deer, the woman tries her magic. She lays a cotton thread as a road leading into her house and sits in a corner and sings this magical song.

  

XXXIX

To come with dangling hands is to come head down over the hunter's shoulder.

  

XL

In the Deer Dance at Nambe, as at other pueblos of the Rio Grand, the dancers costumed to represent deer, elk, antelope, mountain sheep and mountain goats, make a dramatic entrance into the dance plaza. This is the song of welcome made by the chorus.

[p. 125]

  

XLI

This is a Tesuque song used in the Eagle Dance.

  

XLII

When the Tewa made dangerous trips to trade with the nomadic Indians of the plains they were under the charge of their war captain. Each night of the journey one member of the party spoke this speech from a hill top, to bring good luck to the venture.

  

XLIII

I have taken some liberties in the arrangement of this prayer and therefore give the original text with interlinear translation. Some of the "high words" have already been discussed.

Nawe ma'a na'imbi sendo
 Here-at I bring to you our old man
 Payoka umbi kho khun ame
 Summer Leaf your arm-leg-aid
 Ri na'imbi yu si po
 And our tiredness -sweat
 Man k'o cri mba yeki mbo'a
 You eat! and much being
 Ko'gi ndi pa hu wi.
 Food to us keep on giving

  

XLIV

The Corn Mothers are represented by little idols made from ears of corn.

  

XLV

Although prayers vary somewhat, these are several well-defined patterns.

  

XLVI

A child may be given several names.

  

XLVII

It is a developed idea among the Tewa that one in authority needs the qualities of both sexes.

  

XLVIII

There is really no tabu among the Tewa against speaking the names of the dead but apparently they believe that the spirits of the dead should leave the homes of the living.

  

XLIX

This is a part of the Scalp Ceremony of Santa Clara.

  

XL

Whenever possible a secret grave is made for the warrior who dies in battle.

 

 

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: spa.txt =====


    
Selections from the Poetry of the Afghans, by H.G. Raverty, [1868], at sacred-texts.com

  

SELECTIONS

  

FROM

  

THE POETRY OF THE AFGHANS,

  

FROM THE SIXTEENTH TO THE NINETEENTH CENTURY,

  

LITERALLY TRANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL PUS'HTO;

  

WITH NOTICES OF THE DIFFERENT AUTHORS,

  

AND REMARKS

  

ON THE MYSTIC DOCTRINE AND POETRY OF THE SUFIS:

  

BY

  

MAJOR H. G. RAVERTY,

  

BOMBAY ARMY, RETIRED LIST;

  

AUTHOR OF A GRAMMAR, AND DICTIONARY OF THE PUS'HTO OR AFGHAN LANGUAGE; THE GULSHAN-I-ROH, OR SELECTIONS, PROSE AND POETICAL, IN THE PUS'HTO OR AFGHAN LANGUAGE; THE GOSPEL FOR THE AFGHANS; A THESAURUS OF ENGLISH AND HINDUSTANI TECHNICAL TERMS,
 ETC. ETC.

          "Full many a gem of purest ray serene
      The dark unfathom'd caves of ocean bear;
    Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
      And waste its sweetness on the desert air."

     
   (New and Cheaper Edition.)

  

LONDON:
 WILLIAMS AND NORGATE,
 HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN, & SOUTH FREDERICK STREET, EDINBURGH.
 CALCUTTA: W. NEWMAN & CO.

  

MDCCCLXVII.

  

[1867]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com by John Bruno Hare, November 2007. This text is in the US public domain because it was published prior to 1923.

Click to enlarge
Spine

Click to enlarge
Title Page

     
Selections from the Poetry of the Afghans, by H.G. Raverty, [1868], at sacred-texts.com

[p. iv] [p. v]

  

TO THE READER.

DURING my lengthened researches in, and long study of the Pus'hto language, for so many years past, and particularly when making selections for my work entitled "GULSHAN-I-ROH," [**] I could not fail being much struck with the beauty of some of the poetry of the Afghans; so much so, indeed, that I long since determined, and, at length, now venture to submit to the European reader, a literal translation of several poems of the most celebrated of the Afghan poets--together with a brief notice of each author--in an English dress.

It must be remembered, that these poems are the effusions of men who never enjoyed any of what we call the luxuries of life; yet how refined are the generality of their sentiments! Of men who lived in a state, such as our own Borderers lived in, five hundred years ago, in violence and in strife, and whose descendants live so still; yet how exquisitely pathetic are many of their poems, and how high-souled and benevolent their sentiments and ideas! Inhabiting a fine country, with grand and lofty mountains, and green and fertile valleys, but with nought more than the bare necessaries of life attainable, how simple and how perfect are their similes, and how true to nature! What a patriotic ardour; what a true spirit of freedom, and a love of country, much of their poetry displays!

It must also be borne in mind, that the greater number of the

[p. vi]

writers of the following poems, except Ahmad Shah, and Khushhal Khan, and his sons, were either men, who during their life-time had scarcely left the precincts of their native village, or who had devoted their lives to poverty and religious abstraction. Men, who never wrote for fame; and who never contemplated that the inmost thoughts which had occupied their hearts, would ever meet the eyes of more than a few dear and admiring friends, after they had, themselves, passed from the scene for ever. Never did they imagine that they would appear before any Public, much less a European one, in the Saxon tongue, and translated by a FARANGi!

"Far from the maddening world's ignoble strife,
    Their sober wishes never learn'd to stray;
  Along the cool sequester'd vale of life,
    They kept the noiseless tenour of their way."

I have been very careful to render the poems as literal as possible; and have, it will be perceived, endeavoured to preserve the rhyming words, as they occur, in the English as well, more particularly when each couplet ends in the same word throughout.

It will also, no doubt, be observed, that two nominatives sometimes occur, one in each line of a couplet; which is occasioned by the first hemistich of the couplets being put first, where we should, if we considered the English idiom only, put it last. This may cause a seeming quaintness in the translation; but I considered it necessary to follow the original as near as possible, in order to preserve the literal style I had, from the outset, adopted.

The reader should also understand, that Afghan books exist only in manuscript, as was the case in Europe before the invention of printing; and the following poems have been translated from such. Copies of the works of some of the authors herein contained are rare, and seldom to be met with, even in Afghanistan, such as the poems of Ahmad Shah, Khwajah Muhammad, and (except in the Pes'hawar district) Khushhal Khan, and his sons; whilst the

[p. vii]

original manuscript of Shaida's poems, as they were first collected and arranged into a volume, and richly illuminated, is in my possession; and no copy of them, that I am aware of, exists, save that which I permitted the descendants on his brother's side to make from my manuscript, which I sent some hundreds of miles for them to examine. Although he was celebrated as a poet, they had never seen his poems before, he having died in India.

Greater variety will be noticed in the poems of Khushhal Khan, than in those of the other Afghan poets contained in this volume; for, like the poets of the West, no subject seems to have been foreign to him; and, amongst other things, he does not spare the failings of his own countrymen, as he found them two centuries since; and probably he will on this account be the favourite with the general reader.

All I can say in conclusion is, that what is good in the following pages must be credited to the authors; and all the failings and imperfections, which are very many, I fear, to their English translator, who, therefore, prays for the indulgence and forbearance of his readers.

H. G. R.

Footnotes

^v:* See List at the end of this volume.

     
Selections from the Poetry of the Afghans, by H.G. Raverty, [1868], at sacred-texts.com

[p. viii]

  

CONTENTS.

          REMARKS ON THE MYSTIC DOCTRINE AND POETRY OF THE SuFiS

       PAGE <page ix>

     
      POEMS OF AeABD-UR-RAhMaN, WITH NOTICE OF THE AUTHOR

       <page 1>

     
            "       MiRZa KHaN, ANSaRi

       <page 51>

     
            "       AeABD-UL-HAMiD

       <page 85>

     
            "       KHUSHhaL KHaN, KHATTAK

       <page 142>

     
            "       ASHRAF KHaN, KHATTAK

       <page 249>

     
            "       AeABD-UL-KaDIR KHaN, KHATTAK

       <page 268>

     
            "       AhMAD SHaH, ABDaLi

       <page 287>

     
            "       KaZIM KHaN, SURNAMED SHAIDa

       <page 304>

     
            "       KHWaJAH MUhAMMAD, BANGASH

       <page 326>

     
   
     
Selections from the Poetry of the Afghans, by H.G. Raverty, [1868], at sacred-texts.com

[p. ix]

  

REMARKS ON THE MYSTIC DOCTRINE AND POETRY OF THE SUFIS.

THE poetry of the East, particularly that of the Muhammadan nations, differs materially from that of the West; and when taken up by the uninitiated, would often appear to be the mere effusions of wild and voluptuous bacchanals, or worthy of Anacreon himself. These remarks, however, pertain more to Persian than to Afghan poetry, which contains less of the, often, bombastic style of the former, and approaches nearer to the simplicity of the poetry of the ancient Arabs. A general subject with the Afghan, as well as other Asiatic poets, is that of love, not human, but divine, and a contempt for the people and vanities of the world; whilst other Afghan poets, such as Khushhal Khan, write on any subject that may have been uppermost in their minds at the time, after the manner of Western poets.

The general reader, who would understand many of the poems contained in the following pages, must know that most of the Asiatic poets profess the mystical doctrine of the Sufis, the tenets of which, it will be necessary to explain to him; although Oriental scholars may be supposed to be sufficiently familiar with the subject.

The Muhammadan writers state, that these enthusiasts are co-existent with their religion; and, , their rapturous zeal may have greatly contributed to the first establishment of Islamism; but they have since been considered its greatest enemies, and it is avouched that their doctrines have, for a long time, been even undermining Muhammadanism itself. Hence the most rigorous

[p. x]

proceedings have, from time to time, been put in practice to repress their increase, but these, as usual in such cases, have had a contrary effect; and Sufi-ism is said to be still on the increase. There is no doubt, but that the free opinions of the sect on the dogmas of the Muhammadan religion, their contempt for its forms, and their claim to communion with, or rather absorption into the Creator, are all more or less calculated to subvert that faith, of whose outward forms the Sufis profess their veneration.

The tenets of the Sufi doctrines appear to have been most widely diffused over Persia; and, indeed, the great reputation acquired by one of the priests of the sect, enabled his descendants, for above two centuries, under the name of the Safawian dynasty, to occupy the throne of that country. [**]

The general name by which this sect of enthusiasts is known, is Sufi, implying pure, a term probably derived from the Arabic word  (safah), signifying purity; and by this name all are known, from the venerated teacher, or spiritual guide, followed by crowds of disciples, to the humble kalandar, darwesh, or fakir, who wanders about almost naked, or only clothed in his khirkah or cloak of rags, subsisting upon scanty alms, to support this, voluntarily adopted, life of prayer and religious abstraction.

In India, more than in any other country of Asia, from remote ages, these visionary doctrines appear to have flourished, much after the same manner as in Egypt and Syria, in the early days of Christianity, as testified to by the early ecclesiastical writers, who trace to those countries the mystic, the hermit, and the monk; for there the propensity to a life of austerity was quite a disease. In the Hindu religion also, as well as in the people themselves, there is much that tends to foster a spirit of religious abstraction; and we may thus, with some justice, suppose that from India other nations

[p. xi]

have derived this mystic worship of the Deity, but without adopting the dreadful austerities and macerations, common among the Hindus, and deemed necessary for attaining unto this state of beatitude.

To give a full account of the doctrines of the Sufis, would be almost a useless attempt; for traces of it may be found, in some shape or other, in all countries; alike, in the sublime theories of the philosophers of ancient Greece, and in those of modern Europe.

The Sufis affirm, that their creed is adverse to superstition, scepticism, and error; but "it exists by the active propagation of all three." [**] The doctrines of their teachers are given to their disciples in place of the outward forms and observances of the faith they profess. They are invited to embark upon the ocean of doubt, piloted by a sacred teacher, or spiritual guide, whom they must consider superior to all other mortals, and deem worthy of the most pious and spiritual confidence--in fact, of almost adoration itself. They are devoted to the search after TRUTH, and are constantly occupied in adoration of the Deity. He, according to their belief, is diffused throughout all created things; [*+] and they consider, that the soul of man, and the principle of existence, is of God (part of Him), not from Him. Hence their doctrine teaches that the soul of man is an exile from its Creator, who is its home and source; that the body is its cage, or prison-house; and the term of life, in this world, is its period of banishment from Him

[p. xii]

ere the soul fell it had seen the face of TRUTH, but, in this world, it merely obtains a partial and shadowy glimpse, "which serves to awaken the slumbering memory of the past, but can only vaguely recall it; and Sufi-ism undertakes, by a long course of education, and moral discipline, to lead the soul onward, from stage to stage, until, at length, it reaches the goal of perfect knowledge, truth, and peace." [**]

According to this mysterious doctrine, there are four stages through which it is necessary man should pass, prior to attaining unto the highest state, or that of divine beatitude; where, to use their own words, "his corporeal veil, which had previously obscured his sight, will be drawn aside, and his soul, emancipated from all material things, will again unite with the divine and transcendent essence, from which it had been divided, for a time, but not separated for ever."

The first of these stages is termed nasut, or humanity, in which the disciple is supposed to be living in obedience to the sharae, or orthodox law, and paying due observance to the rites and ceremonies of religion; for these things are allowed to be necessary and useful in regulating the lives of the vulgar and weak-minded, and in restraining within proper bounds, and guiding such as are unable to reach the acme of divine contemplation and abstraction, who might be led astray by that very latitude in matters of faith, which instructs and enraptures those of more powerful intellect, and more ardent piety.

The second stage is termed t###804###arikat, or the way, in which the disciple attains what is called jabrut, or potentiality and capacity; and he who reaches this stage, quits, altogether, that state in which he is merely permitted to follow and revere a teacher or spiritual guide, and thus he becomes admitted within the pale of Sufi-ism. All observance of the rites and forms of religion may be laid aside;

[p. xiii]

for he now, it is supposed, exchanges what is called aeamal-i jismani, or corporeal worship, for aeamal-i-ruhani, or spiritual adoration; but this stage cannot be attained, save by great piety, virtue, endurance, and resignation; for it is necessary to restrain the intellect when weak, until, from habits of mental devotion, grounded upon a proper knowledge of its own greatness and immortality, and of the Divine nature, it shall have acquired sufficient energy; since the mind cannot be trusted in the omission or disuse of the rites and usages of religion.

The third stage is aearuf, signifying knowledge or inspiration; and the disciple who arrives thereunto, is said to have attained superhuman knowledge--in fact, to be inspired; and when he has reached this stage, he is equal to the angels.

The fourth, and final state arrived at, is hakikat, or Truth itself, which signifies that his union with the Divinity is perfect and complete.

The dignity of Khalifah, as the teacher is designated, can only be obtained after long-continued fasting and prayer, and by complete abstraction and severance from all mundane things; for the man must be annihilated, before the saint can exist. The preparation for the third stage of Sufi-ism requires a protracted and fearful probation; and many lose their lives in their efforts to attain it. The person who makes the essay must be a devout and godly murid or disciple, who has already advanced, by his piety and abstraction, beyond the necessity of observing religion's forms and usages. He must begin by endeavouring to attain a higher state of beatitude, by a lengthened fast, which should not be less than forty days; and during this period of fasting he remains in solitude, and in a posture of contemplation, and takes no sustenance save enough to keep body and soul together. The character of the votary greatly depends upon the patience and fortitude he may display during this severe ordeal; and when, reduced to a mere skeleton,

[p. xiv]

the disciple comes forth from his solitude, he still has years of trial to endure. He must wander about, companionless, in desert places, or remain in some frightful solitude, and only seeing, occasionally, the Khalifah, or spiritual guide, whom he follows; for the chief merit of all ranks of Sufis, is complete devotion to their teacher. When he dies, he leaves his khirkah, or patched garment, and worldly wealth, to the disciple he considers the most worthy to succeed him; and when the latter dons the holy mantle, he is invested with the power of his predecessor. [**]

The most celebrated Sufi teachers have been alike famed for their devotion and their learning, in Persia as well as in other countries; and, in the former, the Sufis have claimed for their own, all who have, by their writings or sayings, shown a spirit of philosophy, or knowledge of the nature Divine, which has elevated them above the prejudices of the vulgar; and, certainly, great numbers of persons, eminent for their learning, genius, and piety, have adopted the Sufi doctrines. Amongst the most distinguished of these are poets; for the very essence of Sufi-ism is poetry. The raptures of genius, expatiating upon a subject that cannot be exhausted, are held to be divine inspirations, by those who believe that the soul, when emancipated by devotion, can wander in the regions of the spiritual world, and, at last, unite with its Creator, the source from whence it emanated. It is the same with all Sufi poets, whatever be their country; but Persia is more generally known as that, in which this species of poetry was supposed to have reached the highest degree of perfection; but it will be discovered, from the following pages, that Sufi-ism has produced, amongst the rough and hardy Afghans, conceptions equally as sublime. "Human speech, however," to quote the words of a writer already mentioned, [*+]"is too weak and imperfect to convey these lofty experiences of the

[p. xv]

soul, and hence these can only be represented by symbols and metaphors." For this reason the Sufi poets, to quote the words of Sir William Jones, "adopt the fervour of devotion, and the ardent love of created spirits towards their beneficent Creator; and Sufi poetry consists almost wholly of a mystical, religious allegory, though it seems, to the uninitiated ear, to contain merely the sentiments of wild and voluptuous bacchanals; but although we must admit the danger of such a poetical style, where the limits between enthusiasm and depravity are so minute, as to be scarcely distinguishable;"--for the mystical meaning of their poetry (save in the poems of the Afghan poet Mirza) never, or rarely, obtrudes itself;--we may, if we choose, pass it by, confining ourselves to those passages alone, which tell of a mundane passion, and a terrestrial summer and wine. Under the veil of earthly love, and the woes of temporal separation, they disguise the dark riddle of human life, and the celestial banishment, which lies behind the threshold of existence; and, under the joys of revelry and inebriation, they figure mystical transports, and ecstatic raptures. [**] Still, we must not censure it severely, and must allow it to be natural, though a warm imagination may carry it beyond the bounds of sober reason; "for," to quote the same author, "an ardently grateful piety is congenial to the undepraved nature of man, whose mind, sinking under the magnitude of the subject, and struggling to express its emotions; has recourse to metaphors and allegories, which it sometimes extends beyond the bounds of cool reason, and often to the brink of absurdity." BARROW, who would have been the sublimest mathematician, if his religious turn of mind had not made him the deepest theologian of his age, describes Love as "an affection or inclination of the soul towards an object, proceeding from an apprehension and esteem of some excellence or convenience in it, as its beauty, worth, or utility; and producing, if it be absent, a proportionable desire, and, consequently,

[p. xvi]

an endeavour to obtain such a property in it, such possession of it, such an approximation to it, or union with it, as the thing is capable of; with a regret and displeasure in failing to obtain it, or in the want and loss of it; begetting, likewise, a complacence, satisfaction, and delight, in its presence, possession, or enjoyment, which is, moreover, attended with a goodwill towards it, suitable to its nature; that is, with a desire that it should arrive at, or continue in, its best state, with a delight to perceive it thrive and flourish; with a displeasure to see it suffer or decay; with a consequent endeavour to advance it in all good, and preserve it from all evil." Agreeably to this description, which consists of two parts, and was designed to comprise the tender love of the Creator towards created spirits, the great philosopher bursts forth in another place, with his usual animation, and command of language, into the following panegyric on the pious love of human souls towards the Author of their happiness:--"Love is the sweetest and most delectable of all passions; and when, by the conduct of wisdom, it is directed in a rational way toward a worthy, congruous, and attainable object, it cannot otherwise than fill the heart with ravishing delight: such, in all respects, superlatively such, is GOD; who, infinitely beyond all other things, deserveth our affection, as most perfectly amiable and desirable; as having obliged us by innumerable and inestimable benefits; all the good that we have ever enjoyed, or can ever expect, being derived from His pure bounty; all things in the world, in competition with Him, being mean and ugly; all things, without Him, vain, unprofitable, and hurtful to us. He is the most proper object of our love; for we chiefly were framed, and it is the prime law of our nature, to love Him; our soul, from its original instinct, vergeth towards Him as its centre, and can have no rest till it be fixed on Him: He alone can satisfy the vast capacity of our minds, and fill our boundless desires. He, of all lovely things, most certainly and easily may be attained; for,

[p. xvii]

whereas, commonly, men are crossed in their affections, and their love is embittered from their affecting things imaginary, which they cannot reach, or coy things, which disdain and reject them, it is with GOD quite otherwise: He is most ready to impart himself; He most earnestly desireth and wooeth our love; He is not only most willing to correspond in affection, but even doth prevent us therein: He doth cherish and encourage our love by sweetest influences, and most consoling embraces, by kindest expressions of favour, by most beneficial returns; and, whereas all other objects do, in the enjoyment, much fail our expectation, He doth even far exceed it. Wherefore, in all affectionate motions of our hearts towards GOD; in desiring Him, in seeking His favour or friendship; in embracing Him, or setting our esteem, our goodwill, our confidence, on Him; in enjoying Him, by devotional meditations, and addresses to Him; in a reflective sense of our interest and propriety in Him; in that mysterious union of spirit, whereby we do closely adhere to, and are, as it were, inserted in Him; in a hearty complacence in His benignity, a grateful sense of His kindness, and a zealous desire of yielding some requital for it, we cannot but feel very, very pleasant transports: indeed, that celestial flame, kindled in our hearts by the spirit of love, cannot be void of warmth; we cannot fix our eyes on infinite beauty, we cannot taste infinite sweetness, we cannot cleave to infinite felicity, without also perpetually rejoicing in the first daughter of LOVE to GOD--Charity towards men; which, in complexion and careful disposition, doth much resemble her mother; for she doth rid us of all these gloomy, keen, turbulent imaginations and passions, which cloud our mind, which fret our heart, which discompose the frame of our soul, from burning anger, from storming contention, from gnawing envy, from rankling spite, from racking suspicion, from distracting ambition and avarice; and, consequently, doth settle our mind in an even temper, in a sedate humour, in an harmonious order, in that pleasant state of

[p. xviii]

tranquillity, which, naturally, doth result from the voidance of irregular passions."

This passage, which borders upon quietism and enthusiastic devotion, differs no more from the mystic tenets of the Sufi creed, than do European fruits and flowers from the lusciousness and fragrance of those of Asia, or than the cold skies and sun of the West differ from the gorgeous skies and blazing sun of Eastern lands.

It is to express fervid feelings like these that, by Sufi-ism, poetry is brought into play, which, in its sweetest strains, teaches that all nature abounds with a Divine love, causing even the humblest plant to seek the sublime object of its desire.

"In peace, Love tunes the shepherd's reed;
  In war, he mounts the warrior's steed;
  In halls, in gay attire is seen;
  In hamlets, dances on the green.
  Love rules the camp, the court, the grove,
  And men below, and saints above;
  For Love is heaven, and heaven is love." [**]

Sir William Jones, in his "Essay on the Mystical Poetry of the Persians and Hindus," [*+] has given an excellent description of the Sufis and their doctrine; and I cannot do better here than extract therefrom such portions as may elucidate my present subject. "The Sufis," he says, "concur in believing that the souls of men differ infinitely in degree, but not at all in kind, from the Divine Spirit, of which they are particles, and in which they will ultimately be re-absorbed; that the Spirit of God pervades the universe, always immediately present to His work, and, consequently, always in substance; that He alone is perfect benevolence, perfect truth, perfect beauty; that the love of Him alone is real and genuine love, while that of all other objects is absurd and

[p. xix]

illusory; that the beauties of nature are faint resemblances, like images in a mirror, of the Divine charms; that, from eternity without beginning, to eternity without end, the Supreme Benevolence is occupied in bestowing happiness, or the means of attaining it: that men can only attain it by performing their part of the primal covenant, between them and the Creator; that nothing has a pure, absolute existence but mind or spirit; that material substances, as the ignorant call them, are no more than gay pictures, presented continually to our minds by the spiritual Artist; that we must be aware of attachment to such phantoms, and attach ourselves, exclusively, to GOD, who truly exists in us, as we exist solely in Him; that we retain, even in this forlorn state of separation from our beloved, the idea of heavenly beauty, and the remembrance of our primeval vows; that sweet music, gentle breezes, fragrant flowers, perpetually renew the primary idea, refresh our fading memory, and melt us with tender affections; that we must cherish these affections, and, by abstracting our souls from vanity, that is, from all but GOD, approximate to His essence, in our final union with which will consist our supreme beatitude. From these principles flow a thousand metaphors, and other poetical figures, which abound in the sacred poems of the Persians and Hindus, who seem to mean the same thing in substance, and differ only in expression, as their languages differ in idiom." It is the same in Afghan poetry also, as the following pages will amply show.

The modern Sufis, who profess a belief in the Kur'an, suppose, with much sublimity both of thought and diction, that in a prior state of existence the soul had been united with God; and that, at the Creation, the created spirits, and the supreme soul from which they emanated, were summoned together, when a celestial voice demanded from each, separately, "ALASTO BI-RABBIKUM?" "Art thou not with thy God?" that is, "Art thou not bound by solemn

[p. xx]

contract with Him?" whereunto the spirits answered, "BALa," "Yea!" And hence it is that "ALASTO," or "Art thou not?" (the question of this primeval compact), and "BALa," or "Yea!" occur continually in these mystical compositions of Muhammadan poets, whether Persians, Turks, or Afghans. "Music, poetry, and the arts," again to quote the words of a modern writer, [**] "are the unconscious aspirations of the soul, as it hurries along in its restless impulses through the world, stung by the echo of "ALASTO," yet ringing in their ears, but with no visible object to claim the passionate adoration which it burns to pour forth."

"The Hindus," says Sir William Jones, "describe the same covenant under the figurative notion, so finely expressed by ISAIAH, of a nuptial contract; for, considering GOD in the three characters of Creator, Regenerator, and Preserver, and supposing the power of Preservation and Benevolence to have become incarnate in the power of KRISHNA, they represent him as married to Radha, a word signifying atonement, pacification, or satisfaction, but applied allegorically to the soul of man, or rather to the whole assemblage of created souls, between whom and their benevolent Creator they suppose that reciprocal love, which BARROW describes with a glow of expression perfectly Oriental, and which our most orthodox theologians believe to have been mystically shadowed in the SONG OF SOLOMON, while they admit that, in a literal sense, it is an epithalamium on the marriage of the sapient king with the princess of Egypt. The very learned author of the "Prelections on Sacred Poetry," declared his opinion, that the CANTICLES were founded on historical truth, but involved in allegory of that sort, which he named mystical; and the beautiful Persian poem, on the loves of LAYLa and MAJNuN, by the inimitable Niz###804###ami--to say nothing of other poems on the same subject--is, indisputably, built on true

[p. xxi]

history, yet avowedly allegorical and mysterious; for the introduction to it is a continued rapture on Divine love; and the name of LAYLa seems to be used in the Masnawi [**] and the odes of Hafiz###804###, for the omnipresent Spirit of God." If reference is here made to the first of the poems of the Afghan monarch, Ahmad Shah, at page <page 294>, the force of the words of Sir William Jones will be more fully seen.

According to the interpretation given to these mystical poems, by the Sufis themselves--for they have even composed a vocabulary of the words used by these mystics--by wine is meant devotion, sleep is meditation on the Divine perfections, and perfume the hope of the Divine favour; the zephyrs are outbursts of grace; kisses and embraces, the transports of devotion and piety; idolators, infidels, and libertines, are men of the purest faith, and the idol they worship is the Creator himself; the tavern is a secluded oratory, where they become intoxicated with the wine of love, and its keeper is an enlightened instructor or spiritual guide; beauty denotes the perfection of the Deity; curls and tresses are the infiniteness of His glory; the lips are the inscrutable mysteries of His essence; down on the cheek, the world of spirits who surround His throne; and the black mole upon the cheek of the beloved, the point of indivisible unity; and wantonness, mirth, and inebriation, signify religious enthusiasm, and abstraction from all earthly thoughts and contempt of all worldly affairs.

The poets themselves give a colour to such interpretations as the foregoing, in many passages in their poems; and it is impossible to imagine that such effusions as those of Hafiz###804###, Saaedi, and their imitators, would, otherwise, be tolerated in a Musalman country, particularly at places like Cairo and Constantinople, where they are venerated as divine compositions. It must be, however,

[p. xxii]

allowed, that " the mystical allegory, which, like metaphors and comparisons, should be general only, not minutely exact, is greatly diminished, if not wholly destroyed, by any attempt at particular and distinct resemblances; and that this style of composition is open to dangerous misinterpretation." [**]

The following ode, by a Sufi of Bokhara, is such an extraordinary specimen of the mysterious doctrine of the sect, although some of the poems of the Afghan poet Mirza are sufficiently so, that I cannot refrain from inserting it in this place:--

"Yesterday, half inebriated, I passed by the quarter where the wine-sellers dwell,
 To seek out the daughter of an infidel, who is a vendor of wine.

At the end of the street, a damsel, with a fairy's cheek, advanced before me,
 Who, pagan-like, wore her tresses dishevelled over her shoulders, like the sacerdotal thread.

I said, 'O thou, to the arch of whose eyebrows the new moon is a shame!
 What quarter is this, and where is thy place of abode?'

'Cast,' she replied, 'thy rosary on the ground, and lay the thread of paganism thy shoulder upon;
 Cast stones at the glass of piety; and from an o'erflowing goblet quaff the wine.

After that draw near me, that I may whisper one word in thine ear;
 For thou wilt accomplish thy journey, if thou hearken to my words.'

Abandoning my heart altogether, and in ecstacy wrapt, I followed her,
 'Till I came to a place, where, alike, reason and religion forsook me.

At a distance, I beheld a company, all inebriated and beside themselves,
 Who came all frenzied, and boiling with ardour from the wine of love;

Without lutes, or cymbals, or viols; yet all full of mirth and melody--
 Without wine, or goblet, or flask; yet all drinking unceasingly.

[p. xxiii]

When the thread of restraint slipped away from my hand,
 I desired to ask her one question, but she said unto me, 'SILENCE!'

'This is no square temple whose gate thou canst precipitately attain;
 This is no mosque which thou canst reach with tumult, but without knowledge:

This is the banquet-house of infidels, and all within it are intoxicated--
 All, from eternity's dawn to the day of doom, in astonishment lost!

Depart, then, from the cloister, and towards the tavern bend thy steps;
 Cast away the cloak of the darwesh, and don thou the libertine's robe!'

I obeyed; and if thou desire, with ISMAT, the same hue and colour to acquire,
 Imitate him; and both this and the next world sell for one drop of pure wine!"

The tenets of the Sufi belief, as may be judged from what has been already stated, are involved in mystery. They begin by instilling doctrines of virtue and piety, and by teaching forbearance, abstemiousness, and universal benevolence. This much they profess; but they have secrets and mysteries for every step and degree, which are never disclosed to the uninitiated and profane; but I shall now proceed to quote a few passages from the writings of celebrated Sufis, which may tend to throw some additional light upon this dark and mystic creed.

The Persian poet, Shaikh Saaedi, in his "Bostan," or "Flower Garden," the subject of which is devoted to divine love, thus describes it:--"The love of a being constituted, like thyself, of water and clay, destroys thy patience and thy peace of mind; it excites thee, in thy waking hours, with minute beauties, and occupies thee, in thy sleep, with vain imaginations. With such real affection dost thou lay thine head at her feet, that the universe, in comparison with her, vanishes into nothing before thee; and, since her eye is not allured by thy gold, gold and dust alike appear equal in thine. Not a breath dost thou utter unto any one

[p. xxiv]

else, for with her thou hast no room for any other; thou declarest that her abode is in thine eye, or, when thou closest it, in thy heart; thou hast no power to be at rest for a moment: if she demands thy soul, it runs, instantly, to thy lip; and if she waves a sword over thee, thy head falls, immediately, under it. Since an absurd passion, with its basis on air, affects thee so violently, and commands with a sway so despotic, canst thou wonder that they who walk in the true path are overwhelmed in the sea of mysterious adoration? They abandon the world through remembrance of its Creator; they are inebriated with the melody of amorous complainings; they remember their beloved, and resign unto Him both this life and that to come. Through remembrance of God, they shun the whole of mankind; they are so enamoured of the cup-bearer, that they spill the wine from the cup. No panacea can cure them; for no mortal can be apprised of their malady; so loudly have the divine words, ALASTO and BALa, the tumultuous exclamation of all spirits, rung in their ears, from time without beginning. They are a sect fully employed, though sitting in retirement; their feet are of earth, but their breath is like flame. With a single shout they could rend a mountain from its base; with a single cry they could throw a city into commotion. Like the wind, they are gone, and more ; like stone, they are silent, yet utter God's praises. At the dawn of day, their tears flow so copiously, as to wash from their eyes the black antimony of sleep; [**] though the fleet steed of their conception ran so swiftly all night; yet the morning finds them left, in disorder, behind. Night and day they are plunged in an ocean of ardent desire, until they are, through astonishment, unable to distinguish the night from the day. With the peerless beauty of Him, who adorned the human form, so enraptured are they, that, with the beauty of the figure

[p. xxv]

itself, they have no concern; and whenever they behold a beauteous form, they see in it the mystery of the Almighty's work. The wise take not the husk in exchange for the kernel; and he who makes that choice has no understanding. He alone has drunk the pure wine of unity, who has forgotten, by remembering GOD, all things besides in both worlds."

Jami, the author of the celebrated poem of Layla and Majnun, defines the principles of this mystic philosophy in the following words:--"Some wise and holy men are of opinion, that when the Supreme Being sheds the refulgence of his Holy Spirit upon any of his creatures, that creature's essence, attributes, and actions, become so completely absorbed in the essence, the attributes, and the actions of the Creator, that he finds himself in the position of regulator or director, with reference to the rest of the creation, the several existences of which become, as it were, his limbs--nothing happens to any of them, that he does not feel it has happened to himself. In consequence of his individual and utter annihilation, the result of his essential union with the Deity, he sees his own essence to be the essence of the One and Only; his own attributes to be His attributes; and his own actions to be His actions;--and beyond this, there is no stage in progression to complete union with God attainable by man. When the spiritual vision of any man is engrossed by contemplating the beauty of the Divine Essence, by the overpowering influence of the Eternal Spirit, the light of his understanding, which is that quality by which we are enabled to distinguish between things, becomes wholly extinguished; and as 'error passeth away on the appearance of Truth,' so is the power of discriminating, between the perishable and the imperishable, at once removed." [**]

Few orthodox Muhammadans give a literal construction to the

[p. xxvi]

words of the Prophet on the subject of predestination, although the Kur'an inculcates such; for they deem it impious so to do, as thereby God would be made the author and cause of man's sin. All Sufis are fatalists, and believe that the principle which emanates from the Almighty can do nothing without His will, and cannot refrain from what He wills that it should do. Some Sufis deny that evil exists at all, because every thing proceeds from God, and must therefore necessarily be good; and they exclaim, with the poet--

"The writer of our destiny is a fair and truthful writer,
  And never did he write that which was evil."

[paragraph continues] Others, again, admit, that in this world the principle of evil doth exist; but that man is not a free agent; and quote the following couplet, from the Persian poet Hafiz###804###--

"My destiny hath been allotted to the tavern [**] by the Almighty:
  Then tell me, O teacher! where lieth my crime."

Such is the remarkable doctrine of the Sufis, and still more so their language and allegories, which we have been too much accustomed, in Europe, to consider as the wanton and reckless effusions of Eastern revellers, all devoted to the pleasure of the hour--"effusions bright, indeed, with all the gorgeous hues of Eastern colouring, like unto the skies over their heads, or the gardens around them, but yet transient as the summer's roses, or the nightingale's notes which welcomed them." [*+]

This may be correct as to the outward form of Eastern poetry in general; but most Asiatic poets are Sufis, and if we would attempt to read their poems, we should also desire to understand them; since beneath all this gorgeous and mysterious imagery their lies a

[p. xxvii]

latent signification of far different, and more lasting interest, where the ardent longings and fervid transports of the soul find utterance, which we may look for in vain in the venerated literature of pagan Greece and Rome. Their great Molawi assures us that they profess eager desire, but with no carnal affection, and circulate the cup, but no material goblet; since, in their sect, all things are spiritual--all is mystery within mystery:

"All, all on earth is shadow, all beyond
  Is substance; the reverse is folly's creed."

Sahil-ibn-Aeabd-ullah, of Shustar, a celebrated Sufi teacher, states, "That the soul's secret was first revealed when Faraeawn [**] declared himself a god:" and another, Shaikh Muhi-ud-din, writes, "That the mighty host of the Egyptian monarch was not overwhelmed in the sea of error, but of knowledge:" and in another place, "That the Christians are not infidels because they consider Jesus Christ a God, but because they deem him alone a God." Another author, Agha Muhammad Aeali, of Karmanshah, who, however, is an open enemy of the Sufis, says, that "they ignore the doctrine of reward and punishment," which is as incompatible with their ideas of the soul's re-absorption into the divine essence, as with their literal belief of predestination. Some of their most celebrated teachers, however, deny the truth of this statement, and maintain that sinners will be punished in a future state, and that the good will enjoy a much higher and purer bliss than the sensual paradise of Muhammad holds out, thus revolting at a literal translation of the on that subject.

Another Persian Author, of high reputation [*+] for his piety and judgment, has given a good account of the Sufis and their doctrines. He conceives, with several other Muhammadan writers, that some of the principal Muhammadan saints were of the Sufi belief; but

[p. xxviii]

he applies this name to them, apparently, only as religious enthusiasts, and no more. He makes a great distinction between those who, whilst they mortified the flesh, and indulged in an enraptured love of the Almighty, still kept within the pale of revealed religion; and those wild devotees who, abandoning themselves to the frenzied wanderings of a heated imagination, fancied they should draw nearer unto God by departing from every thing deemed rational among men. [**]

In another passage, this author states, "The Almighty, after his prophets and holy teachers, esteems none more than the pure Sufis, because their desire is to raise themselves, through His grace, from their earthly mansion to the heavenly regions, and to exchange their lowly condition for that of angels. I have stated what I know of them in my Preface. The accomplished and eloquent among them form two classes, the Hukama, or men of science, and the Aeulama, or men of piety and learning. The former seek truth by demonstration; the latter, through revelation. There is another class called Aearufa, or men of knowledge, and Awliya, or holy men, who, in endeavouring to reach a state of beatitude, have abandoned the world. These are also men of science; but as, through Divine grace, they have attained to a state of perfection, their fears are believed to be less than those of others who remain in worldly occupations. [*+] Thus they are more exalted, and nearer to the rich inheritance of the Prophet than other men. No doubt there are imminent dangers along the path: there are many false teachers,

[p. xxix]

and many deluded students pursuing the vapour of the desert, like the thirsty traveller; and these, if they do not rush unto their death, return wearied, grieved, and disappointed, from having been the dupes of their fancy. A true and perfect teacher is most rare; and when he exists, to discover him is impossible; for who shall discover perfection, except He who is himself perfect? who but the jeweller shall tell the price of the jewel? This is the reason why so many miss the true path, and fall into all the mazes of error. They are deceived by appearances, and waste their lives in the pursuit of that which is most defective; conceiving all along that it is most perfect; and thus lose their time, their virtue, and their religion. It is to save men from this danger, that God, through the Prophet, has warned us to attend to established usages, and to be guided by care and prudence. What has been said applies equally to those who live in the world, and to those who have abandoned it; for neither abstinence, nor devotion, can exclude the Devil, who will seek retired mendicants, clothed in the garb of divinity; and these, like other men, will discover that real knowledge is the only talisman by which the dictates of the good can be distinguished from those of the evil spirit. The traveller, on the path of Sufi-ism, must not, therefore, be destitute of worldly knowledge, otherwise he will be alike exposed to danger from excess or deficiency of zeal, and he will certainly act contrary to the most sacred of his duties. A senseless man is likely to exceed the just bounds, in the practice of abstinence and abstraction, and then both his bodily and mental frame become affected, and he loses his labour and his object."

"The Sufi teacher," continues Kazi Nur-ullah, "professes to instruct his disciple how to restore the inward man by purifying the spirit, cleansing the heart, enlightening the head, and anointing the soul: and when all this is done, they affirm that his desires shall be accomplished, and his depraved qualities changed into

[p. xxx]

higher attributes, and he shall prove and understand the conditions, the revelations, the stages, and gradations of exaltation, till he arrives at the ineffable enjoyment of beholding and contemplating God. If teachers have not arrived at this consummation of perfection themselves, it is obvious, that to seek knowledge or happiness from them is a waste of time; and the devoted disciple will either terminate his labour in assuming the same character of imposture that he has found in his instructor, or he will consider all Sufis alike, and condemn this whole sect of philosophers.

"It often happens, that sensible and well-informed men follow a master, who, though able, has not arrived at the virtue and sanctity which constitute perfection: his disciples conceiving that none are better or more holy than their teacher and themselves, and yet, disappointed at not reaching that stage of enjoyment which they expected to arrive at, seek relief from the reproaches of their own mind in scepticism. They doubt, on the ground of their personal experience, all that they have heard or read, and believe that the accounts of the holy men who have, in this world, attained a state of beatitude, are only a string of fables. This is a dangerous error; and I must therefore repeat, that those who seek truth should be most careful to commence with prudence and moderation, lest they be lost in the mazes I have described; and, from meeting with evils of their own creation, should give way to disappointment and grief; and, by expelling from their minds that ardent fervour which belongs to true zeal, should disqualify themselves for the most glorious of all human pursuits." [**]

The Sufis are divided into innumerable sects, as must be expected regarding a doctrine, which may be called an ideal belief. It will not be necessary to the present subject to enumerate them all; for though they differ in designation and some minor usages, they

[p. xxxi]

all agree as to the principal tenets of their creed; particularly in inculcating the absolute necessity of entire submission to their inspired teachers, and the feasibility, through fervent piety, and enthusiastic devotion, of the soul's attaining a state of heavenly beatification, whilst the body is yet an inhabitant of this terrestrial sphere.

I have refrained from attempting to give any description of the extraordinary phases the Sufi belief has, from time to time, assumed in Hindustan, where it has ever flourished, and where it has been beneficial in tending to unite the opposite elements of Muhammadanism and Hinduism, as shown more particularly in the events of the life of Nanak Shah, the guru or spiritual guide of the Sikhs, and founder of their religion. On the Bombay side of India, also, it has even taken root among the Gabrs or Parsis. Many of the usages and opinions of the Sufis bear a similarity to those of the Gnostics, and other Christian sects, as well as to some of the philosophers among the ancient Greeks. The Sufi writers are familiar with Plato and Aristotle: their more celebrated works abound with quotations from the former. It has often been asserted that the Greeks borrowed their knowledge and philosophy from the East; and, if correct, the debt has been well repaid. Should an account of Pythagoras be translated into the Persian or other Eastern language, it would be read as that of a Sufi saint. "His initiation into the mysteries of the Divine nature, his deep contemplation and abstraction, his miracles, his passionate love of music, his mode of teaching his disciples, the persecution he suffered, and the manner of his death, present us with a close parallel to what is related of many eminent Sufi teachers, and may lead to a supposition that there must be something similar, in the state of knowledge and of society, where the same causes produce the same effects." [**]

[p. xxxii]

In the same manner as with Hafiz###804###'s poems in Persian, many of the following odes, particularly those of Rahman and Hamid, are commonly sung all over Afghanistan, as popular songs are sung in Europe; but the singers, generally, unless educated men, have little idea of the deep meaning that lies beneath.

Footnotes

^x:* Ismaaeil the First ascended the throne A.D. 1500, and his family was subverted by Nadir, A.D. 1736.

^xi:* MALCOLM'S HISTORY OF PERSIA.

^xi:+ "The creation proceeded at once from the splendour of God, who poured his spirit upon the universe, as the general diffusion of light is poured over the earth by the rising sun; and as the absence of that luminary creates total darkness, so the partial or total absence of the Divine splendour or light causes partial or general annihilation. The creation, in its relation to the Creator, is like unto the small particles discernible in the sun's rays, which vanish the moment it ceases to shine."--PERSIAN MS.

^xii:* E. B. COWELL, M.A.: "OXFORD ESSAYS."

^xiv:* See 2 KINGS, chap ii., where Elisha dons the mantle of Elijah.

^xiv:+ E. B. COWELL.

^xv:* E. B. COWELL.

^xviii:* SCOTT.

^xviii:+ ASIATIC RESEARCHES, Vol. III.

^xx:* E. B. COWELL.

^xxi:* A collection of poems, by MOWLaNA NuR-UD-DiN, JaMi.

^xxii:* SIR W. JONES.

^xxiv:* See note at page <page 39>.

^xxv:* CAPTAIN W. N. LEES' Biographical Sketch of the Mystic Philosopher and Poet, Jami. Calcutta, 1859.

^xxvi:* The sinful world is here referred to.

^xxvi:+ E. B. COWELL.

^xxvii:* PHARAOH.

^xxvii:+ Kazi Nur-ullah of Shustar.

^xxviii:* MALCOLM: HISTORY OF PERSIA. Some Christians in the extreme west of England have preached such doctrines, but practised the contrary.

^xxviii:+ It is related that the disciple of a celebrated Sufi, having some money in his pocket when travelling, began to express his fears. "Cast away thy fear," said the old man. "How can I cast away a feeling?" he replied. "By casting away that which excites it," was the answer. He cast his money away, and, having nothing to lose, felt no fear.

^xxx:* MALCOLM.

^xxxi:* MALCOLM.

     
Selections from the Poetry of the Afghans, by H.G. Raverty, [1868], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

AeABD-UR-RAHMAN.

MULLa AeABD-UR-RAhMaN is one of the most popular, and probably the best known, of all the Afghan poets. His effusions are of a religious or moral character, and chiefly on the subject of divine love, being, like the poetical compositions of all Muhammadan poets, tinged with the mysticisms of Sufi-ism, already described in the Introductory Remarks; but there is a fiery energy in his style, and a natural simplicity, which will be vainly sought for amongst the more flowery and bombastic poetry of the Persians.

Rahman belonged to the Ghoriah Khel clan or sub-division, of the Mohmand tribe of the Afghans, and dwelt in the village of Hazar-Khani, in the tapah or district of the Mohmands, one of the five divisions of the province of Pes'hawar. He was a man of considerable learning, but lived the life of a Darwesh, absorbed in religious contemplation, and separated from the world, with which, and with its people, he held no greater intercourse than necessity and the means of subsistence demanded. He is said to have been passionately fond of hearing religious songs, accompanied by some musical instrument, which the Chasti sect of Muhammadans [**] appears to have a great partiality for. After a time, when the gift of poesy was bestowed upon him, he became a strict recluse,

[p. 2]

and was generally found by his friends in tears. Indeed, he is said to have been in the habit of weeping so much, as in course of time to have produced wounds on both his cheeks. His strict retirement, however, gave opportunity to a number of envious Mullas to belie him; and they began to circulate reports to the effect, that Rahman had turned atheist or heretic, since he never left his dwelling, and had even given up worshipping at the mosque along with the congregation--a matter strictly enjoined on all orthodox Muhammadans. At length, by the advice and assistance of some of the priesthood, more liberal and less bigoted than his enemies, he contrived to escape from their hands, by agreeing, for the future, to attend the place of public worship, and to pray and perform his other religious duties, along with the members of the congregation. He thus, whether agreeable to himself or not, was obliged in some measure to mix with the world; and this, doubtless, gave rise to the ode at page <page 29>, to which the reader is referred.

Rahman appears to have been in the habit of giving the copies of his poems, as he composed. them, from time to time, to his particular friends, which they, unknown to each other, took care to collect and preserve, for the express purpose of making a collection of them after the author's death. This they accordingly carried out, and it was not until Rahman's decease that these facts became known. It then appeared also, that some of these pseudo friends had, to increase the bulk of their own collection of the poet's odes, mixed up a quantity of their own trashy compositions with Rahman's, and had added, or rather forged, his name to them in the last couplets. In this manner two of these collections of odes were made, and were styled Rahman's first and second. Fortunately for his reputation, these forgeries were discovered in time, by some of the dearest of the poet's friends, who recognised or remembered the particular poems of his composition;

[p. 3]

and they accordingly rejected the chaff, retaining the wheat only, in the shape of his Diwan, or alphabetical collection of odes, as it has come down to the present day. Still, considerable differences exist in many copies, some odes having a line more or a line less, whilst some again contain odes that are entirely wanting in others. This caused me considerable trouble when preparing several of them for insertion in my "Selections in the Afghan Language;" but it was attended with a proportionate degree of advantage, having altogether compared some sixty different copies of the poet's works, of various dates, some of which were written shortly after Rahman's death, when his friends had succeeded in collecting the poems in a single volume.

By some accounts, the poet would appear to have been a co-temporary of the warrior-poet, Khushhal Khan; [**] and it has been stated, that on two or three occasions they held poetical disputations together. This, however, cannot be true; for it seems that although Rahman was living towards the latter part of that brave chieftain's life, yet he was a mere youth, and was, more correctly speaking, a cotemporary of Afzal Khan's, the grandson and successor of Khushhal, and the author of that rare, excellent, and extensive Afghan history, entitled, "Tarikh-i-Murassaae," and other valuable works. A proof of the incorrectness of this statement is, that the tragical end of Gul Khan and Jamal Khan, which Rahman and the poet Hamid also have devoted a long poem to, [*+] took place in the year of the Hijrah 1123 (A.D. 1711), twenty-five years after the death of Khushhal. Another, and still stronger proof against the statement of poetical disputations having taken place between them, is the fact of Rahman's retired life, and his humble position, as compared with that of Khushhal, the chief of a powerful tribe, and as good a poet as himself.

[p. 4]

Some descendants of Rahman, on his daughter's side, dwell at present in the little hamlet of Deh-i-Bahadur (the Hamlet of the Brave), in the Mohmand district; but the descendants on the side of his only son have long been extinct.

The poet's tomb may still be seen in the graveyard of his native village.

Footnotes

^1:* So called from a celebrated devotee named Muaein-ud-Din, who dwelt at a place named Chast, in Arabia. The sect still exists in Afghanistan and the Panjab.

^3:* See Memoir preceding his poems.

^3:+ See Hamid, Poem XLI. and note.

     
Selections from the Poetry of the Afghans, by H.G. Raverty, [1868], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 5]

  

THE POEMS

  

OF

  

AeABD-UR-RAHMAN.

IN THE NAME OF THE MOST MERCIFUL GOD!

  

I.

BEHOLD! such an Omnipotent Being is my God,
 That He is the possessor of all power, authority, and will.

Should one enumerate all the most mighty, pure, and eminent,
 My God is mightier, purer, and more eminent than all.

No want, nor requirement of His, is dependant upon any one;
 Neither is my God under obligation, nor beholden to any.

Out of nothingness He produced the form of entity;
 In such wise is my God the Creator, and the Nourisher of all.

He is the artist and the artificer of all and every created thing:
 My God is, likewise, the hearer of every word and accent.

That which hath neither type nor parallel anywhere,
 Its essence and its nature, its material and its principle, my God is.

All the structures, whether of this world or of that to come,
 My God is the architect, and the builder of them all.

He is the decipherer and the construer of the unwritten pages--
 The unfolder and the elucidator of all mysteries my God is.

[p. 6]

Apparent or manifest; hidden or obscure; intermediate or intercalary;
 My God is cognizant of, and familiar with, all matters and things.

He hath neither partner nor associate--His dominion is from Himself alone
 A sovereign, without colleague or coadjutor, my God is.

Not that His unity and individuality proceed from impuissance;
 For, in His one and unique nature, He is infinite, unlimited.

They have neither need nor necessity of the friendship of others,
 Unto whom my God is beneficently and graciously inclined.

Wherefore then the occasion that I should seek Him elsewhere,
 Since, in mine own dwelling, my God is ever at my side?

O RAhMaN! He is neither liable to change, nor to mutation--
 My God is unchangeable and immutable, for ever and ever!

  

II.

My weeping for the beloved hath passed beyond all computation;
 Yet the dear one is in no way affected at the sight of my tears.

Though every one of my words should be pearls of great price,
 Still she doth not account them at all worthy of her ears.

Were she overcome by sleep, I would arouse her by my cries;
 But though fully awake, my loved one is asleep unto me.

Like unto a writing, I speak, though with mouth covered;
 But my silence surpasseth my wails and my lamentations?

When is there security for the crop of love in scorching ground!
 It requireth a salamander to exist in this desert of mine.

[p. 7]

This is not my love that separation hath parted from me:
 'Tis my soul, which hath become separated from this body of mine.

I, RAhMaN, desire naught else than the beloved of my heart,
 Should my prayer be accepted at the threshold of the Almighty.

  

III.

There is no return for thee, a second time, unto this world!
 To-day is thy opportunity, whether thou followest evil or good!

Every thing for which the opportunity is gone, is the phoenix of our desires;
 But the immortal bird hath never been caught in any one's net.

The stream, that hath left the sluice, floweth not back again!
 The hour, which hath passed away, returneth to us no more!

For time is, alas! like unto the dead in the sepulchre's niche;
 And no one hath brought, by weeping, the dead to life again.

If thou hast any object to attain, be quick, for time is short:
 Flatter not thyself on the permanency of this brief existence!

Each target, of which, in thy heart, thou considerest thyself sure,
 Through pride and vanity, thou wilt surely miss thine aim of.

Over-sanguine hope hath rendered many desponding:
 Be not off thy guard as to the deceit and fraud of time!

When thy mouth becometh shattered by the stroke of death,
 In what manner wilt thou then offer praises with it?

The bereaved woman, who giveth utterance to her bewailings,
 Lamenteth over thee, if thou understandest what she says.

Thou art not a child, that one should teach thee by force:
 Thou art wise and intelligent, and arrived at maturity's years.

[p. 8]

Exercise, then, thine own understanding as to good and evil,
 Whether thy well-being lieth in this, or in that.

Conceal thy face beneath thy mantle, and open thine eyes:
 Fly not far away on the winds of vanity and ambition!

Soar not unto the heavens with thy head in the air,
 For thou art, originally, from the dust of the earth created.

At the last day, inquiry will not be made of thee,
 As to whether thou art the son or grandson of such an one.

To the bride, who may not be handsome in her own person,
 What signify her mother's or her grandmother's good looks?

Practise goodness in thine own person, and fear evil!
 Presume not on the virtues of thy father or thy mother!

These precepts, O my friend! I urge upon myself:
 Be not then grieved that I have made use of thy name.

I use thine and those of others, but speak to myself alone:
 With any one else, I have neither motive nor concern.

Whatever I utter, I address the whole unto myself:
 All these failings and defects are only mine own.

Had I a place for these sorrows within my own breast,
 Why should I give utterance unto these declamations?

Since the racking pains of mortality are before thee,
 Why dost thou not die, O RAhMaN! before they come?

  

IV.

No one hath proved any of the world's faithfulness or sincerity;
 And none, but the faithless and perfidious, have any affection for it.

[p. 9]

They who may lay any claim unto it, as belonging to them,
 Speak wholly under delusion; for the world is no one's own.

Fortune is like unto a potter--it fashioneth and breaketh:
 Many, like unto me and thee, it hath created and destroyed.

Every stone and clod of the world, that may be looked upon,
 Are all sculls; some those of kings, and some of beggars.

It behoveth not that one should place a snare in the world's path;
 For the capture of the griffin and the phoenix cannot be effected.

Who can place any dependence upon this fleeting breath?
 It is impossible to confine the wind with the strongest chain!

Whether the sun or the moon, the upshot is extinction:
 Doth the flower always bloom? Nothing can exist for ever!

Walk not, O RAhMaN! contrary to the ways of the enlightened;
 Since the love of the world is not approved of by any wise man.

  

V.

If one seek a charmer in the world, this is the one:
 This is the dear one, who is the ornament of the universe.

There will hot be such another lover in it as myself;
 Nor will ever such a beloved one be created like thee.

I had shown patience under thy harshness and cruelty;
 But, in the place of lamentation, joy and gladness cannot be.

I will never consent to be separated from thee,
 So long as my soul is not separated from this body of mine.

Like unto the congregation behind, with the priest before,
 In such wise have I imitated and followed thee.

[p. 10]

I am not the only one--the whole world loveth thee!
 Whether it be the beggar, or the sovereign of the age.

Would that thou wouldst grant me a deed of protection,
 Since thou puttest me off with the promise of to-morrow!

'Tis not that of mine own accord I am smitten with thee:
 'Twas a voice from thy direction that reached me.

Indeed, from all eternity, I am devoted unto thee--.
 It is not that to-day only, I have a beginning made.

When with the sword of thy love it shall be severed,
 Then will the neck of RAhMaN have its duty performed.

  

VI.

The godly are the light and the refulgence of the world:
 The pious are the guides and the directors of mankind.

If any one seek the way unto God and his Prophet,
 The devout are the guides to point out the path.

The alchemist, that searcheth about for the philosopher's stone,
 Will find it the bosom companion of the sanctified.

In the society of the enlightened, he will turn to red gold,
 Though a person may be as a stone or a clod of the desert.

The ignorant are, as it were, like unto the dead:
 Verily, the wise are like unto the saints themselves.

The enlightened are, comparatively, like unto the Messiah;
 Since, from their breath, the dead return to life again.

He who may not possess some portion of wisdom
 Is not a man: he is, as it were, but an empty model.

[p. 11]

I, RAhMaN, am the servant of every enlightened being,
 Whether he be of the highest, the middle, or the lowest degree.

  

VII.

Come, do not be the source of trouble unto any one;
 For this short life of thine will soon be lost, O faithless one!

No one is to be a tarrier behind, in this world:
 All are to be departers, either to-day or to-morrow.

Those dear friends, who to-day bloom before thee,
 Will, in two or three short days, fade and decay.

If the sight of any be pleasing to thee, cherish them:
 After they wither and die, when will they again revive?

The leaves of autumn, that fall from the branch,
 By no contrivance can the sage attach them again.

When the rain-drops fall from the sky upon the earth,
 They cannot again ascend unto the heavens whence they came.

Imagine not, that those tears which the eye sheddeth,
 Shall e'er again return to the eyes they flowed from.

This is a different sun that riseth every morn:
 The sun, that setteth once, riseth not again.

Though paradise is not gained by devotion, without grace;
 Still, every man his neck from the debt must release. [**]

Shouldst thou incur a hundred toils for the flesh's sake,
 Not one shall be of any avail to-morrow unto thee.

[p. 12]

Shouldst thou gorge thy stomach with the world itself,
 Thou wilt not be remembered, either in blessings or in prayers.

Shouldst thou give but a grain of corn unto the hungered,
 Verily, it will be hereafter thy provision in eternity.

Shouldst thou bestow but a drop of water on the thirsty,
 It will become an ocean between thee and the fire of hell.

Shouldst thou once bow thy head in the road of the Almighty,
 Thou shalt, at the last day, be more exalted than any.

This world, then, is the mart, if one be inclined to traffic;
 But in that world there is neither barter nor gain.

If friends comprehend aught, to-day is their time,
 That one friend may show self-devotion to another.

If there is any real existence here, of a truth 'tis this,
 That in some one's society it should in happiness pass.

May God protect us from such a state of existence,
 Where thou mayst speak ill of others, and others of thee.

Poison even, is pleasant, if it be in peace and in concord;
 But not sugar, combined with sedition and with strife.

The belly, filled with rubbish, is well, if free from sorrow;
 But not so, though gorged with confection of the dregs of woe.

The back, bent from toil, is indeed estimable;
 But not from a purse of ill-gotten money round the waist. [**]

A blind man, who seeth nothing, is truly excellent;
 Better than that he should set eyes on another man's wife.

[p. 13]

A dumb person is far better without palate or tongue,
 Than that his tongue should become the utterer of evil words.

A deaf man, who cannot hear, is preferable by far,
 Than that his ears should be open to scandalous tales.

Demon or devil, that may come upon one, is agreeable;
 But let not the Almighty a bad man before thee bring!

Than to bear the society of a fool, it is more preferable
 That a fiery dragon should become one's bosom friend.

If there be a real difficulty, it is the healing of hearts;
 But the profit and loss of the world are trifling affairs.

Its advantages, or its detriments, are trivial matters--
 God forbid that any one become infamous for despicable things!

Forbid that any such desire of thine be accomplished,
 Whereby the heart of thy brother or relation be grieved!

Should one eat delicious food, and another be eyeing it,
 Such is not victuals, it is mere poison, so to speak.

It behoveth at times to respect other's wishes, at times thine own;
 But thine own good pleasure is not to be regarded always.

The wise concern not themselves in such matters,
 In which there's constant grief, and not an hour's pleasure.

It is incumbent on judges to administer justice;
 But not to give their ears unto venal things.

Thoughts and ideas of all sorts enter into man's mind;
 But it is not meet to account them all right and just.

The devout should have a constant eye towards their faith;
 For some thoughts are virtues, whilst others are sins.

[p. 14]

God forbid that iniquity proceed from any one's hands!
 What affinity is there between sin and innocence--evil and good?

It is not that all men are equally on a parity together;
 For some are eminent, some indifferent, some vile and base.

The dignity of every one lieth within its own degree:
 It idiot meet that the groom should the noble's rank acquire.

I, RAhMaN, neither thank, nor complain of any one;
 For I have no other friend or enemy but myself.

  

VIII.

He hath obtained happiness and felicity in this world,
 Who in it hath acquired contentment and peace.

The dominion of Solomon, for a thousand years,
 Equaleth not an hour's devotion, in this world.

One breath, in remembrance of the Deity, is more inestimable
 Than the whole wealth of the universe, in this world.

They have found advantage and emolument in it,
 Who occupied themselves in piety, in this world.

If there be any blessing, truly, it is that of devotion:
 Consider that there is no greater good, in this world.

If there be any toils and troubles, verily they are religion's:
 No other labours and trials are of avail, in this world.

All, all is transitory, and perisheth, save the Almighty,
 Whether it be pleasure, or whether it be beauty, in this world.

[p. 15]

Even the monarch, he goeth down unto the dust at last:
 Then what is glory, and what is .fame, in this world? [**]

There will be no greater blockhead therein, than he
 Who seeketh for happiness or tranquillity, in this world.

Thou, who desirest in this life a short period of repose,
 Say, hath any one yet obtained it, in this world?

Relentless fate will make it like unto the shifting sands, [*+]
 Whoever buildeth up a structure, in this world.

It is not a whit less than the stumbling of the drunkard,
 Man's brief stability and continuance, in this world.

Come near the running stream--here behold life!
 There are many such like emblems, in this world.

Every one that approacheth the graveyard of the dead,
 Should consider it a sufficient admonition, in this world.

These massive courts, these firm and compact mansions,
 Will certainly at last be desolate, in this world.

The insatiable eyes of destiny, indeed, are not such
 That they suffer any one to be in safety, in this world.

[p. 16]

Whatever cometh into it, departeth from it again:
 All creatures are merely travellers, in this world.

When the judgment cometh, austerities cannot be practised:
 He is the man, who hath mortified the flesh, in this world.

Since to-morrow he will rise again with the same qualities,
 Let not God give any one an evil nature, in this world!

That will, verily, be unto him a harvest after death,
 Whatever he may have sown in the field of this world.

Although that world cannot be seen here below;
 Yet I can perceive its signs and its omens, in this world. [**]

There will be no reciprocity of viaticum in the last day;
 For I have myself beheld doomsday, in this world.

They will go down into the tomb as a deposit also,
 Whoever may exist as a deposit, in this world. [*+]

Virtue is present bliss; but propitious fortune is necessary,
 That one may acquire felicity, in this world.

Good habits, virtuous actions, and a noble disposition,
 Are paradise and happiness, too, in this world.

Contrariety and opposition plunge a man's life in torment:
 Such antagonism is of no avail, in this world.

The hand to the forehead, and on the breast, [*++] to every one:
 This, indeed, is greatness and distinction, in this world.

[p. 17]

If exalted rank be of advantage unto any one,
 A high place is justice and equity, in this world.

No other regrets can be taken out of it by us,
 Save those of affection and kindness, in this world.

The whole of that world's traffic is carried on in this,
 If one desire to follow commerce, in this world.

If man's good fortune may not have become inverted,
 The truth is by no means hidden from him, in this world.

It behoveth that good be rendered for good, evil for evil,
 If any one seek after holiness, in this world.

The Almighty hath bestowed sanctity upon them,
 Who have shown stedfastness and constancy, in this world.

Should all created beings combine in union together,
 They will not be able to change their lot, in this world.

If any one here below can be called a man, verily 'tis he
 Who may have neither need nor necessity, in this world.

Since solicitude on its account is the cause of all sin,
 How can people show such a hankering, for this world?

Over RAhMaN, indeed, this life hath passed away,
 Even as a short hour glideth away, in this world.

  

IX.

Consider not the wise of this world shrewd and sagacious;
 For foolish and silly are all the wise ones of this world.

The light of wisdom is prohibited unto those hearts,
 On which may rest the dirt and dust of this world.

[p. 18]

What one of the world saith, is all nonsense and absurdity:
 Emptiness and folly are every word and speech of this world.

They merely play and gambol, after the manner of infants,
 Who occupy themselves with the affairs of this world.

Like unto babies, with their mouths filled with milk,
 Are all the subtle and the experienced of this world.

He will ever continue to be a dolt and an idiot,
 Who may be drunk from the intoxication of this world.

In truth, the toper's inebriation will not be so great
 As will be that of the drunken with the wine of this world.

There is a medicine in the world for every sick person;
 But, alas! there is no physic for the sick of this world.

The cure of every one that hath been burned can be effected;
 But not that of the scorched from the fiery sparks of this world.

Whatever thou throwest into the fire consumeth away;
 And satiated will never become the seeker of this world:

He will ever be as a captive, sunk in distress and sorrow;
 Then God forbid one should become the slave of this world!

He will be for ever immersed in lurid gloom and darkness,
 Whoever may be the captive of the infidel of this world.

Whether it be adoration unto the idol, or unto the world,
 Still, idolators all, are the worshippers of this world.

He is the true Muslim amongst the whole of the Faithful,
 Who hath burst asunder the Hindu cord [**] of this world.

[p. 19]

Headless behind, his body remaineth, but the head will go;
 How, then, is the possessor of a head, a head-man of this world? [**]

They make their sons and daughters orphans, and desert them--
 All are unnatural--the fathers and the mothers of this world.

There will be a load of misery for ever upon his head,
 Round which may be wrapped the turban of this world.

All is affliction; whether it be bought, or whether it be sold;
 For there is nought else whatever in the bazar of this world.

They cheat and impose--the whole fraternity are knaves--
 All the buyers, and all the sellers of this world.

They will never show the least affection towards it,
 Who may be acquainted with the secrets of this world.

He whose regard may be directed to religion and piety,
 Fostereth not any hopes or expectations of this world.

He who quaileth at the sight of a precipice or an abyss,
 Will never travel upon the dangerous path of this world.

The whole of its friends and associates are impostors--
 What dependence can be placed on the deceivers of this world?

Its old and its young, alike, are all rivals of each other--
 Where is the true friend in the region of this world?

Whatever may be created, the whole shall fade and perish--
 Draw near! behold the raids and ravages of this world!

Unto whom it cometh, from him it again departeth;
 For I have well observed the gait and movements of this world.

[p. 20]

One hour it may be spring--in another, autumn will come;
 For no permanence whatever, hath the spring of this world.

Though thousands of props should be placed to support it,
 Without foundation, notwithstanding, is the wall of this world.

Though thou shouldst raise round thyself a fortress of iron,
 Still consider but as glass all the bulwarks of this world.

In the same manner as the sun's shadow shifteth,
 So likewise there is nowhere permanence in this world.

Entertain thou no hope of pre-eminence by its means;
 For incessant and perpetual is the littleness of this world.

Without shears they sever the thread of man's existence,
 Both the nights and the days of this world.

After death, an account will be required of every man,
 As to the number and magnitude of the sins of this world.

They will be but a mere handful of dust at the last day,
 The rosy-cheeked and the rosy-bodied of this world.

They will arise on an equality with the beggar together,
 Both the princes and the sovereigns of this world.

There will be a brand impressed upon the miser's breast
 By every darham and every dinar [**] of this world.

Let them be an oblation to the contentment of the contented,
 All the wealth and the wealthy ones of this world.

Themselves, after death, will become the injured and oppressed--
 All the tyrants and the oppressors of this world.

[p. 21]

They may enumerate tens and hundreds until doomsday,
 But no one hath completed the numeration of this world.

When the time for the winding-sheet and the ablution cometh, [**]
 Unveiled and exposed become the veiled and modest of this world.

They will be brought forth on the bier from their privacy,
 Both the coy and the bashful of this world.

More than any other person the Prophet would have enjoyed,
 Had there been any thing like propinquity in this world.

One even of its iniquities cannot be fully explained by RAhMaN;
 For beyond all computation, is the wickedness of this world.

  

X.

Since thou passest thy days in jollity, and thy nights in slumber,
 When, O unfortunate! wilt thou bring the Almighty to mind?

Thy departure, if thou art aware, will be extremely precipitate--
 Be not, then, unmindful of the exceeding shortness of life!

Thy breath and thy footsteps here are all, all computed;
 Therefore step not on this path inconsiderately and in error.

In the book, the Almighty hath sent a statement of the account:
 See, then, thou make thyself with both account and book acquainted.

I am fully aware that, originally, thou art of the earth;
 Why then, with thy finger, removest thou the dust from thy person?

Not until thy thirst for this world shall have become quenched,
 Shalt thou, at the judgment, become satiated with the water of life.

[p. 22]

To the same extent thy inside shall be filled with fire,
 As, to-day, it is gorged, with wine and with roasted meat.

Weigh thou, then, with thine own hands, this good and evil,
 As to how much thy wicked actions do exceed the good.

In that world, after what manner will thy answer be,
 Seeing that in this, thou art wholly unable to reply?

To-day that thou runnest to the shade for shelter from the sun:
 When it stands but a spear's height [**] above thee, what wilt thou do?

Acquiesce not, O RAhMaN! in causing affliction unto any one,
 If thou desirest salvation from the torments to come.

  

XI.

In this world, the countenance of the beloved is the object--there is naught else;
 Whatever it is, the sight of the adored-one is desired, and naught else.

When I contemplate separation and association with the beloved,
 The one is torment, the other a paradise of flowers, and naught else.

Each of the eyelashes of the beloved pierceth me to this degree,
 That I declare it is the two-edged sword of Aeali, [*+] and naught else.

[p. 23]

It requireth a hero to raise the tresses around her face:
 The last is a treasure-hoard, the others are snakes; [**] and naught else.

How shall I recite the praises of the charms of the fair!
 I speak briefly--they are innumerable, and naught else.

In whatever direction I listen, with the ears of the heart,
 I find it is all love's market in a bustle, and naught else.

The whole of the world's factories, that one seeth around him,
 They all belong unto the empire of love, and naught else.

Every physician before whom I present myself saith,
 "Thou art sick through love; indeed, it is naught else."

Should poor RAhMaN place his affections on any other save thee,
 He will assuredly be deserving of death, and naught else.

  

XII.

From how long since am I a purchaser of thy face!
 I am gone beyond life and goods, in the mart of thy face.

There is naught else before mine eyes save the light of it;
 To this degree am I sunk, in the refulgence of thy face.

Under the pretext of tobacco, I exhale the smoke of my sighs;
 For I burn and emit smoke for ever, in the fire of thy face.

All other folks whatever occupy themselves in the world's affairs;
 But I am sunk in expectation of beholding thy face.

Thanks, that thou hast delivered me from obligation to others;
 And, head bent in adoration, I am beholden to thy face.

[p. 24]

Where'er I, RAhMaN roam, for the heart's diversion;
 I have no other object--I am the seeker of thy face.

  

XIII.

If I say aught regarding separation, what shall I say?
 Of this agony, without a remedy, what shall I say?

I have no power to breathe in the dear one's presence:
 Since I have no power, powerless, what shall I say?

When I gaze upon her, I forget myself entirely--
 When I know nothing of myself, what then shall I say?

Of the state of my own heart, unto her I cannot speak--
 Of that, without name or vestige, what shall I say?

Of love's mystery, that hitherto no one hath explained--
 Of the inexplicable and indescribable, what shall I say?

I am o'erwhelm'd in tears, through grief for my beloved--
 Concerning such a flood as this, what then shall I say?

I, who have sunk down upon the furnace of separation--
 Of the rose-bower of conjunction, what shall I say?

She plundereth one of life and goods, and stealeth the heart--
 Regarding such a heart-ravisher, what then shall I say?

He calleth the crows, and driveth the nightingale from the garden--
 Of the gardener of this world, what then shall I say?

She is still far better than all that I can explain--
 What then of the loved-one shall I, RAhMaN, say? [**]

[p. 25]

  

XIV.

The garden of existence will not bloom for ever!
 The market-place of life will not be in bustle always!

Like as the river Aba Sind [**] boundeth along in its course,
 With such like exceeding precipitation is the progress of life.

Just as the lightning, that showeth itself and is no more;
 So swift, without doubt, is the swift course of life.

It is violent and impetuous to such a degree,
 That no one is able to command the bridle of life.

Since its swift steed hath neither curb nor rein,
 The brave cavalier of life must have a fall at last.

In a single hour it severeth the friendships of years--
 In such wise, unfaithful is the friend of life.

I will neither leave my house, nor will I travel;
 For, without going a journey, I pass over the road of life.

It will, in the end, be severed by the shears of fate--
 It will not remain for ever connected--this thread of life.

He should view his own self with the bubble's eye,
 If, in his heart, one would compute the length of life.

O RAhMaN! there is no opportunity in this world again
 For him, over whom hath passed away the period of life.

  

XV.

This is the adored one--that is the rival:
 This is the rose--that is the thorn.

[p. 26]

This is the rose--that is the thorn:
 This is Mansur [**]--that the gallows-tree.

This is the beloved--that the malicious: [*+]
 This is the treasure--that is the snake.

This is wisdom--and that is love:
 This is anguish--that the consoler.

This is separation--that is conjunction:
 This is autumn--that the fresh spring.

This is devotion--that is sinfulness:
 This is refulgence--but that is fire.

This is the wise man--that is the fool:
 This is awake--but that is asleep.

This is RAhMaN--that is the adored:
 This is the sick--that is the physician.

  

XVI.

So fast our friends depart unto the grave,
 As the karwan, [*++] with speed, returneth home.

So very promptly doth death deal with us,
 As the reaper cutteth down the ripe corn.

[p. 27]

Like as the moving sand [**] is quickly commingled,
 So speedily is this world together huddled.

The human frame as rapidly decayeth,
 As the tulips, in the autumn, wither away.

So swiftly passeth away this sweet life,
 As the rapid river boundeth along in its course.

A twinkling of the eye, indeed, will not be so speedy,
 As RAhMaN'S hasty departure from the world.

  

XVII.

At times the body burneth from heat; sometimes, it trembleth from the cold:
 At others, it dieth from thirst and hunger; at others, from excess of food.

All, all who have come into the world, are in tumult and in uproar:
 Neither is that hungry one at peace, nor that cloyed one in tranquillity.

At times, they raise the hand to the head, and act civilly to each other;
 Sometimes they stretch out the hand to the dagger and the sword.

When the angels mixed the dust of the first Adam together,
 They combined, along with it, all manner of pains and woe.

What matters it, though this very hour one be beaten or be bound?
 His time, too, will come likewise, to strike and to pinion others.

For how long will this crazy foundation of our's continue firm?
 With plastering and propping it so continually I am quite worn out.

[p. 28]

'Tis possible, perhaps, that after death one may laugh in the tomb,
 Who may, in this life, have mourned and lamented over himself.

I perceive all are departers--there are none to be tarriers behind:
 Travelling upon this road is necessary, alike, for young and for old.

It is the flowing ringlets of the beloved that every one seeketh after,
 Whether it be the young or old, the great or small, the rich or poor.

Supremely happy is he who hath been accepted at her threshold;
 But woe and misery for him who hath been driven from it.

Like unto me, RAhMaN, hundreds were her nightingales;
 But which that dark-eyed one hath chosen, God only knoweth!

  

XVIII.

When the black eye-lashes become submerged in the heart's moisture,
 Then both property and effects become engulfed in the ocean of the heart.

Thou speakest vainly of the heart's disquiet unto the "Father of Desire:" [**]
 What know children of the deep, deep sorrows of the heart?

Unto every other countenance than that of my own beloved,
 I have permanently closed, altogether, the eyes of the heart.

That the highest canopy of heaven is beneath its shadow,
 In the same degree, the more supernal is the banner of the heart.

This sanctuary is more sacred than Abraham's tabernacle,
 If one would restore the desolated sanctuary of the heart.

[p. 29]

Though others should set itself, feet upon the earth's surface,
 I have on the empyrean itself, placed the foot of the heart.

That spot, which lieth midway 'twixt the firmament and world,
 Is a place of seclusion--'tis the very staircase of the heart.

From whom, then, shall I crave it, save from thee my God,
 Since the world's physicians cannot prepare the salve of the heart?

There are, indeed, very many extrinsic friends in the world;
 But RAhMaN nowhere findeth, a single friend of the heart.

  

XIX.

I am ever sitting, with heart dried up, in the moisture of my tears:
 Love showed unto me, in my own retreat, both ocean and land.

Like as when, with my lips, I kissed the wound of thy sword,
 I have never since, from any salve, such soothing experienced.

Majnun, that laid his head at the feet of Layla, his beloved, [**]
 Became exalted in Arabia, and in all foreign lands.

The powerful will always be triumphant over the weak;
 And I am preserved from other misery by my grief for thee.

Like unto myself, for thee, thus in wretchedness o'erwhelmed,
 Of the whole race of Adam there will be no other similar.

Like as a carcass, that may be fallen amongst the living,
 In such wise am I, whilst in it, separated from the world.

From the breathings of the charmers I obtain no alleviation;
 For this reason, indeed, that my breath is dependent on thine.

[p. 30]

I have neither inquiry nor research to make, save after thee:
 Thou art my object every moment, and at every step.

Should it be my good fortune to obtain the platters of thy dogs,
 I would no more cast mine eyes, even upon Jamshed's cup. [**]

So completely have I gambled away my heart upon thy curls,
 As when a little button falleth, and, in murky darkness, is lost.

All ensanguined in blood, like unto red roses hang,
 A thousand hearts in every ringlet of thy curly hair.

I, RAhMaN, withdrawn from the world, was happy indeed;
 But looking towards thee, hath brought man's censure on me.

  

XX.

The fair face turneth like unto a smoky pot in old age:
 The upright-statured becometh like a bent stick, in old age.

Like unto the candle in the morning, or the sun in winter,
 One turneth pale, and wanteth warmth, in the time of old age.

If a person place his foot in one direction, he goeth in another;
 The whole body becometh quite a stranger to us, in old age.

One's limbs are laid out, as if accounted among the dead,
 Although he is still palpably beheld alive, in old age.

[p. 31]

A defunct is much better off, for after death he liveth again;
 But it is not so that one may again grow young, in old age.

If he take any thing, it disagreeth with him, like poison;
 For one cannot eat, nor can one drink, in old age.

That is youth, in which one both heareth and seeth something;
 But nothing can be heard, and nothing seen, in old age.

O RAhMaN! verily, old age is such utter helplessness,
 That, were it Rustam [**] himself, he deserveth pity, in old age.

  

XXI.

He who placeth any hope upon the fabric of this world,
 Embarketh, on a tour of the ocean, in a paper boat.

No one hitherto hath successfully run the steed of the sky [*+]--
 How can one practise horsemanship on the back of the wind?

Neither can the wolf be instructed in the art of humanity,
 Nor can any reliance be placed on the forbearance of fate.

Fortune revolveth equally with Islam and with idolatry--
 When doth the blind make distinction 'twixt white and black?

With mine own eyes have I viewed the portents of destiny:
 It createth thousands every moment, and destroyeth them too.

I am unable to place any such trust in fate's revolutions,
 As that when its time cometh, it will grant exemption to me.

No one, indeed, will have experienced in his whole lifetime,
 Such severity as the beloved-one, hourly, wreaketh upon me.

[p. 32]

Should I venture to place in my turban a bud of the rose,
 From it, my evil destiny produceth a thorn therein.

If I stretch forth my hand unto gold, it turneth into dust:
 If I manifest desire for dust, it treateth me with scorn.

Separation from God is a great calamity, unbearable to me:
 My distressed heart ever yearneth for society with Him.

When hath any lover acquired such an amount of patience,
 That he putteth off, until to-morrow, the promise of to-day?

O heart ravisher! if thou shouldst even clothe me in fire,
 In my sight, the garment will become me like gold brocade.

If, with regard to my love, any one should speak evil of me,
 To myself I consider, that he is uttering my praise.

'Tis right that reproaches be heaped on the lover, the rule is such:
 It is ever the custom of the healthy to laugh at the sick.

Honour and love are widely separated from each other--
 How can one perpetrate a robbery in the light of day?

RAhMaN, this ode reciteth in reply to that which Dawlat [**] wrote--
 "Should the beloved present me continually the wine of her love!"

  

XXII.

If any one should account me an ascetic, an ascetic am I;
 If any one should consider me a noble, a noble am I.

I desire the whole world as an oblation unto the beloved:
 It is not that, for myself, I care ought about it.

[p. 33]

'Tis hard sustaining the dignity of the cowl: were it not so,
 Every moment I incline unto the Darwesh's calling.

I take advice from every one, and give counsel unto all:
 I am, at once, the disciple of some, and the apostle of others.

In separation the thoughts of the beloved ever follow me:
 Along with Yusuf, [**] I am a companion in imprisonment.

At the time of laughing, my weeping is like unto the taper's:
 In the world, I am totally concealed, yet in fear of my life.

But what freedom, what independence is greater than this?
 That I am a captive in the fetters of the locks of the beloved.

What other happiness is there more inestimable than this?
 That for the sake of the beloved I am ever plunged in grief.

Khushhal Khan and Dawlata [*+] are but slaves of mine;
 For, of the Pus'hto tongue, I, RAhMaN, am the Aealam-gir. [*++]

  

XXIII.

Where the lips of the beloved? where affliction of heart and soul?
 Where the nightshade's red berry? where the ruby of Badakhshan?

Pure and free is true love from all proneness to carnality
 Where is the well of the stomach? where the dimple of the chin?

There is not a little difference 'twixt the libertine and the recluse--
 Where are youths and maidens? where are widows and orphans?

[p. 34]

They are all fools, who barter their religion for the world--
 Where are fifty days? where eternity and everlasting life?

Let ambition and desire be a sacrifice unto contentment
 Where is the land of Egypt? [**] where the Hamlet of the Slaves? [*+]

In one village, the Darwesh and murderer cannot dwell--
 Where is Aeaziz Khan? where is Mulla AeABD-UR-RAhMaN?

  

XXIV.

Though kings and princes have made their exit from the world,
 It hath not become, in anywise, imperfect or defective thereby.

Though thousands, every moment, perish and pass away,
 Thousands, likewise, every instant, are into it brought.

Of their exits and their entrances there is no computation:
 They are like unto the fathomless ocean that rolleth along.

At another's sorrows, man doth not become affected:
 He is alone sensitive of what happeneth to himself.

One, so illustrious as the Prophet, passed from the world away;
 Yet this world did not become ruined by that separation.

When such like eminent people have gone down to the dust,
 How shall be remembered, by any one, such dogs as thou and I?

[p. 35]

Shouldst thou sift, over and over, the whole world's dust,
 Thou wilt not again discover either Dara or Shah Jahan! [**]

Not even a trace remaineth of their names or their records,
 Who laid claim unto glory, and sought, from posterity, fame?

Go thou, and see for thyself, if I speak falsely--
 Look upon the graves of thy father, and grandfather too!

Behold! what have those mouths and lips become,
 Which, on both thine eyes, were wont to kiss thee fondly?

They who used to hail thee with "Thy sacrifice, thy sacrifice," [*+]
 Let them now call out unto thee, "Thy sacrifice am I!"

I am quite amazed with the glowing words of RAhMaN,
 That in the collection of his odes, fire hath not burst out.

  

XXV.

The chiefs and the monarchs of the world,
 At last, abject and confounded, depart.

They are fastened to the link-rope of fate,
 Like as captives together are chained.

Sweet existence departeth front him,
 And the king hath neither power nor control.

Though he give away wealth and lands,
 He obtaineth neither quarter nor mercy.

[p. 36]

He hath neither friend nor defender:
 Both pain and agony overcome him.

Helpless, in his presence, will be standing,
 Both his ministers and his envoys too.

No remedy can be prescribed for him;
 And doctors, nonplussed, hang their heads.

His dominions remain behind him;
 And from regret and sorrow his heart breaketh.

When the soul hath deserted his body,
 His family weep, and bewail his loss.

For an hour or so, they mourn over him;
 Then the poor creatures grow calm again.

They then remove him for the ablution, [**]
 And place him naked on the stretcher.

Then of his garments, become covetous,
 The washers and the bathers of the dead,

On the return home from the grave,
 The heirs share, and carry the effects away.

Both his friends, and his enemies, alike,
 To his throne and country lay claim.

His handmaidens and concubines, they
 Are carried off by the dead man's compeers.

Both name and vestige of him are lost,
 As if, indeed, he had never existed.

[p. 37]

Not even a record of him remaineth;
 Not even his title, to future times.

The world, verily, is like a running stream,
 Upon which no impression can remain.

Though one may people a thousand spots,
 Still, all, at last, must desolate become!

Like as the wind cometh and passeth by,
 So rolleth away the course of time!

This exposition was long and lengthy,
 But RAhMaN hath condensed and abridged it.

  

XXVI.

My black eyes have turned white, from the weeping of separation;
 And again, have become coloured, from the blood of the heart.

I was wont to say, "Even yet, I will go and visit my friends;"
 For I did not know that the time of their departure was fixed.

Some, like unto the moth, cast themselves into the fire:
 Some, alive, like the nightingale, the glowing rose upon.

The abjectness of death hath come before the dead;
 And the living become woe-begone, though yet in existence.

The soldiers of destiny have so put forth their hands to plunder,
 That a thousand Khasraus and Shirins [**] have been trampled to dust.

[p. 38]

They who, in their gaiety, placed their feet upon the heavens--
 Such tenderly nourished ones have now sunk into the grave.

They who were wont to repose upon ermine and velvets,
 Without bed and without pillow now in the cold earth lie.

Why, then, should not the heart of RAhMaN be sorrowful,
 When such numbers of his friends have been severed from him?

  

XXVII.

Whomsoever one's own affections have made abject, contemptible, account not;
 For love is sympathy's clouds: as mere clouds of dust, account them not.

At times, the curls become dark spikenards; at others, amber and musk:
 Although they are like unto snakes, as such, account them not.

One of its phases is destruction, whilst another is reconstruction:
 Indeed, love, radically, is fire; but as such, account it not.

Many awake, are fast asleep, like the statue, with eyes open:
 Though it regard thee with staring eyes, awake, account it not.

The object to be conveyed by the faces of the fair, is a certain emotion:
 That which produceth not such impression, a face, account it not.

The thorn, which is along with the rose, is among roses reckoned:
 What matter though 'tis termed a thorn? as such, account it not.

The wise are those, who confess themselves wanting in wisdom--
 They who account themselves sage, as such, account them not.

[p. 39]

He, indeed, is sinful, unto whom his own sins are not evident:
 Whoever considereth himself evil, as such, account him not.

He, who hath confessed the power of his beloved one's dark locks,
 Will be disturbed for ever; then tranquil, account him not.

Let him, who seeketh perfection, practise the lowliness of RAhMaN:
 That is the expedient: any other plan, successful, account it not.

  

XXVIII.

Would to heaven that I were the dust and ashes at thy door!
 Would that thy foot were, for ever, placed upon my head!

By all means, let thee and me meet face to face;
 Then let my breast be the target for thine arrows!

Let my whole body, like antimony, be ground to powder; [**]
 For then, at least, one glance of thy dark eyes will be mine.

Were the society of the fair dependent on gold or silver,
 I had acquired it, by my sallowness, and my silvery tears.

Wherefore, indeed, had reproaches been uttered against me,
 If any one had been aware of thy heart-ravishing ways?

Should I tell them of the dignity thy love hath brought me,
 The angels, all, would cry, "O that we were human too!"

If I were the heart-ravisher, and thou, like me, the heart-ravished,
 The spectacle of my condition would then be manifest to thee.

[p. 40]

It will not be equal unto the bloody torrent from mine eyes,
 Though one's face, all over, might sharp sword-gashes bear.

O that I were the nightingale, or the zephyr of the morn,
 That my path might lie amongst thy fragrant bowers!

'Midst the agonies endured for thee, to RAhMaN, the physician saith--
 "Thou wouldst be better were thy state even worse than it is."

  

XXIX.

If this, thy heart's affection, be bestowed upon a rival,
 For thy sake, this rival shall be my friend also.

He who may be fascinated with one fair countenance,
 From that one, a thousand other faces will be acceptable to him. [**]

Whosoever may have entered into the service of kings,
 Must, necessarily, be under obligation unto the janitor.

Against thy malicious guardians, how shall I complain?
 It is usual for the thorns to be associated with the rose.

Until a hundred thorns shall have pierced his breast,
 How shall the nightingale unto the rose ever gain access?

He will spread the prayer-carpet in the cupbearer's path--
 Every Sufi who may be, towards his countenance, prepossessed.

[p. 41]

He will lose his senses, entirely, through the phrenzy of love,
 Though he may be as wise, indeed, as Iflatun [**] himself.

He will, in no wise, cast censures upon RAhMaN,
 Whoever may be cognizant of thy beauty and grace.

  

XXX.

Though they may have been a hundred times by each other's side, and in each other's arms;
 Still, all the loving-ones of this world will be separated from each other.

They, who, at present, are dwelling together in the same abode;
 At the last, will all have separate dwelling places.

These fragrant flowers, whose proper place is in the turban,
 All, all of them will fade away, and be trodden under foot.

These fair-faced ones, with bright countenances like the sun's--
 The black hair, like a forest, will overspread their cheeks.

This delicious sherbet, which is the society of our friends,
 Will, in separation, and in absence, to deadly poison turn.

Through disjunction from a friend, I myself have witnessed,
 The wisest of the age become, wholly, of reason bereft.

He setteth not his foot, for dread, on the ground of society,
 Who is, already, cognizant of the dread slough of separation.

In what manner shall one devise a fit remedy for this,
 Unto which, neither human wisdom, nor conjecture reach?

[p. 42]

To such a degree hath anguish rusted RAhMaN'S heart;
 But the goblet of pure wine will its furbisher become.

  

XXXI.

The face of the beloved, the sun, and the moon, are all three one:
 Her stature, the cypress, and the pine, are all three one.

I have not the least need, either of honey, or of sugar;
 For, the lips of the beloved, honey, and sugar, are all three one.

When I am reclining upon my couch, without her by my side,
 Fire, thorns, and this couch of mine, are all three one.

When I cast mine eyes toward her dwelling's door and walls,
 A garden, a parterre of flowers, and they, are all three one.

When I am soiled with any dust of the alley she dwelleth in,
 This dust, and musk, and amber, are all three one.

O God! make no one acquainted with absence from his love;
 For invasion, massacre, and such absence, are all three one!

The very moment that man biddeth adieu unto the world,
 Dust, and silver, and gold, unto him, are all three one.

Should the monk, in reality, follow a life of austerity,
 The sovereign, the chief, and the monk, are all three one.

It is not right that one should roam in foreign lands;
 Therein, he who can see, the blind, and dumb, are all three one.

That town, in which there may be neither sweetheart nor friend,
 That town, the ocean, and the desert, are all three one.

[p. 43]

At the shops of the sightless dealers in jewels,
 The kauri, [**] the ruby, and the pearl, are all three one.

Let not these saintly monitors hold my love in scorn;
 For the true lover, the saint, and the father, are all three one.

Through the despotic severity of tyrannical rulers,
 The grave, and fire, and Pes'hour, [*+] are all three one.

What matter, though he may praise himself unto RAhMaN?
 Still, the fool, the ox, and the ass, are all three one.

  

XXXII.

Thy fair face, and thy musky mole, are associated together,
 Or Mahmud and Ayaz are sitting together, bosom friends. [*++]

What matter, though thy countenance is hidden by thy curls?
 The water of immortality itself is, in total darkness, concealed.

From thy curls, thy ruby lips, and thy face, are produced
 The night, the glow of sunset, and the dawn of day.

Is it the teeth, in thy sweet mouth, that shine so lustrously,
 Or are there glittering dewdrops in the bud of the rose?

'Tis not that my heart, alone, is pierced by thy glances:
 The knife and the flesh, of old, are hostile to each other.

Without floods of tears, the dark eye deigneth not to look on one:
 The opening of the narcissus dependeth on the rivulet's humidity.

Peace, without trouble and affliction, no one hath acquired;
 But thy cruelty, and thy constancy, are blessings unto me.

[p. 44]

Through the good fortune attendant on the meed of thy beauty,
 Throughout the world resoundeth the fame of RAhMaN'S rhymes.

  

XXXIII.

If there be any essential duty in this world, verily 'tis that of religion;
 And for the followers of this avocation, there is due meed of praise.

Unto whose lot have fallen the gifts of godliness and piety,
 The shadow of felicity and happiness ever followeth after them.

Contentment hath so filled their palates with savour,
 That, in their mouths, the dry crust is like honey unto.

Without elephants and camels, they wield the sceptre of royalty,
 Though a small worn-out piece of mat is their only carpet.

When they, in their necessities, raise their hands in supplication,
 The very angels of heaven say, Amen! to their requests.

They, who, in this life, accept indigence and privations,
 Their advantage and good in that are infallible indeed.

The lowliness and humility of the meek are, in themselves, dignity:
 Their hearts are clean, though their ragged garments be soiled.

The water of the higher ground floweth ever unto the lower--
 The Almighty hath raised to perfection, the humble, and the meek.

The heads of the stubborn and scornful reach the heavens now;
 But, after a few short days, their place is in the dust!

They, who follow the dictates of presumption and arrogance,
 Deserve not mercy--they are abominable and accursed.

[p. 45]

What, though their human forms may be termed men?
 Men they are not, in reality--they are children of the devil.

Though RAhMaN possesseth none of this world's pelf,
 Thank Heaven! neither presumptuous, nor self-conceited is he.

  

XXXIV.

There is a different scar branded upon every one's breast,
 Whether he be the beggar, or the sovereign of the land. [**]

There is no obtaining satiety from this fountain of the world;
 And its thirsty-ones are, severally, in dissension and in strife.

A. little peace is obtained, only after much pain and trouble--
 A mere straw of this world, without it, is unlawful and unmeet.

This life's joys are not attainable, without bitterness and woe--
 From the miser's house, ever so little alms, is a misfortune.

Why then may not tranquillity be prohibited unto them,
 Who have entered within the caravansary of this world?

As to the state of Majnun, why should any one inquire?
 The whole world, house by house, is Majnun and Layla too! [*+]

Love hath breathed upon the entire universe a spell, so potent,
 That the lover, though keen-sighted, is to all things blind.

The Almighty hath accorded unto every one a different lot;
 And every man's own portion is, separately, determined.

[p. 46]

Giving and taking--buying and selling--all are in others' hands
 There is, I perceive, no opening here, either for thee or for me.

All matters, if in accordance with the will of the master,
 Though unlawful towards the bondsman, are legal and right.

Willing or unwilling--whether it be one's wish, or whether it be not--
 The fulfilment of one's destiny, agreeable, or hateful, is inevitable.

Life and faith, it behoveth to intrust, entirely, unto Him,
 Whose decrees have gone out upon every human being.

Into the hands of whomsoever the ruler hath delegated authority,
 The whole world boweth unto his wishes and his views.

O RAhMaN! if the Most High should not be one's companion,
 Though armies may be with him, he still is all alone!

  

XXXV.

That friend, who is false and faithless, is no friend at all!
 The affair, which hath not stability, is no matter at all!

Though laying down one's head is difficult, for thee and for me;
 Yet 'tis an easy matter in love, and difficult by no means.

Care and solicitude awaken a man from his slumbers;
 And he who hath no anxiety, though awake, is fast asleep.

To the lover, if there is aught in life, 'tis the society of his beloved--
 The life of separation cannot be reckoned as existence.

It increaseth and groweth less, in the twinkling of the eye--
 Reliance on the revolutions of fortune is no reliance whatever.

[p. 47]

If one be the father of a hundred sons, what shall he do with them?
 The ignorant, foolish son, is not the son of his father.

Unto their lovers, the beloved ones ever manifest their caprices;
 But the beloved of RAhMaN causeth him no disquietude.

  

XXXVI.

In the name of that Deity of mine, this is my meed of praise--
 Him, of whose many appellations, one, "The Most Glorious" is.

Those things, which, unto all others, are insuperable,
 The whole of these matters are easy, and feasible unto Him.

He is the sovereign over all the rulers of the earth:
 Over the head of every monarch, He is also the King.

Is any one able to place a sun in the firmament?
 Yet He, in the heavens, hath elevated this glorious orb.

Can any one spread out a veil over the disc of the sun?
 But, see! He hath entirely concealed it, in the veil of clouds.

Who is there capable of producing a moon, to light the night?
 He hath created many moons, to illumine the nocturnal gloom.

Can any one pour down a single rain-drop from the sky?
 Yet He hath rained, upon us, the genial showers of spring.

Who is there-equal to give vitality, even to a mosquito
 Yet He hath given life to the whole creation of the earth.

Hath any one the ability to give the red tinge to stone? .
 But He hath coloured it with the Arghowan's [**] rich hue.

[p. 48]

Can any one cause a single flower to grow from out the earth
 Yet He hath made to bloom gardens of sweetest flowers.

Hath any one the power to produce water from fire?
 He, from the fire of summer, hath produced the winter rains.

Hath any one the ability to impart religion unto man?
 Yet He, upon all His servants, hath faith and religion bestowed.

Can any one ascend from earth to Heaven?
 Yet this potent power, He hath, unto Jesus Christ, assigned.

Who is there. that can hold converse with the Almighty
 Yet, to this degree, He hath the patriarch Moses exalted.

Who is mighty enough to place a saddle on the steed of the wind?
 Whilst He hath, high in air, the throne of Suliman set up. [**]

What man, with snowy beard, can, unto the Last Day, live?
 Yet, upon Khizr, [*+] this great favour hath He conferred.

Hath any one power to produce gems from out the rain-drops?
 Whilst He, from out the rain-drops, hath produced pearls.

Who is there can supply food unto all creatures?
 Yet He, unto all created things, is the giver of daily bread.

[p. 49]

That which He can perform, none else can accomplish:
 All the most powerful are impotent, before His omnipotence.

He hath founded the house of stone in the midst of the waters,
 In which He hath given, unto fire, security and protection. [**]

The earth hath bowed down its head in His adoration;
 And the firmament is bent over in the worship of Him.

Every tree, and every shrub, stand ready to bend before Him:
 Every herb and blade of grass are a tongue to utter his praises.

Every fish in the deep praiseth and blesseth His name:
 Every bird, in the meadows and in the fields, magnifieth Him.

All things are occupied in offering thanksgiving unto Him,
 Whether mankind, or the genii, or the beasts of the field.

The created things themselves have not held Him in such estimation,
 As the great love and regard they are held in by Him.

No one hath discovered the extent of His omniscience--
 His knowledge and perception such a boundless ocean is.

Neither doth any one bear likeness or similitude unto Him,
 Nor doth He bear likeness or similitude unto any one.

With Him, there is neither deficiency, detriment, nor decline:
 He is, wholly, without defect, without decline, or deterioration.

He hath neither simile, nor similitude, nor hath He place:
 He is without semblance, without comparison, without abode.

From all form, structure, or configuration, He is exempt;
 Yet all figure, lineament, and formation, from Him proceed.

[p. 50]

No one beholdeth Him with his eyes, nor can He be looked upon;
 And yet, ineffable and inscrutable, He is manifest to all.

If any one should say, He cannot be seen, verily, He cannot:
 And should he so say, He is, in truth, apparent unto all.

Without doubt and without distrust, consider Him immaculate
 In all things soever, of which people are hard of belief.

No one hath lauded Him equal unto His just deserts;
 Neither hath any one-sufficiently resounded His praise.

Out of the thousands of His excellencies and His perfections,
 Deem not, that one, by RAhMaN, hath been adequately expressed.

Footnotes

^11:* See Mirza, Poem VI., second note.

^12:* It is customary in the East to carry money in a purse or belt, fastened round the waist.

^15:*

"The boast of heraldry, the pomp of pow'r,
  And all that beauty, all that wealth e'er gave,
  Await alike th' inevitable hour.
  The paths of glory lead but to the grave."

^15:+ The Reg-i-rawan, or "Moving sand," situated forty miles north of Kabul, towards the mountains of Hindu Kush, and near the base of the mountains. It is a sheet of pure sand, in height about 400 feet, and 100 broad, and lies at an angle of 45 degrees. This sand is constantly shifting, and they say that in the summer season a sound like that of drums may be heard issuing from it. See "BURNES'S CABOOL."

^16:* That is to say, the signs and omens of the approach of the end of the world.

^16:+ The deposit or pledge for the observance of faith and obedience unto God. See Mirza, Poem VI., second note.

^16:++ The mode of salutation in Eastern countries is, by raising the right hand to the forehead, or by placing it to the breast.

^18:* The Brahmanical cord. Also a belt, or cord more particularly, worn round the middle by the Eastern Christians and Jews, and by the Persian Magi. It was introduced A.D. 839, by the Khalifah Mutawakkil, to distinguish them from Muhammadans.

^19:* The play upon the words 'head' and 'head-man' here is almost lost in the translation.

^20:* Names of Arabic coins. The darham is of silver, and the dinar of gold.

^21:* Referring to the custom, in the East, of washing the bodies of deceased persons before dressing them out in their grave-clothes.

^22:* According to the Muhammadan religion, the sun at the resurrection will be no further off than a mile, or (as some translate the word, the signification of which is ambiguous) than the length of a spear, or even of a bodkin.

^22:+ Zu-l-fikar, the name of the famous two-edged sword of Aeali, the son-in-law of Muhammad, and which the latter reported he had received from the angel Gabriel.

^23:* In the fables and traditions of the East, it is supposed that wherever there is a hidden treasure,-there is a serpent, or serpents, to guard it.

^24:* This ode is very popular as a song; but the singers are, probably, not aware of the depth of meaning beneath.

^25:* Aba Sind, the "father of rivers," the name given by the Afghans to the Indus.

^26:* Al Mansur, the name of a Sufi, who was put to death at Baghdad, some centuries back, for making use of the words  "I am God."

^26:+ The Arabic word here used in the original, and very commonly made use of by poets, is scarcely to be translated by an equivalent word in the English language. The Spanish word duenna gives the signification, but the Afghans apply it to both sexes.

^26:++ Commonly "caravan," a company of travellers or merchants associated together for mutual defence and protection, and conveyance of merchandize, in the East.

^27:* See Reg-i-rawan, note at <page 15>.

^28:* Desire itself, called also the "Parent of Desire."

^29:* The loves of Majnun and his mistress Layla are the subject of one of the most celebrated mystic poems of the Persian poet Niz###804###ami, and famous throughout the East.

^30:* Jam or Jamshed, the name of an ancient Persian king, concerning whom there are many fables. The cup of Jamshed, called jam-i-jam, is said to have been discovered, filled with the Elixir of Immortality, when digging for the foundations of Persepolis, and is more famous in the East than even Nestor's cup among the Greeks. It has furnished the poets with numerous allegories, and allusions to wine, the philosopher's stone, magic, enchantment, divination, and the like.

^31:* The Persian Hercules.

^31:+ The steed of the sky--the firmament, the revolving heavens, fortune, destiny, fate, etc.

^32:* The name of an Afghan poet, a cotemporary of Rahman's. His poems are not to be met with in the present day.

^33:* The patriarch Joseph.

^33:+ The name of Afghan poets.

^33:++ Aealam-gir--"The world-conquering"--the name assumed by Aurangzeb, Emperor of Hindustan.

^34:* Muhammadans consider the land of Egypt the peculiar country of presumptuous and ambitious rulers, who, like Pharaoh, laid claim to divinity.

^34:+ The name of a village near Kandahar, on the Tarnak river, and, for centuries past, in ruins. It is proverbially used in reference to a place utterly desolate and deserted.

^35:* Dara, the Persian name of Darius; Shah-i-Jahan, "the Emperor of the Universe," the title assumed by the fifth Mughal, sovereign of Hindustan.

^35:+ Equivalent to the reply of "Thy sins be upon me" of Scripture, a common mode of reply in Afghanistan and Persia.

^36:* See Rahman, Poem IX., second note.

^37:* Khasrau, King of Persia ( with Muhammad), having been driven from his kingdom by his uncle, took refuge with the Greek Emperor Maurice, by whose assistance he defeated the usurper, and recovered his crown. Whilst at Maurice's court, Khasrau married his daughter Irene, who, under the name of Shirin, signifying 'sweet,' is highly celebrated in the East, on account of her singular beauty; and their loves are the subject of the celebrated Persian poem by Niz###804###ami.

^39:* Black antimony, ground to powder, is commonly used in the East, as a collyrium for the eyes.

^40:* "There are such wild inconsistencies in the thoughts of a man in love, that I have often reflected there can be no reason for allowing, him more liberty than others possessed with phrenzy, but that his distemper has no malevolence in it to any mortal. The devotion to his mistress kindles in his mind a general tenderness, which exerts itself towards every object as well as his fair one."--STEELE, Spectator, No. 336.

^41:* Plato.

^43:* Cypraea moneta.

^43:+ Peshawar, sometimes written as above.

^43:++ Mahmud, Sult###804###an of Ghazni, who was much attached to his servant Ayaz.

^45:* "There is a skeleton in every house."

^45:+ See note, page <page 29>.

^47:* The name of a tree, whose fruit and flowers are of a beautiful red colour--the Cercis Siliguastrum, of botanists, probably.

^48:* According to the Muhammadan belief, Solomon succeeded his father David when only twelve years old; at which age the Almighty placed under his command all mankind, the beasts of the earth and the fowls of the air, the elements, and the genii. The birds were his constant attendants, screening him from the inclemencies of the weather, whilst his magnificent throne was borne by the winds whithersoever he wished to go.

^48:+ The name of a prophet, who, according to Oriental tradition, was Wazir, or Minister, and General of Kaykobad, an ancient King of Persia. They say that he discovered and drank of the fountain of life or immortality, and that, in consequence, he will not die until the sounding of the last trumpet, at the Judgment Day.

^49:* As fire can be produced by striking stones together, the Muhammadans suppose that fire is inherent in stone, and that water protects it.

     
Selections from the Poetry of the Afghans, by H.G. Raverty, [1868], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 51]

  

MIRZA KHAN, ANSARI.

MIRZA KHAN, ANSARI, was a descendant, probably , of Pir Ros'han, the founder of the Ros'hanian sect, which made a great noise among the Afghans, about the year 1542-3 of our Era. He appears to have commenced writing poetry in the year A.H. 1040; and these effusions were afterwards brought together in the form of a Diwan or Collection of Odes, bearing his name. Some parties contend that his real name was Fat'h Khan, and that he was of the Yusufzi tribe of the Afghans, and that the term Mirza is an assumed name, usually taken by Oriental poets. Mirza, however, is a Persian word, signifying a prince or a nobleman, and also a secretary or writer, and would never be assumed by an Afghan, it being a distinctive appellation applied to persons of Persian descent, by the Afghans. This statement, however, is also fully disproved, from the fact, that several old copies of his poems, which I have examined or have in my possession, end in these words: "Here ends the Diwan of Mirza Khan, Ansari."

Kasim Aeali, Afridi, an Afghan poet of Hindustan, in one of his odes, states, that Mirza Khan was of the family of Bayazid, or Bazid, Ansari, who assumed the name of Pir Ros'han, or Saint of Light, as already mentioned. Bazid himself (of whom it will be necessary to give a brief account, as Mirza's subsequent misfortunes were chiefly owing to his being a descendant of that impostor) was, altogether, a remarkable man; and the Ansari tribe, to which he belonged, is an offshoot of an Arab tribe of Madinah, mentioned in the Kur'an, which received the prophet Muhammad

[p. 52]

after his flight from Makkah; and hence the name Ansari, from the Arabic word ansar, signifying aiders, or assistants. People of this tribe are to be found, even now, scattered over Afghanistan, the Panjab, and some parts of India.

Bazid's religion, which he instituted in the year A.D. 1542-3, spread rapidly amongst the Bar Pus'htun, or Eastern Afghans, till, at length, he was able to assemble armies, and oppose the Mughal government. He held the same tenets as the Sufis (of whose mysticisms some account has been given in the Introductory Remarks), but having been a disciple, for some time, of the notorious Mulla Suliman--known in the East as Jalandhari Suliman, from the town of Jalandhar, in the Panjab, where he dwelt--Bazid became initiated in the tenets of the Jogis, a sect among the Hindus, and became a fast convert to the creed of the Metempsychosis, or  system of the transmigration of souls. On these doctrines, however, he engrafted some of his own, the most remarkable of which was, that the most complete manifestations of the Divinity were made in the persons of holy men. [**] The great opponent of Bazid was Akhund Darwezah, the greatest and most venerated of all the saints of Afghanistan, who, in derision of the title of Pir Ros'han, or Apostle of Light, which Bazid had himself assumed, conferred on him the name of Pir Tarik, or Apostle of Darkness, by which name he is now chiefly known.

Mirza, was a great traveller, and was well known from Herat to Agra, throughout the Afghan country, and also in India; for he himself had numerous disciples in the mountainous parts of Afghanistan--from Suwat and Bajawrr, north of Pes'hawar, as far as Kandahar and Herat. He dwelt for a long period in the Rajput state of Rajwarra or Rajputanah, in Hindustan, the Raja of which country, although a Hindu, ever treated him with great

[p. 53]

veneration and liberality. The Mughal Emperor, Aurangzeb, also, in whose reign Mirza flourished, allowed him a regular stipend. The Emperor, however, was a great bigot, and, as is well known, was entirely in the hands of the priesthood; and, consequently, on more than one occasion, at the instigation of some of them more ignorant and bigoted than others, Mirza was summoned by the monarch, to answer accusations of heresy and blasphemy, preferred against him at their instigation. The Emperor, with all his bigotry, appears, however, to have had some scruples of conscience; and, generally, had some plausible excuse to save Mirza from their clutches, and himself from a bad name. The only reply the Mulls, or priests, could draw from the monarch, who is famous for personally administering justice, was, that they should enter into disputation with the accused, and if anything contrary to the

lip orthodox laws of Muhammad could be drawn from him, he would then consent to punish Mirza, but not otherwise. Notwithstanding Mirza's enemies were thirsting for his blood, still they could not succeed in drawing him into the snare they had spread for him; and the poet, very prudently, retired from the scene, fearing lest, at some time or other, they might be more successful in their machinations, and bring him to destruction; for, according to the well known Oriental proverb--"Kings and rulers have neither eyes nor ears; and between truth and falsehood they are incapable of discerning; for the words of a few designing men being sufficient to make the innocent guilty, the unfortunates are plunged into the calamity of destruction." Mira, on this account, generally confined himself, when in India, to the territories of the independent or tributary Hindu princes, by whom he was honoured and respected.

The poems of Mirza contain many Arabic and Persian words, which most Oriental poets freely use; but his Pus'hto is very ancient, particularly in words used amongst the hill tribes of

[p. 54]

[paragraph continues] Eastern Afghanistan, in his day, and which are not generally understood by the people of the present time, together with some words purely Sanskrit; but these latter usually occur in the last words of a line, when at a loss for a rhyme, in which very great licence is taken and allowed, by poets, in all Oriental countries, without such words being common to the language, or used in conversation by the people. Some of the philosophers of the present day, in their blind rage for comparative philology--the hobby they ride for the time being--based merely on their own superficially theoretical, and not practical knowledge of Oriental languages and subjects--would probably consider this use of some pure Sanskrit words as conclusive and undeniable evidence to prove the Pus'hto or Afghan language, of the Sanskrit family of tongues. They seem to forget that all those parts of Central Asia, now called Afghanistan, from Kabul eastward, were, even in the days of Alexander, peopled by a Hindu race, remnants of whom, existing even at the present day, lived as Helots among the Greeks, to their various Muhammadan conquerors, of whom the Afghans are the most recent, the Afghan tribes of the Pes'hawar district, and its northern vicinity more particularly, having arrived in those parts as recently as the beginning of the sixteenth century. They, as will also be seen from the languages of many other conquering tribes, adopted, for convenience sake, some few words of the people they conquered. However, the Sanskrit in Mirza's poems may be accounted for, from the fact of his long residence amongst Hindu people.

The poetry of Mirza is deeply tinged with the mysticisms of the Sufis, and, to some extent, with the religious tenets of his ancestor Pir Ros'han. His effusions are, certainly, more difficult than that of any other poet, from the fact of their being (as I think will be allowed) more sublime, and grander in conception.

It is said that Mirza, in the latter years of his life, married and

[p. 55]

settled in the Ti-rah district, lying immediately to the south of the famous Khaibar Pass, and ignored the Ros'hanian faith, which in his more youthful days he had adopted, and manifested great repentance for every thing he had written or said, contrary to the sharae, or orthodox canons of the Muhammadan creed. On this account, he soon became great with the ecclesiastics of Pes'hawar--a city, in those days, as famous as Bokhara itself for theological learning--and thenceforth was held in high estimation by them. His descendants, on this account, are still greatly respected by the Muhammadans of those parts, whether Afghans or others.

Nothing is known, for certain, regarding the death of Mirza; for he passed a great portion of his life in Hindustan, and must have ended his days in that country. [**] His descendants still dwell in the Ti-rah district, amongst the clan of Mi-an Khel, and have the repute of being quiet and well behaved. There is generally one of the family who follows the life of an ascetic; and is allowed, by the simple people, to have the power of working miracles.

Footnotes

^52:* ELPHINSTONE: Caubul.

^55:* A person named Mirza, son of Nur-ud-Din, one of the sons of Pir Roshan, lived in Shah Jahan's reign, and was killed at the battle of Dawlatabad.

     
Selections from the Poetry of the Afghans, by H.G. Raverty, [1868], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 56]

  

THE POEMS

  

OF

  

MIRZA KHAN, ANSARI.

  

I.

O THOU, in heart ignorant concerning thine own soul!
 O man, seek thou the nature of it, from the reality itself!

From the refulgence of religion, acquire thou comprehension:
 Bear away, unto the desert, this darkness of infidelity!

Sin abandon; and set out towards devotion and piety!
 This is the road, without anxiety, and from danger free.

This secret praise is the lamp of truth and orthodoxy;
 Therefore, from the Immaculate's hand, the lighted lamp take.

Should perception's light become enkindled in thine heart,
 Thou wilt, altogether, acquire life's happiness and felicity.

The penetrating, and the enlightened, are spectators of both worlds;
 But the bat flieth about in the dark, without seeing.

What do I, blind that I am, know of the state of the sublime?
 How wilt thou, from the deaf, ask the import of sound?

Thou wilt comprehend, forthwith, the language of all things,
 Shouldst thou, sagacious one! make thine heart's ear to hear.

Err not, regarding the amount of attributes and properties;
 And unto the source of the essence, bear the essence itself.

[p. 57]

About their own materiality, the enlightened are in torment;
 But there can be no dread of mortality from corruption itself.

Every attainer [**] who hath passed beyond this nature frail,
 Assuredly discovereth the signification of immortality.

He wandereth about in the boundlessness of infinity:
 He arrived even unto his home, that he might unity behold.

That fruit, which on its own branch acquired ripeness,
 This brief claim of its own perfection, made to the parent tree--

"Notwithstanding there is not much excess in thy greatness;
 Still, within this body of mine, do I see thee, entirely, O tree!

From the first, thy root germinated from me, and flourished:
 The development of thy purpose devolved, wholly, on me."

Answer, to this effect, on the part of the tree, proceeded--
 "Colour and flavour, O fruit! whence didst thou acquire?

From one fruit, naught but a single tree is produced;
 And the fruit of that tree is renewed, year by year."

The reply from the tree, however, is here sound and wise,
 Though the observation of its fruit is, of attention, worthy.

From that, which possesseth no kernel, no corn groweth:
 It is not advisable that any one should sow husked seed.

The reputation of the servant lieth with his master;
 And without the servant, the master's dignity is not.

Invoke, then, within thine heart, the sayings of MiRZa,
 If the page of thy mind be unblotted, and unstained.

[p. 58]

  

II.

When, with the mind, I examined the shoulder-bone of prediction, [**]
 I saw that, within unity's area, the community of plenitude dwelleth.

In what manner shall I describe the infiniteness of the Omniscient,
 When all that's inscrutable, He hath drawn, like a veil, over His face?

I behold, floating upon the surface of the waters, the ship of the earth; [*+]
 And on all sides, I perceive, cones of stone have protruded therefrom.

For how long shall the heavenly bodies, in the firmament, revolve?
 By what art, profound, hath the Great Sage suspended them therein?

The conception of the intellect of the wise is unable to penetrate
 Unto where the hand of, "Let it be," and "It was," [*++] hath reached.

These unadorned heavens became arrayed with embellishments,
 Which He, with the diamonds of omnipotence, carved out.

The lamp of the sun and the moon became enkindled therein--
 He assented not that, unrevealed, His own skill should remain.

From the clouds, He caused the genial rain to descend on earth;
 And herbs and plants of every kind he disseminated thereon.

[p. 59]

On its face, the phenomena of spring and autumn, so admirable, arose;
 And the gradations of heat and cold were diffused throughout.

From the whole achromatism of colour, that manifesteth itself,
 The face of nature is with every tint and hue emblazoned.

On all sides, where'er I cast mine eyes, of every tinge and dye,
 The chequered carpet of the Great Chamberlain is spread out.

The countless creatures that, in all directions, meet the eye,
 Are the army of this great chess-board, in order arranged.

Here, the destiny of every one, whatever he may be, is fulfilled--
 From the game's commencement, the knights are mounted, the footmen on foot.

And mankind themselves, originally, are of one origin and race;
 Yet some rule empires, whilst others beg from door to door!

Though the beasts of the field exist, from inconvenience free,
 The whole burden of "Do" and "Refrain" is laid upon mankind.

Unto every man his own private interests are the most agreeable;
 But the decrees of the Great Judge are separately meted unto all.

The mercy of the All-merciful is equally extended to all men;
 Though some have chosen to deny Him, whilst others have obeyed.

For the use of mankind were all living creatures produced;
 And man himself created, to acquire knowledge of the truth.

He, who in this life, acquireth not a perception of the nature divine,
 Hath naught of humanity in him; and 'tis just to term him a beast.

Whosoever giveth ear unto the inordinate promptings of carnality,
 Though, in outward appearance, he liveth, yet his soul is annihilated.

[p. 60]

Wherefore doth he give himself airs about this short existence;
 Since, without an aim, he is standing like a sign-post in the path?

Like unto the hare, with eyes wide open, he for ever sleepeth:
 In what manner, as though entranced, shall the sleep-overcome awake?

He hath abandoned the path at the counsel of the Accursed:
 His mind is misled by hypocrisy's manifold deceits.

The poor, ignorant creature is accounted a demon, and beast of prey:
 Even worse still--he is amongst decayed carcasses numbered.

His dark, confined heart is as a tomb, for his soul is dead:
 His decked-out body, a grave, on which the mould is beaten down.

His distressed and distracted mind is the emblem of the worm:
 His sepulchre is intact: it is his soul that is devoured.

He hath no peace nor tranquillity: nought else save torment:
 Every moment overwhelmed in misery: driven away as one unclean.

He possesseth not strength sufficient, the human form to support--
 He took the deposit on his head, without calculating its weight. [**]

Like unto the mule, it is expelled from its own kindred race,
 That, which being one by nature, hath become, with another, mixed.

Tyrant and fool that he was, he should have acted in this way--
 He should have cried with piercing cries, and have dashed his head. [*+]

Such a ponderous load, as neither Heaven nor earth could bear,
 By what strength could the weak, helpless, ignorant, sustain

[p. 61]

It behoveth to call for aid, with all speed, unto the perfect,
 That they may consign the burden into the hands of the Master.

Unto every wise man, who hath become released from the debt,
 Therefrom, the hereditary gift of knowledge divine hath fallen.

The gravity and importance of such knowledge the saints know;
 Since they have sought it in the mind, and unto the world's limits.

His laws and His edicts go out upon every person and thing:
 He hath built up a wall from this crude and untempered dust.

He made the inanimate to be counted among the living,
 When He, the Immaculate, with His own breath, breathed on them.

He will live for ever and ever, and death shall affect him not,
 Through whom the Eternal hath drawn the thread of vitality.

What blessed one became purified from ungodliness and scepticism?
 He, whom the Lord of Holiness hath, with sanctity's water, cleansed.

Upon the face of the waters, his lamp effulgent burneth;
 And, like straws, infidelity and mistrust consume thereon.

At his entreaty, from the stars, was ill-presage wholly removed;
 And, thro' his good offices, no hour is accounted portentous.

O MIRZA! of the praises due unto the perfections of the saints,
 Who, commensurate with their infinity, hath a tittle rendered?

  

III

 is the vanity [**] of thine own doubt and mistrust;
 And, thro' scepticism, thou sustainest injury exceeding.

[p. 62]

Fall not into error, concerning thy outward appearance;
 Since, after spring passeth away, the autumn cometh.

Set out in pursuit of the great object of solicitude,
 Whilst thou thy command upon the bridle retainest.

The Omnipotent is, by no means, distant from thee;
 For He is nearer unto thee, than even thine own self.

Whether on the earth, or whether in the heavens,
 The Omniscient there also is present in the midst.

He became, in unity and individuality, unique:
 In immensity, and in infinitude, He is diffused.

From His divinity, He departed and advanced towards it;
 And now, throughout the whole universe, He moveth.

The limits of His boundless infinity cannot be discovered;
 And in mankind is His abode, and His place of sojourn.

He himself inflicteth, and He himself performeth;
 And man He hath made, the motive and the plea.

From every saint that hath commenced his mission,
 Some sign, or some indication becometh manifest.

The scepticism of MiRZa hath vanished, and is no more;
 But whatever is by him spoken, Mi'an Ros'han [**] speaketh.

[p. 63]

  

IV.

 standeth for the pilgrim [**]--in this path let him proceed:
 Let him, in all sincerity, become a seeker after Him.

From the sleep of negligence and remissness awake!
 Follow now in pursuit of thy well-wisher and friend!

Tho' the object thou seekest be obscure and invisible,
 Ride lightly, and without baggage, in following it.

Its acquirement is attended with much trouble and toil:
 Determine thou, therefore, a dauntless spirit to show.

Since the lamp of love and affection is become lighted,
 Like the moth, to-day, become thou the sacrifice thereon.

He hath bestowed upon thee the cup of vitality;
 Then let the largess be upon the cupbearer scattered! [*+]

Seek not to discover the faults and failings of others;
 But become the mirror of thine own acts and ways.

The desired object of thy attainment is near unto thee:
 Then, in sincerity and piety, towards it draw near!

Thou art, from the beginning, one and indivisible:
 Become now, therefore, the narrator of those hidden things!

God is one--without partner, and without associate:
 Forbear thou, then, from all, contrary thereto.

In this, O MiRZa! the choice lieth with thee, entirely;
 Therefore, in the qualities of the tranquil, be thou stedfast!

[p. 64]

  

V.

 is significant of faith's straight and narrow path; [**]
 And, after much terror and danger, its goal is attained.

The artifices and deceits of the Devil are manifold in number;
 But far, far worse than those, is that enemy the flesh.

Follow thou not, in pursuit of the lusts of the world:
 The state is evil, and their promptings are pernicious.

The Devil spread out for man, the snare of posterity;
 And wealth, and various pleasures, are the baits thereon.

Distinction, and fame, one of its ramparts became,
 Whilst another of its attractions were silver and gold.

He layeth out separate snares quietly, and with caution;
 But the whole are like unto embroidery upon the carpet.

He will neither be prosperous nor happy, in this world,
 Who giveth ear unto the temptations of the Accursed.

Though a whole region should fall beneath his sway;
 Still, that man's heart will long, another to acquire.

They who give way unto the promptings of the flesh,
 For them, especially, there is torment excruciating.

But they who have passed safely this dread ordeal,
 For them are the perfect gifts of the patient and the meek.

Unto MiRZa, His beneficence and His kindness are vouchsafed;
 For He alone, is the All-merciful, and the Accepter of penitence.

[p. 65]

  

VI.

 signifieth the great evil [**] of mistrust, and scepticism,
 Through which, all the world is, in bewilderment plunged.

That mind cannot rest assured, or be at peace,
 Which is constantly distracted in pursuit of nothingness.

It cannot partake of the advantages of unity;
 For it is in the infiniteness of infinity dispersed.

The elaboration of its counsels and reflections is great;
 But 'tis like unto a cloud, that containeth no rain.

Verily, he will not be able to attain unto perfection,
 Whose looks are directed unto detriment and defect.

The ignorant wreaketh tyranny, merely upon himself,
 Who is the sponsor of the onerous deposit of faith. [*+]

[p. 66]

A worshipper of himself, sunk in egotism and vanity,
 He is, like the first Adam, in amazement and perplexity lost.

The soul contained in the human form, is like unto Joseph;
 And the body's nature and disposition are its prison-house.

When it hath become, from this thraldom, liberated,
 It is then in safety, and Heaven is its dwelling-place.

With transports filled, and mounted upon the steed of love,
 Enraptured, it is come forth unto the Choukan [**] of its desire.

Draw near, O MiRZa, and lift up thine eyes!
 See! this is the ball, and this is the arena too!

  

VII.

--All that may be contrary to nature change: [*+]
 Make the soul king, and wisdom its minister.

Give not ear unto the flesh, for it is ignorant;
 And with wisdom, understanding regard.

The deceits of the Devil are without number;
 Therefore, consider as a fetter each of his spells.

There are five robbers [*++] in thine own house,
 Each of which, in separate places, chain up.

[p. 67]

Deprive them of all evil appetites and desires;
 And, in thy heart, give place to reliance on God.

Draw thou near unto truthfulness and piety;
 And from thee, drive all deceit and guile.

I have spoken unto thee without disguise;
 Therefore, guide all thy actions accordingly.

Shouldst thou seek to be with these gifts endowed,
 Then go, seek the society of thy spiritual guide.

Guard well the heart from the Evil One;
 And upon it, register the remembrance of God.

The mundane things of this world are a dream:
 Now give thou the interpretation of the truth.

Subtile and profound are the words of MiRZa:
 In their elucidation, do thou thy perception show!

  

VIII.

The loved-one is not concealed from thee,
 O thou obstruction, round about thy soul!

Thou thyself hast become thine own veil,
 Standing obdurate, in scepticism's path.

Thou becamest visible--the beloved, invisible;
 But like unto thee, a perfect counterpart.

Spotless and pure, on every side and surface--
 A simple lineament, but substance without.

Shouldst thou behold her, thou art blest:
 How long, then, O forlorn! wilt thou gaze upon thyself?

[p. 68]

When doth grain shoot up and flourish
 In arid soil? O thou, of hard earth, a clod!

When a clan pitcheth its tents upon a plain,
 Forthwith the grass thereon entirely disappeareth.

The black bee [**] buzzeth lightly around the lotus;
 Whilst thou, O beetle! hast sunk under thy load.

The flame, full soon, consumeth the straw;
 But thou burnest, clumsy block! with many groans.

From love alone, is the heart's existence:
 What were the callow brood, without the parent bird?

O MiRZa! the compact of affection and love,
 The moth, with the lamp, hath adjusted.

  

IX.

The anguish of love, alas! is incalculable.
 It is, alas! without antidote, without cure.

Without its thorns, the rose will never be;
 And friendship, alas! is with absence coupled.

The beloved, happy, and in her own heart, at peace,
 Is, alas! unconcerned--a ravisher of hearts!

He will undergo the pangs and agonies of love,
 Who may be, alas! reckless and regardless of life.

I live but in the remembrance of my dear one:
 Alas! indeed, I cannot exist, without my life.

[p. 69]

The only regret of the ascetic MIRZA, alas! is this--
 That his passion's object is without indication.

  

X.

How amazing is the sublimity of the mind of the adorer!
 Unto whose throne, there was no access, even for the giant Aeud. [**]

This stage of it is more contracted than Sarat's narrow bridge: [*+]
 How, then, did the army of love accomplish its ascent?.

His passion became like unto a vast and boundless ocean,
 Which, by its first swell, o'erwhelmed him in the billows.

The sword of unity, from between, He removed altogether; [*++]
 And upon infinitude, He conferred the name of spouse.

The boundless ocean, O MiRZa! hath encompassed all things;
 But the Ganges merely floweth to Shamsabad and Kanouj.

[p. 70]

  

XI.

If it be thy wish to pass through life, from hatred and malice free,
 From the longings of covetousness deliver this spotless breast.

Thro' heedlessness of heart, like what wilderness art thou grown?
 Account the Devil's temptations a monster, not a gnat!

The expecting heart is one only--its cares and anxieties many:
 The term, too, of thy existence, long or short, is nothingness.

The spiritual guest is an inestimable one: cherish him carefully--
 Broken rice possesseth not the fitness for the tables of kings.

Covetousness tottereth like one with ophthalmia stricken;
 But by perfect reliance upon the Almighty, cure thou the disease.

Change sinful arrogance for meekness and humility;
 And the sword of thy vanity and pride return unto its sheath.

Become pliant, and bending, like unto the tender twig;
 Not of thine own accord, like a hard, dry log of wood.

The five fingers once had an astonishing dispute together,
 At which time the little finger acknowledged its own littleness.

There is dignity, in the very insignificance of form;
 Hence fitness for the ring went unto the little finger.

Outwardly, become the spectator of the heart's internal things,
 O thou, from truth's source, great--by scepticism, contemptible!

O MiRZa! behold thou the infinite greatness of unity;
 Since such delicious honey, is from the bee produced.

[p. 71]

  

XII.

Thou art the vitality of my soul, O Thou, than soul itself, more precious to me!
 Thou art the whole universe's existence, O Thou, than the world, more precious to me!

Thy comprehension hath embraced all things; yet all things have not comprehended Thee:
 Thou hast possessed Thyself of the seat of faith, O Thou, than faith, more precious to me!

Whence shall there be aught of bliss in Heaven, if that sight of Thee, be not for me?
 My heart is carried away in yearnings for Thee, O Thou, than Heaven, more precious to me!

Wherefore should I rehearse the world's praises? unto whom repeat them, when Thou art not?
 Thou, nightingale! gayest me hue and fragrance, O Thou, than the parterre, more precious to me!

The bower is the hearts of the worshippers, and the heavenly Paradise of the recluse;
 And the beholding of Thee, The Inscrutable, beyond all indication, precious to me!

Thou art without similitude; infinite; indubitable; without ambiguity:
 And hence, the mine of all things, O Thou, than every mine, more precious to me!

Thou art, moreover, the vitality of the universe; the breath of every living creature:
 Thou art the inspiration of this Adam, O Thou, than inspiration, more precious to me!

[p. 72]

Thou art the repository of vitality, that hast pervaded all and every living thing:
 At times invisible, at others visible; but whether hidden or apparent, precious to me!

Thou art a voice, after many kinds; encompassing all things; without indication:
 Thou art without lineament in every respect; but, in every way, precious to me!

Thou art wholly inscrutable in all things: the invisible in the manifest:
 Thou art the signification in description, O Thou, beyond description, precious to me!

Concerning the soul, what shall I say? verily, it is an attribute of unity itself:
 MiRZa, without the soul cannot exist, O Thou, than soul even, more precious to me!

  

XIII.

Shouldst thou once become an inmate of the house of God's love,
 Thou wilt, forthwith, become a stranger unto the world, entirely.

From out of entity, nonentity will come upon thee;
 Thou, by this inexistent, in all existent, shalt unique become.

This perfect knowledge will be with thee, entirely;
 But thou wilt be mad in the sight of the weak-minded.

The whole arrows of calumny will be poured upon thee;
 And thus, thou wilt become the butt of great and small.

[p. 73]

From the world's unworthy, thou shalt the heart's concerns withdraw:
 Thou wilt be like a hidden treasure in a wilderness.

Shouldst thou change this, thy well-being, for misfortune,
 Thou wilt become the whole prosperity of all adversity.

Shouldst thou cast this heart of thine on that consuming flame,
 Thou wilt, the self-sacrificing moth become thereby.

A pure, unadulterated wine shall fill thy mouth;
 From the effect of which, thou shalt be ever inebriated.

Thou wilt not hold, in any consideration, either world,
 Shouldst thou grow rich from the treasury of contentment.

Thus thou wilt shower mercy's genial rain upon the world,
 And become the seed, through the universe disseminated.

The all-knowing, concerning thy condition shall speak;
 And by truth, thou wilt become the parable of the truthful.

On speaking, thou wilt give reply worthy of being spoken;
 And become, of every harp and every melody, the harmony.

The eloquent, who shall enter on the praises of the Almighty,
 Shall, like unto MiRZa, be remembered throughout all time.

  

XIV.

He, who placeth reliance on the lying and deceitful,
 Maketh firebrands out of nothing, by such utter folly.

It is the senselessness of fools, in opposition to wisdom,
 That, in the heat of summer, raiseth a tower of snow.

[p. 74]

His prosperity is trouble--he groweth down-hearted thereby:
 And his fresh adversity addeth twofold misery his sorrows unto.

Every man, who seeketh fidelity from the perfidious world,
 Taketh it, in lease, for much bitterness, and many woes.

Success and disaster good and evil--are with the act coupled;
 But fools suppose such things influenced by the stars.

I am amazed, beyond measure, at such like people,
 Who place any reliance upon the bubble's permanency.

The ocean's waves will, one day, dash against each other;
 And will, full speedily, the garment of the bubble rend.

When the pious and devout view this running stream,
 They perceive, in its flowing, the scene of their own existence.

The wise enter upon the search of the object of their desires:
 The beasts of the field, about food and sleep, themselves concern.

When the adorers awake from the slumber of remissness,
 They take due heed of the fleeting of every breath.

That the traveller may, from his sweet repose awaken,
 The warning bell of departure, tolleth at the dawn of day. [**]

The delight of the Darwesh is in fervour, and in study:
 The pleasure of Chieftains is in their banners and drums.

That country cannot be exempt from confusion and ruin,
 Whose army indulgeth in grossest tyranny and rapacity.

If a friend should lend ear unto the secret of the stranger,
 Friends will, themselves, ruin their own affairs, thereby.

[p. 75]

When the mandate of the All-powerful shall reach him,
 From whence shall MiRZA'S strength a remedy obtain?

  

XV.

How shall I define what thing I am
 Wholly existent, and non-existent, thro' Him, I am.

Whatever becometh naught out of entity,
 The signification of that nothingness am I.

Sometimes a mote in the disc of the sun;
 At others, a ripple on the water's surface.

Now I fly about on the wind of association:
 Now I am a bird of the incorporeal world.

By the name of ice I also style myself:
 Congealed in the winter season am I.

I have enveloped myself in the four elements:
 I am the clouds on the face of the sky.

From unity I have come into infinity:
 Indeed, nothing existeth, that I am not.

My vitality is, from life's source itself;
 And I am the speech, every mouth within.

I am the hearing-sense within every ear;
 And also the sight of every eye am I.

I am the potentiality in every thing:
 I am the perception every one within.

My will and inclination are with all;
 With mine own acts, also, satisfied am I.

[p. 76]

Unto the sinful and vicious, I am evil;
 But unto the good beneficent am I.

In the lot of the devoted, I am the honey:
 In the soul of the impious, the sting.

I am with every one, and in all things.
 Without imperfection--immaculate I am.

'Tis by the mouth of MiRZa that I speak:
 An enlightened heart, without similitude, I am.

  

XVI.

The tresses of this impassioned loved-one, are all dishevelled:
 They are spread all around her face, like a shadow unto.

She hath prepared every separate hair as a snare--
 Each one laid for the capture of wounded hearts.

Within those hearts how can there be aught of tranquillity,
 When she hath held them in check, by the reins of love?

Since from such an abode of their own they are exiled,
 Where is the land of their sojourn, in which peace may be found?

They, who have their reason lost, thro' such a charmer's love,
 Have now renounced both the rosary and the Brahmanical cord. [**]

All things have happened through their own affection;
 And those without it, are useless, in all respects.

They have no place, either in the closet or the wine-shop:
 Neither in the Muslim's regard, nor the infidel's sympathy.

[p. 77]

With regard to such like eyes, what caution can I use,
 When their glances are prepared for piercing me?

Her lovely person she hath transformed to a sandal tree; [**]
 And those tresses, like unto snakes, are around it fallen.

He, who nourisheth the desire of such a sight as this,
 On him, are the whole miseries of the universe heaped.

The hearts of lovers ever kindle, at the loved-one's glance;
 For 'tis a flame; and her eyes are like firebrands unto.

To-day she hath again lighted the lamp of her beauty;
 And her adorers' hearts, like the moth, are oblations thereon.

The names, nightingale and wooer, are one and the same;
 And conscious hearts, in her praise, are melodious songsters. [*+]

Her eyes are lotuses, and the pupils, they are black bees; [*++]
 And their gaze, like the gazelle's, is free and unrestrained.

Her eyebrows are bows, and her eyelashes, the arrows;
 And to launch upon her lover, she hath raised them.

The pure and sincere, in both worlds, enjoy liberty:
 'Tis a tower, whence to gain a good sight of the beloved.

Than this supreme felicity, what greater can there be,
 When, every moment, they expect the adored to behold?

This infinity, on the water-wheel [* section] of unity she placed;
 And each water-pot, in its own turn, cometh and departeth.

[p. 78]

She hath endowed every one with her own understanding;
 And every one's perception is, in proportion, according.

O MiRZa! behold thou those languid, sleepy eyes,
 That, for the love of the adored, beam with phrenzy ever!

  

XVII.

What inquiry makest thou concerning the lover's condition I
 No one hath hazarded a conjecture of the interminable road!

Wherefore had I been afflicted with misery such as this,
 Had I guarded the heart from hearing the sight's promptings?

How can there be any peace or tranquillity for them,
 Whose hearts, the ardent glances of the beloved have abducted?

Love, she hath made the chain of a distracted breast;
 And, by the power of her glance, draweth the bond unto her.

A wondrous state of affection hath come over them--
 Without seeing, they are disturbed, and in pursuit tired out.

Without any will of their own, they search for liberty:
 With such a death impending, the dead yearn after life.

When the ripe fruit falleth to the earth, in its perfection,
 The seed, with gladness, boweth its head to the ground.

This bubble, even now formed by the water, is by it again broken;
 But what is carried away by the flood, floateth, its surface, upon.

They of little sense, are at their good fortune perplexed;
 And this wind, like unto chaff, carrieth them before it.

One, here and there, comprehendeth the reality's purport--
 The lightly equipped travelleth, easily, along the narrow path.

[p. 79]

Cast, O MiRZa, thine eyes upon the burnished mirror!
 There is no particle of iron-dross in the steel thereof.

  

XVIII.

Upon them, that journey on the road of love,
 New assaults, incessantly, are made.

How can there be any peace in those hearts,
 That have beheld the splendour of the beloved?

Though, at first, she showed her face in its splendour,
 A part of her mantle is now drawn o'er it again.

She hath made each of those eyelashes an arrow;
 And her eyebrows are the ambush with bended bow.

The pilgrims, she hath ripened by separation's heat;
 And now her preparations are for the reaping of them.

Care and anxiety are the motives of existence;
 But what is life unto them, that before death die?

Since from sweet existence, they have, their hearts withdrawn,
 The world is a barleycorn in the sight of their resolve.

The truly beloved is, by no means, distant from thee:
 Thine own insensate scepticism is the abyss in thy front.

To that godly one, who entered the transient abode,
 The whole universe is God, and he followeth Him.

It behoveth to acquire love from both the eyes,
 That, apparently separate from each other, are but one sight.

Since thou wanderest not far from thy abode,
 Surely thy heart, O MiRZa! is pledged unto thy beloved.

[p. 80]

  

XIX.

When that rose, out of nothingness, a form assumed,
 The violet fell down, in adoration, at its feet.

Thou shalt drink from the cup of the perfect-one,
 If to the melody of flute and harp, thy intellect respond.

Make thine heart the pleasant meadow of Abraham!
 And become thou, as the scorching fire of Nimrud therein! [**]

Behold the fidelity and sincerity of the world!
 See how it deserted the tribes of Thamud and Aead! [*+]

Like as the rose bloometh, so it fadeth away;
 As its short life, so is mine also computed.

[p. 81]

Where is the rose, and where, too, is the thorn?
 For all things soever there is a purpose fixed.

Let the idea of a partner with God perish:
 The Indivisible is one only, and Omnipresent.

He hath entered into the emporium of infinity:
 He is the attestor, and He is the attested become.

The adored, from His countenance hath raised the veil;
 And the fortune of MiRZa become propitious and august.

  

XX.

How long wilt thou wander, O covetous one! in the world's pursuit?
 This very avarice, in itself, is an impediment in thy design!

For far fiercer than fire, is the flame of covetousness:
 As much more as its food may be, so much is its voracity.

New cares and anxieties about it, every moment increase:
 It hath taken all zest and pleasure from its bondsmen.

It coquets and toys, separately, with every one:
 To the whole creation it is the seller, and they its buyers are.

Neither did Shaddad, in his arrogance, enter his paradise, [**]
 Nor did Karun [*+] derive any profit from its pursuit.

[p. 82]

It concealed religion from the children of profanity;
 And the straight-path, mere rites and ceremonies termed. [**]

It hath spread out a great net in this universal road;
 And no wise man, save the contented, escapeth from it.

The pious and devout, thro' contentment, peace of mind acquire,
 When unto the Consoler, they their distressed hearts turn.

From head to foot, the devout shall become illumined,
 When they, thro' their hearts' courage, to the Creator draw nigh.

He, who hath died unto the world, obtaineth all things--
 This is the great axiom of the Sower of bygone times.

The advantages he will acquire, will exceed all computation,
 Who, in his necessities, becometh the acquirer of the Giver of Good.

Both states of being he vieweth, upon every respiration:
 In truth, he is absorbed into the Shining Bright.

On the foot of the spirit, he ever soareth upon them,
 However sublime the highest heaven, or the empyrean boundless.

His ice-like scepticism becometh thawed, by unity's sun:
 He neither speaketh, nor acteth, save with the Creator's assent.

The felicity of the wise is after this manner recounted--
 That its signification relateth unto the reality itself.

[p. 83]

If adoration unto the Almighty is a divine command,
 Bow thine head, unto the good and perfect too.

How long wilt thou have occasion for MiRZa, as the medium?
 Distinguish thou thyself, O auditor, the speaker's voice!

  

XXI.

I continually call to mind this sweet and charming friend,
 Through this exalted name of whom, I acquire the heart's good.

How then can I be patient, severed from such a dear one,
 When I perceive no sign of resignation in my heart?

Through this anxiety about her, I am ever miserable,
 As to what remedy I shall devise; of whom, inquiry make.

In its eagerness for a look, it hath wholly left its seclusion:
 With what chains shall I restrain this incomparable heart?

Except I make a snare of the ringlets of the faces of the fair,
 And place for the bait, their musky moles therein.

I will put forth the whole wisdom of the enlightened,
 If I may, this wayward heart, by any means, entrap.

Verily, it is become so utterly scattered to the winds,
 That I find not the least vestige of it, in any direction.

It hath abandoned the universe, in search of the beloved:
 How then shall I quit the world, in the pursuit of it?

No tidings thereof can be obtained, in any quarter:
 I sit not down, abstaining, nor do I follow, in pursuit.

The body's vitality is the heart; and the heart's, the soul;
 Then, without heart, and without soul, how shall I exist?

[p. 84]

Of life, not even a dying breath remaineth unto me:
 Frantic and beside myself thereat, I beat my hands and feet.

Still, this my death, is far better for me, than life itself,
 Since, my soul I have abandoned, for the loved-one's love.

Regarding the putting off of mortality, MiRZa thus testifieth--
 When from this being, I cease to be, I shall entity become.

Footnotes

^57:* One who has attained a certain stage in the Sufi mysticisms.

^58:* , walaey, The shoulder-bone of an animal, or more particularly that of a sheep, used by the Afghans in divination.

^58:+ "The ship of the earth" here referred to is the earth itself, and the "cones of stone" are the mountains protruding from its surface. According to the ideas of Muhammadans, the earth is placed upon the waters, in the midst of which it floats.

^58:++  kun fa-yakun, "Be! then it is," a phrase attributed to the Creator at the creation of the world.

^60:* The conditions which Adam accepted from the Creator regarding the duties for which he was created. See Mirza, Poem VI., second note.

^60:+ Referring to Adam.

^61:*  kh, is the first letter of  khudi, vanity, pride, etc.

^62:* Mi'an or Pir Roshan, the founder of the Roshanian doctrine, and ancestor of Mirza. See page <page 51>.

^63:*  stands for , of which it is the first letter, signifying a pilgrim, a traveller, and, metaphorically, a devotee.

^63:+ A custom of scattering money, by way of largess, amongst the people on festive occasions.

^64:* --the direct and narrow path--the way of religion and orthodoxy.

^65:* The first letter of , sin, evil, fault, infirmity, etc.

^65:+ By faith is understood here, entire obedience to the will of God, on the observance or neglect of which, no less than eternal happiness, or misery depends; and so difficult in the performance, that when God proposed it to the vaster parts of creation, on the conditions annexed, they declined to undertake as a duty, that, the failing wherein must be attended with such terrible consequences. God made the proposal to the heavens, earth, and mountains, which, at their first creation, were endued with reason; and made known to them that he had made a law, and created Paradise for the recompense of such as were obedient to it, and Hell for the punishment of the disobedient; to which they answered, they were content to be obliged to perform the services for which they were created, but would not undertake to fulfil the divine law on these conditions, and therefore desired neither reward nor punishment. When Adam was created, the same offer was made to him, and he accepted it, notwithstanding man's weaknesses, and the infirmities of his nature. Jellal-ud-Din, al Beidawi's COMMENTARY ON THE KUR'aN.

^66:* Choukan or Chougan is the Persian name of a game resembling tennis or cricket, but played on horseback by many Asiatic tribes. It also signifies the crooked bat used therein.

^66:+  the first letter of , contrary, different, etc.

^66:++ The five robbers or enemies here referred to, as in the house of the body, are the five senses--hearing, seeing, touch, taste, and smell.

^68:* A bee enamoured of the lotus.

^69:* Aeud is the Arabian name of Og, the son of Anak, concerning whose enormous stature, his escaping the Flood, and the manner of his being slain by Moses, the Muhammadans relate numerous fables. See NUMBERS, xxi. 34, 35.

^69:+ The bridge over the infernal fire, and over which those who are to be admitted into Paradise, as well as those who are destined to Hell-fire, must pass. It is described as finer than the thread of a famished spider, and sharper than the edge of a sword.

^69:++ "In remotest time, the sword was emblematic of chastity. When the Emperor Maximilian married Maria of Burgundy by proxy, he enjoins the knight, who is to be his representative, to lay him down in the bridal bed, to which he is to lead the princess, in full armour, and to place a drawn sword between himself and her."--CHAMBERS' JOURNAL, Vol. XI. From this it would appear to have been also practised by the nations of the East.

^74:* It is usual to ring a bell at the dawn of day, to arouse the people of a caravan to prepare to set out.

^76:* See note at page <page 18>.

^77:* The sandal-wood tree is said to be the favourite haunt of black serpents.

^77:+ The musikar is a bird, said to have numerous holes in its beak, from which as many melodious sounds issue.

^77:++ A species of bee, enamoured of the lotus.

^77: section The Persian wheel is a contrivance for drawing water for irrigation, etc., round the rim of which a string of earthen pots revolves.

^80:* The commentators on the Kur'an relate, that by Nimrud's (or Nimrod's) order, a large space was enclosed at Kutha, and filled with a vast quantity of wood, which being set on fire, burned so fiercely that no one dared to venture near it. Then they bound Abraham, and putting him into an engine (which some suppose to have been the Devil's invention) shot him into the midst of the lire, from which he was preserved by the angel Gabriel, who was sent to his assistance; the fire burning only the cords with which he was bound. They add, that the fire having miraculously lost its heat, in respect to Abraham, became an odoriferous air, and that the pile changed to a pleasant meadow; though it raged so furiously otherwise, that, according to some writers, about two thousand of the idolaters were consumed by it.--SALE'S KUR'aN, note to page 269.

^80:+ "And unto the tribe of Thamud we sent their brother Salih. He said, Oh my people, worship GOD: ye have no GOD besides him. Now hath a manifest proof come unto you from your LORD. * * * Those who were elated with pride replied, Verily, we believe not in that wherein ye believe. And they cut off the feet of the camel, and insolently transgressed the command of their LORD, and said, Oh Salih, cause that to come upon us which thou hast threatened us with, if thou art one of those who have been sent by God. Whereupon a terrible noise from Heaven assailed them; and in the morning they were found in their dwellings prostrate on their breasts, and dead."--AL KUR'aN.

^81:* Shaddad and Shaddid, the two sons of Aead, who reigned shortly after the death of their father, and extended their power over the greater part of the world; but the latter dying, his brother became sole monarch; who having heard of the celestial paradise, made a garden in imitation thereof, in the deserts of Aden, and called it Irem, after the name of his great-grandfather. When it was finished, he set out, with a great attendance, to take a view of it; but when they were come within a day's journey of the place they were all destroyed by a terrible noise from heaven. SALE'S KUR'aN, page 488, and note.

^81:+ Karun, the son of Yeshar (or Izhar), the uncle of Moses, and consequently [p. 82] the same with Korah of the Scriptures. Ile surpassed every one in opulence, so much so, that the riches of Karun have become a proverb. God directed Moses to punish him; and the earth having opened under him, he was swallowed up, along with his palace, his riches, and his confederates.

^82:* That is to say, that the sacred book of the Lawgiver Muhammad has been called a mere collection of rites and ceremonies.

     
Selections from the Poetry of the Afghans, by H.G. Raverty, [1868], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 85]

  

AeABD-UL-HAMID.

AeABD-UL-HAMiD, the author of the following poems, was born at Mashu Khel, a small village belonging to the Kudrizi clan, or branch, of the Afghan tribe of Mohmand, one of the purely Afghan tribes at present dwelling in the Pes'hawar district. Hence, Hamid, like Rahman, was a Mohmand, but of a different clan. The exact year of his birth I have been unable to discover, but it was certainly about the middle of the last half of the seventeenth century. He was brought up to the priesthood, and is said to have been endowed with a considerable amount of learning, which he acquired at Pes'hawar; and students from all parts of the surrounding districts sought his instruction.

He is the cynical poet of the Afghans--the Shaykh Saaedi of the Pus'hto language--and the beauty of his compositions is fully acknowledged, even amongst a nation so rich in poets as the Persians, by whom he is styled "Hamid the Hair-splitter." His poetry, though generally of a moral tendency, and breathing contempt of the world and its vanities, is still tinged with Sufi doctrines, as all Muhammadan poetry, in whatever language written, more or less is. He was the author of three works--a poem entitled "Nairang-i-Aeishk," or "Love's Fascination;" "Shah Gada," or "The King and the Beggar;" and a Collection of Odes, entitled "Dur-o-Marjan," or "Pearls and Corals," from which the following translations have been selected.

The year of the poet's decease is, like that of his birth, somewhat uncertain; but the people of his native village account his death

[p. 86]

to have taken place about the year A.D. 1732; and his descendants, on inquiring of them, state, that four generations have passed since that event occurred, which, at the usual computation of thirty years for each generation, agrees within five years with the period mentioned. An aged man of the same village, who died about twenty years since, in the 107th year of his age, had been, repeatedly, heard to say, by the people of the hamlet, that he had, in his youthful days, seen Mull Hamid frequently, who, at that time, was upwards of fifty years old. Another patriarch, Malik Aeaziz Khan, who is about a century old, states, that he had heard his father and grandfather relate, that they remembered Hamid well; and that he was just coming into notice as a poet, towards the close of Rahman's life; and some of Hamid's odes having reached the ear of Rahman, he sent for the poet to come and visit him; and was so pleased with his modesty and humility, that he gave him his blessing, and prayed that his verses might be sweet unto all men, and that no one might ever excel him in Afghan poetry. Up to the present day, certainly, Hamid has not been surpassed.

The poet's grave is still pointed out by the people of his native village. Some of his descendants continue to dwell at Mashu Khel, and some are dispersed in other villages. The dwelling in which Hamid was born, lived, and died, is now in ruins.

     
Selections from the Poetry of the Afghans, by H.G. Raverty, [1868], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 87]

  

THE POEMS

  

OF

  

AeABD-UL-HAMID.

  

I.

O THOU, for ever, with the cares of the flesh, distracted!
 Why awaken for thy soul, sleeping misfortune and calamity?

The wise act not according to the counsels of their enemies:
 Then why takest thou the advice of the devil, carnality?

Have some degree of shame for this white beard of thine!
 And, moreover, in broad day, robbery cannot be effected.

Look thou well to this thine own fast fleeting breath;
 Since to depart, every respiration raiseth the cry--Begone!

For what evil are worldly goods accumulated with thee?
 When the bees fill the comb, they are of the honey deprived.

In the sight of God, as a man among men, thou art well;
 But not, in the world's eye, a self-made Shaykh [**] and Mulla. [*+]

When the pus exudeth from the sore, the invalid ease obtaineth;
 But thou, at the passing away of this world, bewailest.

[p. 88]

The hand of despair he will soon place upon his hip, [**]
 Who girdeth up his loins, in the world's people confiding.

O HAMiD! the fostering of the flesh's lusts is improper;
 For no one, surely, showeth affection for an inveterate foe!

  

II.

This world, O friend, is neither mine nor thine!
 It is to be left behind, and to endure after every one!

Fallen into the arms of one, it laugheth and flirteth with another:
 What an immodest, wanton harlot, indeed, is this world!

Although it seemeth pretty and attractive, what then?
 Intrinsically, and inherently, this world is a black calamity.

Since there is no generous, no disinterested friendship in it,
 Though it may seem a friend, it is an enemy, in reality.

It will very speedily dash from the mountain's summit
 Them, with whom 'tis hand in glove, and cheek by jowl.

It ridiculeth to their faces, its own followers, at all times;
 For ever practising mockery and derision, is this world.

In any one place of it, there is never, either rest, or tranquillity;
 For like unto a mere shadow, and naught else, is this world.

No one's affairs can be brought to completion by the light of it;
 For this world is as the lightning, and the light of the sky.

[p. 89]

Absurdly, thou attachest thine heart to the sounds of its drum;
 For the world is a bridal procession--the mere guest of an hour.

No one hath become a gainer, by its trade and its traffic;
 For the world is a seller of barley, though an exposer of wheat.

It is not meet, that the good and great bend their steps towards it;
 For this world is a spectacle--a mere children's show.

HAMiD, who laugheth and is merry therein, but laugheth at himself;
 For, indeed, the world is only a place of sorrow and of grief.

  

III.

I know not, in the least, whether this is love, or whether fire:
 Do I consume in it of my own choice, or is this compulsion?

Is this the incurable agony of the tender passion, that thus killeth me,
 Or a viper, for whose sting, there is neither antidote nor charm?

Since I have no pretty and lovable companion by my side,
 This is, in reality, no dwelling; it is, verily and truly, a grave!

Be not disturbed, shouldst thou be reviled, on love's account;
 For such like abuse is the acme of all greatness whatsoever.

Since thou severest my heart's fibres, and leavest none sound,
 Are these the arched eyebrows of the beloved, or a reaping-hook?

Is it, indeed, the stigma attendant upon the dark-eyes' glances,
 Which, notwithstanding loss of life and goods, leaveth me not?

Do not be in any way abashed, by the censure love bringeth on;
 For it is the embroidered decorations of existence itself.

[p. 90]

Since it hath preserved me safely, from mine own sorrows,
 Is this love's anguish, or is it my sympathizing consoler?

Whoever entereth on love's path must, indeed, endure its pangs;
 For this is an excellent present to send after the bride.

When I beheld HAMiD over head and ears in love's affairs,
 I found him mad--in sooth, Majnun's [**] elder brother.

  

IV.

Love, assuredly, is both profit, as well as traffic,
 Hence, why the candle yieldeth its head with a smile.

The chikor hath dyed red its legs, [*+] and laugheth heartily,
 Because, alone in its roost, it found happiness and joy.

Inasmuch as life and goods are staked upon it,
 This trade is, certainly, constituted to some advantage.

Though, the lover's appearance seemeth wretched, what then?
 This beggar in rags, swayeth the sceptre of dominion.

Where is wandering in the desert? where sauntering in hamlets?
 Where the hale and healthy? where the crazy and mad?

Zulikha [*++] abandoned, entirely, the cushion of sovereignty,
 When the first inception of love's passion she acquired.

Those lovers who, from affection, openly, weep and wail,
 Merely conceal, by so doing, their transports and their joy.

[p. 91]

When the beloved accordeth her society with willingness,
 The lovers say, unto themselves, now are we repaid!

Because thou, O HAMiD! hast made but a beginning in thy love,
 Hence, towards me, thy endearments thus so trifling are.

  

V.

In such wise have the fair made away with my heart,
 As if, indeed, it had never, at any time, been mine own.

Though I summon back, this stag-eye captured heart;
 Yet, like the deer, it heedeth not any calling of mine.

Whereas my beloved inflicteth one wound upon another,
 The medicine-chest of the physician is useless unto me.

Since thoughts of the rosy-cheeked, are the light of my eye,
 It is objectionable, unto the rose, this gazing of mine.

Whatever part shall be found, free from headaches for the fair,
 There's the befitting spot where my head should be smitten.

Whether I die or live, my head is laid at the portal of the beloved;
 Save that threshold, there is no other place of existence for me.

Should I draw the whole of the world's beauties to my side,
 I could not derive from another, the good I gain from thee.

There cannot exist between any lover and his beloved,
 Such cruel treatment as thine, and endurance like mine.

If other folks groan under the tyranny of the Mughals, [**]
 The Almighty hath made my grief for thee, the Mughal to me.

[p. 92]

Both the moth and the taper have often consumed themselves;
 But they have no conception, O HAMiD, of this consuming of thine!

  

VI.

How shall I stroll in the garden, without thee at my side?
 What shall I do with the jasmine and the lily, without thee?

Since thou art the light of mine eyes, when thou art absent,
 How shall I, the view of the parterre and its fragrant flowers, enjoy?

When every tulip, to a live coal turneth, and I burn thereon,
 Let me not see them; for what were Yaman [**] without thee?

No one yearneth after Paradise, save the Deity's face to behold:
 What then is home, or hamlet, or country to me, without thee?

Forasmuch as it cannot reach the dimpled well of thy chin,
 What shall I do with the short thread of life, without thee?

As a mendicant monk, in the dust at thy door, I am happy;
 But what were Khut###804###an's sovereignty [*+] to me, without thee?

Since I am carried to the fire, perpetually, like meat for the roast,
 Of what use to me is existence, like slaughter, without thee?

Say then unto me, HAMiD, whom thou, so cruelly, leavest--
 Unto him of the sightless eyes say, what shall I do without thee.

[p. 93]

  

VII.

Do not become, like the bubble, wholly vain and inflated;
 For, from such vanity thou wilt, to ruin and perdition go.

Ask not from the Almighty, the rank and dignity of man;
 Since, like the brutes, thou art occupied, in eating and drinking.

Even the beast, in the plough, goeth uniform to the furrow;
 Wherefore then, quittest thou, thus sinfully, the Law's precepts?

Every breath thou drawest, without remembering thy Creator,
 Consider, that thou swallowest a live coal, by the same computation.

Seeing that thou knowest nothing, save sleeping and eating,
 In what respect art thou superior to the beasts of the field?

Why writhe in agony, at the bare thoughts of Hell's pangs,
 When thou wanderest about tormented by carnality's cares?

Follow not, thus presumptuously, the vanities of the world;
 For in this, like the lightning, thou wilt soon lose thyself.

If, in the accounts here below, there shall no errors be,
 There will be none, in those, of the account-book above.

Be not concerned, O HAMiD, regarding thy daily bread;
 For that Causer of Causes, the Infinite, existeth!

  

VIII.

A spoiled son taketh not to discipline and instruction;
 And a shaded palm-tree yieldeth not ripe dates.

[p. 94]

Let not that boy be ever taken unto thy embrace,
 Who may not take, also, to his lessons and his school.

Certainly, the ass and mule are in their place, in the stable;
 But not a blockhead, without application, in the house.

When one degenerate creature appeareth in a family,
 He bringeth disgrace on his lineage, both present and past.

"According to the son's good or bad actions, the father is remembered,"
 Is a saying that hath been verified, throughout the world.

The finger is pointed towards the rider, and to him only,
 Whose horse, the bridle's guidance doth not properly obey.

In heart, affection--on tongue, asperity; it behoveth, with the son:
 What an excellent axiom--"Where the blow is, there is respect."

Joseph, then, became fit for the exercise of sovereignty,
 When he received the blows of displeasure, and of wrath.

Like the flies, every worthless creature buzzeth about him,
 When sugar-lipped HAMiD reciteth his sweet strains.

  

IX.

I am sunk in care, to this degree, on account of the fair,
 Like unto a stone, submerged at the bottom of Aeman's sea. [**]

For this reason, all peace and tranquillity are lost unto me,
 That my tears have engulphed the goods and chattels of patience.

Those unacquainted with the case, call it the sunset's redness,
 Though by weeping blood, I even, the sky itself, submerge.

[p. 95]

Be not misled by the honied words of the deceitful fair;
 For they, by this witchery, have whole peoples o'erwhelm'd.

Thus, under the mask of fondness, they slay and destroy one,
 Like as though Khizr [**] were drowned, in immortality's fount.

In such wise, they keep me at a distance, when in their presence,
 Like one thirsting for a draught of water, in solicitude drowned.

The pearl of the ocean of their coyness cannot be found,
 Though I engulph, without number, the ships of patience therein.

Love's lighted taper, unto the tomb, he hath borne away,
 Who carried the arrow of separation, embedded in his heart.

The paper boats of HAMiD'S cares and anxieties,
 The world hath, in the fathomless ocean of amazement, o'erwhelmed.

  

X.

In what manner shall I hush the sighs of this seared heart?
 The nightingales will not be mute, among the roses of the parterre!

The tongue becometh again extricated, like a hero from the melee,
 However strongly I seize it with my teeth, that it may silent remain,

Through crudeness and rawness, fermentation, from the vessel ariseth;
 But the wise, from their own shrewdness, will taciturn be.

With water only, shall the lamp of thy desire become lighted,
 Shouldst thou, like the pearl-oyster, silence, with patience, thy tongue.

[p. 96]

When the seed is concealed in the earth, it becometh an ear of corn;
 Therefore, lock up thine anguish, within the recesses pf thy breast.

The nightingale's wailings, about the rose, are not befitting;
 For the moths consume themselves, in silence, on the red flame.

Like as the straw and the yellow amber [**] attract each other,
 Thus, with silent tongue, do loving friends, each other invoke.

As the mother, the innocent cause of her infant's death, mourneth silently; [*+]
 So, inaudibly, the heart-enamoured utter their sighs and wails.

How could he entertain honourably his sugar-mouthed guest,
 Should HAMiD'S sweetness-raining, thoughtful strains be hushed?

  

XI.

My heart hath gone out, as a help in the fight, a look to obtain;
 And to the right and to the left are discharged the arrows of sight.

With the ardour I am filled with, my heart throbeth and beateth,
 Like as the infant springeth and boundeth, in its mother's arms.

By the hand of the forsaken, peace of mind cannot be grasped--
 When do the heart-scorched, from a handful of water, find relief?

The stars, in their gladness, at my union with the beloved,
 The tamborine beating, have thrust their fingers through.

[p. 97]

By the recollection, every moment, of the mole of my beloved,
 A musk-pod, as it were, becometh broken upon my head,

The Rustams [**] of patience and abstinence, like little children,
 Take shelter, in retirement, from the crushing blow of love.

At the fountain of union's attainment, I die, with lips parched,
 From the burning fever of the dread of separation.

Since the self-willed, like HAMiD, they have made humble,
 Love's pomp and grandeur are not without mishaps and blows.

  

XII.

From the fire and fever of separation defend us!
 Preserve us, O God, from the fierce flames of Hell!

They make earth and heaven tremble on man's account
 Shield us, alas! from the great tyranny of the fair!

Evil destiny made it my grievous lot, unto life's end,
 To be ever departing, alas! from the sweet-lipped ones.

Though I, through reverence, cannot look upon her face;
 Yet, for the courtesy of the ungracious ones, alas! alas!

The lot of the love-born, in comparison with the damned,
 Is, alas! very many times more horrid and abominable.

Who deem the tormenting of lovers to be a virtuous act--
 O, guard us, and defend from this creed of the fair!

Who cannot utter, with the tongue, what the heart wisheth--
 From the desires of such lovers, O save and rescue us!

[p. 98]

The morning, whose dawn is called the morn of doom--
 From the night of such morning, O save us, and preserve!

Thou sayest, that HAMiD should be debarred from the fair--
 Alas, O monitor, that thou shouldst speak such monstrous words!

  

XIII.

O necessity! what a terrible calamity art thou,
 That changest man's nature into that of the dog!

The Muhammadan, thou makest follow Hindu rites,
 And the Hindu, the usages of the Faithful to observe,

Kings and Princes thou makest stand at the door,
 Of their crowns deprived, and from their thrones driven.

Even the free and unrestrained birds of the air also,
 Thou entanglest, helpless and paralyzed in the net.

The tutor likewise, in the sight of his own scholar,
 Thou makest even more contemptible than the fowl.

Since by them, man cannot be exempted
 From the tax of necessity's urgent demands,

Say then, from all power and dominion soever,
 And in empire's sway, what advantage is there?

Unto the opulent, infinite Deity, this is exclusive,
 That He is wanting in nothing, whatsoever it be.

The raising up of HAMiD, too, shall be effected,
 From out of the waves of affliction, and of grief!

[p. 99]

  

XIV.

The friendship of this world's friend is false and hollow:
 From the tulip thou seekest permanence, unavailingly. [**]

Like unto one who vainly calleth to a goose for a porringer, [*+]
 So absurd, hath become, the hope of any constancy.

Since no one is the gainer from a friend's friendship,
 Let not this unprofitable, gainless trade be entered on.

He, who in his necessities, craveth aught from fate's revolutions,
 Unavailingly, runneth after the lightning's bright gleams.

To-morrow, thy manliness will be, from thy acts, seen;
 Therefore, in boasting, raise no foolish noise, to-day.

Speaking, without acting, is mere trouble and vexation:
 The kernel of desire, by this absurdity, cannot be obtained.

He, who may open his mouth unto the mean and base,
 Rendereth the pearls of his own speech worthless, altogether.

When, thereby, its own rent garment it cannot gather together,
 The rose, unreasonably, laugheth, at the weeping of the dew. [*++]

Since, in the flame, O HAMiD! the moth uttereth no cry,
 The wailing of the nightingale for the rose, is utterly vain.

[p. 100]

  

XV.

Keep thy face for ever wet with the water of thy tears;
 For in these waters can be seen, the lustre of the pearl.

The lamp of Joseph's countenance at that time became lighted,
 When his brethren made it red, by their cuffs and blows.

The tree that is obscured, will be backward in giving fruit,
 Until it shall be brought, face to face, with the sun.

Like the rose, thy face shall glow before every one,
 If thou but wash the face of the heart with blood.

The darksome stain of thy eagerness will not disappear,
 Till, with patience's pearl-powder, thou cleanse not the face.

The patient and submissive, from prudence and bashfulness,
 Are unable to look upon their own faces, the mirror within.

He who beareth the blister of toil and labour, upon his hand,
 Will gaze, without apprehension, on the surface of the gem.

Unto the wise, a display of knowledge is a great defect
 The lustre of the gem changeth the mirror to an earthen plate.

If thou seek after distinction in the court of the adored,
 Like as the mirror, smear over thy face with ashes and dust.

The ardent longing of HAMiD containeth naught of sinfulness;
 It only seeketh everywhere, for that which it hath lost.

  

XVI.

Since the world's pomps and vanities are accounted nothing,
 Only the worthless man will boast of such nothingness.

[p. 101]

The existence of the transitory world is as the lightning's flash;
 And by the light of a meteor, no affairs can be disposed of.

The world's lusts and vanities, are but the phantoms of a dream;
 For when the sleeper again awaketh, they will be naught.

From this world, every man departeth, mouth filled with gall;
 For it hath never yet made sweet any one's disposition.

Notwithstanding they fought and struggled so together,
 Neither Alexander nor Darius carried the least thing hence.

He, who is acquainted with the world's deceptions and deceits,
 Neither tradeth nor trafficketh in its markets, in the least.

Since the integrity of friendship cannot be preserved,
 The friendship of this world's friends is, than nothing, less.

This embryonic thing, no one hath brought to perfection;
 For its permanence is no longer than the lightning's flash.

O HAMiD! he who is free from its cares and vexations,
 Is perfectly indifferent regarding the world's people too!

  

XVII.

Shroud well the sight from the black eyes' glances!
 Arise not, but, from drawn swords, guard well thine head!

Before love, the asceticism of a century is as nothing:
 From a thousand bales of cotton, keep off a single spark!

Unto thy human form, a road of dire peril is affection:
 Guard well thyself: on the path of danger enter not!

Love hath made reprobates of many simple devotees:
 Mountains on mountains of ice, from the sun's face screen!

[p. 102]

No other attainment will avail thee, in love's affairs,
 Save one--the gift of madness--of which, be then beware!

Like as the naked man, from sharp swords himself shieldeth,
 Do thou, from the morning curses [**] of the afflicted, thyself guard!

Cold sighs are not good for the novice in ardent love--
 Keep the pinching wind, carefully, from the fresh wound!

Love and affection, with conceit and vanity, cannot exist:
 Guard well the guide's breath and footsteps, in this path!

Shouldst thou, O Zephyr! go in the direction of the beloved,
 Be mindful of the message, respecting HAMiD'S aspirations!

  

XVIII.

When black antimony is applied unto dark eyes, [*+]
 From one dark calamity, another hundred spring.

Black eyes, and sable locks, and dark eyebrows--
 All these are gloomy misfortunes--man-devourers.

No one is able to guard himself; even from one ill;
 Yet on me, a hundred misfortunes are heaped, one on the other.

I am neither accounted among the living, nor the dead;
 For love hath placed me, absolutely, the two states between.

What now, indeed, is either name or fame unto me?
 Wherefore doth the bare-headed, woe-begone, beat his breast?

[p. 103]

If thou, O monitor! tallest thyself as wise as Plato,
 Unto me, in sooth, thou art but Majnun's crazy brother. [**]

I will now embrace the paganism of sable ringlets,
 If thou givest any of thy admonitions unto me.

O fool! love hath vanquished many powerful ones:
 Why then, on the strength of thy hypocritical austerity, so elate!

What idol is it, O HAMID, that is resting on thy heart,
 Unto which, thou art ever, in adoration, bent down!

  

XIX.

Were the looks constantly directed to every fair one's face,
 How long, in love, would the saint's sanctity stand?

"As thou eatest of every tree, one, at least, will be poison"--
 This axiom hath been tested throughout the world.

In one short moment, love turneth into ridicule
 The saint's century of piety, and the empire of the prince.

It will drag him away disgraced to the market-place,
 Though the hermit be sitting, a hundred seclusions within.

Love's affairs cannot be conducted by the wisest counsels--
 The body cannot be cast into the fire, by any safe plan.

The languid eyes, far-reaching, have my heart reached,
 Though the arrow of the lax bow but tardily striketh.

It is ever, either the jingle of the anklets of the beloved,
 Or the clanking chains of love's distracted ones.

[p. 104]

Though the mart of the fair be crowded with misfortunes,
 They are not, by rebuke of saint, or ascetic, restrained.

Every breath, every step, it placeth at the breast malediction's sword;
 And separation from the beloved, sick unto death, hath HAMiD made!

  

XX.

The fragrance of the flowers of this world's garden is gone;
 And the kind disposition of its fair ones hath, also, departed.

Neither the nature of my love for the idols leaveth me,
 Nor hath the proneness to tyranny left them either.

How will love, O monitor! leave me now,
 When, from head to foot, it hath entered at every pore?

My soul would make efforts to depart and leave me,
 If the pursuit of the fair were to leave my heart.

The heart, gone forth in the search of the youthful, cannot be found:
 He is lost, who, at night, towards the distant fire, proceedeth.

This river Aba Sind, [**] which appeareth to our view,
 Is but a small rivulet, exuded from the ocean of my tears.

My friend, I conceive, hath gone over to my rival's counsels;
 Since observance of that vow, 'twixt her and me, hath ceased.

To obtain justice on them lieth in no one's power, HAMiD!
 The blood of the slain, by the dark-eyed, is shed and gone!

[p. 105]

  

XXI.

Soften, O God, the heart of the guardian [**] with benevolence!
 Make this Hindu, somewhat of a Muslim unto me!

My patience, make into a sharp sword, for love's sake;
 And the marplots, with their own doubts, cut to pieces therewith!

Since the hearts of the fawn-eyed take fright therefrom,
 Change the whole of my prosperity to a desert wild!

Apply fire unto the dwelling of my faith and worldly goods!
 On this plea, at least, make me a guest, for love's own sake!

Give unto destruction the goods and chattels of my existence,
 That may not be illumined with the lamp of the dear one's face!

Either, for me renew the period of union with the beloved,
 Or, in separation, let my term of life but a moment be!

Since she acteth, at all times, on giving ear unto my enemies,
 Make my friend somewhat ashamed of conduct like this!

My adversaries cast me into the burning flames of separation--
 Preserve me, O God! like as Abraham, [*+] save Thou me!

O HAMiD! to-day, look stedfastly on the face of the beloved;
 For to-morrow, thou wilt wring thy hands, and grieve for her.

  

XXII.

To thyself thou speakest well, but actest not rightly:
 What is this thou sayest--what is that thou doest?
 Thou wouldst reap wheat, where thou didst barley sow;
 But the good cometh when thou actest worthily.

[p. 106]

Day and night, for the sake of the flesh's lusts,
 Thou takest the trouble to count the hairs of thy head;
 But in seeing the truth, like unto the hare,
 With eyes wide open, thou puttest thyself to sleep.

Shouldst thou, upon the impaling stake, be placed,
 Or shouldst thou be precipitated into a well,
 Thou hast neither those eyes nor those ears,
 By means of which, thou mightest hear or see.

The very branch, actually, on which thou sittest,
 Thou cuttest off--thou actest like one that is blind:
 Thou plantest thorns in the midst of that path,
 On which, every moment, thou thyself journeyest.

If any worldly loss should come upon thee,
 Thou lamentest thereat, and makest thine eyes red;
 But though faith and religion should leave thee altogether,
 Thou makest that a matter of not the least concern.

For the sake of sweet-flavoured and dainty victuals,
 Thou, willingly, acceptest a hundred heats and colds:
 No dog, even, for the sake of its belly, would practise
 Such despicable acts, as those that thou committest.

Sometimes, thou usest force; at others, entreatest
 At times, actest with humility; at others, with pride:
 This one body, for the sake of the world's lusts,
 Thou now makest a dog of; and now, a wolf.

At that time, brightness cometh upon thee,
 When thou causest darkness in another's house:
 The funeral entertainment is, unto others, sorrow;
 But thou turnest it into a joyous bridal feast.

[p. 107]

Any matter, however vile and base it may be,
 Meeteth with entire approval, thy heart within.
 Thou neither feelest shame, nor accountest it a fault,
 However improper the act that thou committest.

Now, thou becomest a monk; now, turnest priest:
 Sometimes, blackenest the eyelids; [**] at others, dressest in green. [*+]
 At times, a strolling singer, with hand to forehead, bowing:
 Sometimes, a soldier, thou takest to sword and dirk.

At times, thou heavest sighs; at others, weepest:
 Sometimes, speakest choleric words; at others, cold ones.
 All these are caused through the promptings of the flesh--
 Thou turnest water into fire, O thou sensualist!

Though the worship of God is incumbent upon all,
 Neither do these things constitute it, nor dost thou perform.
 Say then, in what employment wilt thou delight--
 Wilt thou, with an ox, or with an ass, amuse thyself!

If the favour of the Almighty be essential unto thee,
 Thou wilt renounce for thyself all vanity and pride.
 Thou wilt, thyself, tread carnality under thy feet;
 And wilt, upon another spot, thine eyes direct.

Thou wilt seize contentment with thy hands:
 Thou wilt consider carnality and the devil thieves.
 Thou wilt follow in the steps of the good, always:
 With heart, and with tongue, thou wilt imitate them.

[p. 108]

What canst thou by thine own evil disposition against others effect?
 Thou wilt merely bring injury and calamity, upon thyself!
 Thou fallest into a well of thine own free-will:
 Then what complaint against HAMiD bringest thou?

  

XXIII.

Although free from grief and sorrow, am I never;
 Still, that I meddled in love's affairs, regret I never.

Though my goods be plundered, and my neck stricken,
 The one to turn from the moon-faced, am I never.

In the acquirement of a single straw's weight of love,
 To be obstructed, by either faith or religion, am I never.

Whether my head be firmly placed, or be it severed,
 The one to rejoice or grieve thereat, am I never.

Though I stake both life and goods, on the heart-ravishers,
 Reproached therefrom, the world before, am I never.

Like one bereaved of his senses, in love's affairs,
 Thinking of mine own profit or injury, am I never.

To me, O monitor! say naught regarding patience;
 For the ear-giver, unto such speeches, am I never.

Whose sweet face hath not, thus, amazed me ever,
 On such a charmer yet, set eyes have I never.

Why should my dear one, on HAMID a kiss bestow,
 When, of such beneficence as this, worthy, am I never.

[p. 109]

  

XXIV.

Though I have become crushed by the multitude of my sorrows,
 I cannot be patient, nor can I, from the fair abstain.

Let all the offerings and sacrifices of the world, be an oblation,
 Unto the reproaches, upbraidings, and coquetry of the fair.

When I cast my eyes on their beauty, sweetly blooming,
 The fresh-blown flowers of spring are nothing to me.

Before the sleepy, languid glance of my love, I wonder,
 That with a lax-strung bow, they, so sharply, strike.

She raiseth uproar in the privacy of the secluded,
 When this peace-disturber displayeth her charms, unto them.

She dischargeth a thousand darts, right into my heart,
 When, in anger, she turneth her eyes, sharply, on me.

Why would any one, entreatingly, ask aught of them,
 Were not the upbraidings of the fair, with honey mixed?

The sweet creatures, by their duennas, [**] avert the evil eye;
 For in front of the melon-bed, the black shard will be placed. [*+]

If he hath not pressed the lips of the sugar-lipped ones,
 How hath HAMiD'S tongue become a scatterer of sweets?

  

XXV.

Patience and forbearance, turn man's nature into fire:
 The malevolent and the ill-willed, on its flame, shall be straw.

[p. 110]

Fire reacheth the evil-minded, from their own persons--
 The Phoenix maketh its own nest, a furnace for its body.

The arrows of the pangs of the oppressed, strike home--
 None of the discharges are harmless--none miss the mark!

The world-enamoured are, of all fools, the greatest;
 For, like the baby, they show eagerness for the flaming fire.

Every man, who, after a pestilence, desireth a market,
 In his eagerness for physic, the worthless fellow, poison taketh.

They, who look for perfection out of arrogance, are fools;
 For, in foul water, the necessary ablutions cannot be performed.

No one can restrain the passions from manifold wickedness:
 No one can prevent fire from consuming straw.

When one benefit, out of a thousand such, thou hast not realized thereby,
 Out upon such shameless, such execrable longings as those!

The world, slumbering in the sleep of negligence, heareth him not,
 Though HAMiD shouteth, as loud as the peal of a bell.

  

XXVI.

Be not grieved at the departure of this world's wealth!
 Be not sorrowful if out of thy foot cometh a broken thorn!

The flesh's lusts and vanities, God hath given captive unto thee;
 Then do not thou, the captive of thine own slaves, become!

Godliness and piety cannot exist with conceit and egotism:
 In this matter, without a guide or instructor, be thou not!

[p. 111]

There is no bridle that can be placed in the mouth of passion;
 Then let it not be trained up, as a reprobate and robber, by thee!

Where is the scar of a single brand? where that of a thousand?
 Enter not, then, into schemes for increasing worldly wealth!

Say, is the light or the heavy load, the best for the head?
 Indigence, for thee, is good: do not thou a lordling become!

The Almighty hath given thee ears to hear, and eyes to see;
 Then do not, wittingly, like one, blind, from the precipice fall!

With smiling face and unclouded brow, unto the world become
 Its injustice-receiving target; but, the arrow, become thou not!

All other bonds soever, O HAMiD! are easy to be borne;
 But, at least, let thy neck be, from the chain of avarice, free!

  

XXVII.

My friend observeth none of the usages of affection towards me!
 Alas, my dark, dark destiny! shine out a little on me!

Let me some day, at least, to mine own, that lip press,
 That every hour sippeth up the very blood of my heart!

Through her unkindness, even yet, thou rubbest thine eyes with thy hand:
 Then why, after the fair, runnest thou again, poor wretch?

My friend, through coquetry or playfulness, speaketh incoherently to me,
 Or her lips adhere together, from the sugar of their sweetness.

The load of love, which neither earth nor heavens can bear--
 With what strength wouldst thou raise it, thou improvident one?

[p. 112]

Alas, that I had not become enamoured, when I first fell in love!
 Now, whatever it is, this must be, with a good grace, borne.

Gazing upon the countenances of the beautiful, is HAMiD'S calling;
 The eyes of the coward only, become dazzled at the gleam of the sword!

  

XXVIII.

Really, this existence, so to say, is altogether worthlessness,
 Since, in the world, I pass my life away, absent from my friend.

I cannot imagine what unfortunate, hard grain I am,
 That I do not become ground, between the mill-stones of absence.

The sable locks and fair countenance of my beloved,
 I behold in every thing, white or black, in the world.

I use my tongue in such a manner, through helplessness,
 That I may my friend regain, either by falsehood or by truth.

If other folks, by alchemy, transmute dust into gold,
 I, by the alchemy of love, have turned gold into dust.

Where is love? and where too, shame and modesty's fear?
 Where there is shame or modesty, dancing cannot be. [**]

If thou seekest a dear-one, for her, shed thou rivers of tears;
 For, in the waters of this ocean, that pearl can be found.

From the door of worthy and base, he preserveth both breath and step
 Whoever wandereth about frantic, in desert and in wild.

[p. 113]

HAMiD styleth that person a mere worshipper of idols,
 Who, with manifest hypocrisy, performeth his duty unto God.

  

XXIX.

When the dear friend who departed, unto her friend returneth,
 In truth, 'tis as if the Messiah drew near unto the dead!

Disjunction from the adored is a dire, and a black calamity;
 God forbid any follower of Islam, into such affliction fall!

In such wise, hath separation caused my confidence to fail,
 As when, all at once, a fiery dragon might one confront.

Through bashfulness, I am unable to look upon her sweet face--
 Bleared eyes become wholly dazzled by the lightning's flash.

Neither will the promises of the fair be, hereafter, fulfilled,
 Nor will the Phoenix fall entrapped, in any one's snare.

Do not become altogether hopeless of desire's attainment;
 For the Almighty bringeth to the ground the birds of the air.

Since I have taken up my residence, the city of sorrow within,
 For me, there is no laughter or joy, without sorrow after.

Through excessive fear of the dread morn of separation,
 In the presence of the rosy-cheeked one, I like the taper weep.

By this, thy non-appearance, thus, full-well, I know,
 That, either to-day or to-morrow, unto HAMiD, bringeth death.

  

XXX.

O thou constant endurer of misery in the cares of the flesh!
 O thou, happy in this affliction, and in doing injury unto others!

[p. 114]

No one obtaineth the slightest benefit, or advantage from thee:
 Indeed, thou art like a thorn ever buried in the side of others!

Thou wilt, one day, become a captive, like unto the hawk;
 Since, day and night, thine own species' flesh, hath thy food become.

Let not the sighs of the afflictions of the oppressed strike one;
 For, from their gasps and sobs, whole regions to perdition go.

The execrations of the oppressed pass not harmless, HAMiD
 The shaft of the archer striketh the target unerringly!

  

XXXI.

At the present time, extinct is the principle of sincerity!
 That which is taken now, is but the empty name of sincerity!

I discover nought else, whatever, save duplicity and deceit,
 Though I have carefully examined the horoscope of sincerity.

Let any one, with the finger, unto me a single man point out,
 Whose acts are in accordance with the usages of sincerity.

As though folks, festive songs, over a dead bride, should sing;
 So entirely hollow and doleful are the drum sounds of sincerity.

When the occupation of father and son, is dissimulation,
 What then remaineth of the colour and odour of sincerity?

Because hypocrisy hath destroyed the taste of the world's mouth;
 Hence poison of the infernal tree [**] is the sweet savour of sincerity.

Examine closely the cottages and the mansions of the world:
 Say, hath any one laid on their walls a single layer of sincerity?

[p. 115]

The world containeth none sincere; but should such be found,
 Then, HAMiD is the special and obedient servant of sincerity.

  

XXXII.

Every rebel is brought to submission, by sincerity:
 Every shameless one is made ashamed, by sincerity.

Like the sun, its brightness shall become world-irradiating--
 Every brow, that uprightness and sincerity may illumine.

I will be answerable if it come not, and crouch at his feet,
 If one act, with sincerity, unto the most ravenous beast.

No shears soever can, with its mouth, any bond sever,
 That shall have been made strong and durable, by sincerity.

Like as when, on the rising of the sun, light appeareth;
 Thus sincerity life bestoweth, at every breath and footstep.

Like as the morning dawneth, so shall the bud blossom,
 When sincerity, its smiling mouth, to laugh shall incline.

Those things, which the sorcerer by his enchantments effecteth,
 Are as nothing, compared to what is effected by sincerity.

Forthwith, the hardened old infidel of a thousand years,
 Is made a seeker of Islam's true faith, by sincerity.

From the race of hypocrites, O HAMiD, guard thyself,
 Lest, with their deceit, they turn rotten thy sincerity!

  

XXXIII.

To this degree, art thou become absorbed in thine own selfish objects,
 That the interests of others are good for nothing, in thy sight.

[p. 116]

When the feasible wishes of others are so difficult unto thee,
 What remedy wilt thou devise, as to thine own impossible ones?

Until, of thine own free will, thou carry out the wishes of others,
 How, by the means of them, shall thy ends be effected?

"Where there is no object, what is the object?"--so the proverb runneth;
 Hence, for the lamp, the nightingale no solicitude showeth.

Dost repeat a prayer, that with such vehemence thou criest?
 Calling upon the Almighty, is not the object of thy invocations!

Without being summoned, folks around the lamp assemble,
 Because, with silent mouth, it mentioneth its aims and wishes.

In all this amount of trouble, that he taketh on himself,
 The giving of advice and admonition is the only object of HAMiD.

  

XXXIV.

Were there any chance of thy exhortations taking effect on me,
 Then, O monitor! unto me, thou wouldst have given admonition.

Love hath made my eyes more wanton, even, than the locust's, [**]
 Whilst thou, unjustly, stirrest about in them the rubbish of advice.

I had not been o'erwhelm'd to this degree, in the ocean of grief,
 Had admonition, whether little or much, into my heart entered.

Like as the state of the dead, past all remedy, becometh;
 So the heart, by love despoiled and ravaged, giveth not ear to advice.

[p. 117]

When, O counsellor! will they become acceptable unto lovers--
 These monk-and-hermit-approved expostulations of thine?

From counsel, what alleviation doth the poor lover obtain?
 To the snake-and-scorpion-stung, what availeth admonition?

'Midst the uproar and tumult of the assembly of reprobates,
 Can a secret and whispered homily, at any time, be heard?

Love hath ever condemned me to far worse punishment,
 Whenever I have listened, the admonitions of others unto.

I will not then, O mentor! unto thy counsels give ear;
 For, as fate will have it, I, HAMID, hold advice unlucky.

  

XXXV.

When men covet, from their fellow-men, any worldly object,
 Their human nature, from this covetousness, that of a dog becometh.

The foot of their modesty trippeth and stumbleth, perpetually,
 When they, by the flesh's lusts incited, upon covetousness seize.

Thro' covetousness for the grain, the free bird becometh ensnared;
 And this thy covetousness also, will, speedily, bring calamity on thee.

The bitter words of rectitude and truth, will all be left by them,
 Who sweeten their mouths with the confection of covetousness.

The colour of their friendship will, speedily, be demolished,
 When one friend hath any want requiring to be satisfied by another.

[p. 118]

This single drop of water becometh a pearl within its breast,
 When the oyster, towards the ocean, all covetousness escheweth. [**]

The difference between royalty and beggary, ceaseth, altogether,
 When the king satisfieth not the beggar's craving covetousness.

The stranger leave out; for, verily, though it were father or mother,
 God forbid, that any one should be under necessity to another!

Pestilence is far preferable, O HAMiD! than that covetousness,
 Which, for the sake of the flesh's lusts, coveteth aught from others.

  

XXXVI.

Be not captivated by the friendship of this world's people--
 This shameless, this faithless, this barefaced world!

Like unto dogs, that snarl and fight over a rotten carcass,
 Thus, in the world, its insolent people squabble and contend!

They neither inquire about, nor cast a look upon each other--
 Back to back, pass along the world's acquaintances and friends.

The peevish, ill-tempered, disagreeable ones, are left behind;
 Whilst cruel fate hath removed from us the sweet and charming!

Thine eyes, indeed, will not be pleased with a single one of them,
 Shouldst thou bend thy looks upon the people of this age!

Since their hands are wholly withdrawn from what is right,
 Wherefore may not the world's folks be, in calamity, immersed?

Lying and duplicity have become sweeter to them than sugar;
 But like poison, the world's people have spitten out truth!

[p. 119]

They will not leave thee, O HAMiD! in thy decency, and repute;
 Since the base and infamous have become the great ones of the age.

  

XXXVII.

I perceive in friendship together, the vile, deceitful world;
 By which means its people have forfeited the country of truth.

It appeareth unto me, merely poison mixed with sugar,
 This, than honey or than sugar, more seemingly, loving world.

Be mindful never to sit in the assembly, at any time soever,
 Of this, without hurt, and without detriment, woe-begone world!

When is the brightness of any one's face agreeable or pleasing,
 In the dark eyes, of the unto-justice-blear-eyed world?

Let it be an oblation on the altar of a single grain of modesty,
 The hundred-weight-lascivious, wanton, shameless world!

In reality, it is but a useless shell, without a kernel,
 The present race of mankind in comparison to the past.

The hand, from toil blistered over, is, truly, Yaman [**] in itself;
 Then why, in search of rubies, doth the scabby world wring its hands?

From the vile and base, it behoveth well, the heart's secret to guard--
 In the flower-garden, the foul and filthy world is not admitted.

What do the sound and healthy ken of HAMiD'S heart's pangs?
 Only the afflicted know, the state of the suffering world!

  

XXXVIII.

When my love for thy sweet face became noised abroad,
 The love of Majnun and of Laila, [*+] became an empty jest.

[p. 120]

That, which appalled, even Majnun, within the tomb,
 Such a grievous calamity, unto me, hath love assigned.

Tho' his head, like the taper's, disappeareth at every respiration;
 Still, no one should consider himself, from this love, exempt.

In the hands of the sorrow-stricken, it placeth harp and rebeck,
 When, in the court-yard, love seateth the bridal train.

Fire, kindled by way of jest, blazeth up in real earnest;
 And love, made in sport, hath brought many unto tears.

The brokers of sense and reason, lose their occupation, entirely,
 When love, on its own account, beginneth to traffic and trade.

Like as by applying fire, one setteth dry straw in a blaze,
 In the same manner, doth love, piety and austerity unto.

Doth any one, a false claim and a true, in one breath, prefer?
 How then shall sincere love, remain concealed one moment?

He never again obtaineth a smile from the rosy-cheeked ones,
 Though love caused HAMiD to weep, like unto the dew.

  

XXXIX.

If kings have a liking for the throne and the sceptre,
 Lovers have a partiality for ruin and desolation.

There is no such injurious effect, in the agony of love,
 That those afflicted with it, desire any cure.

Like Joseph, he will descend into the well of grief,
 Who hath a desire for the ascension unto gladness.

My heart hath now grown cold with regard to passion:
 It hath a yearning towards the waves and billows of woe

[p. 121]

Wittingly, the prince of reason engulpheth himself,
 Who hath a longing for the taxes of the country of love.

What compassion do the amorous eyes of the fair possess,
 When they always have a desire for an occasion to slay?

HAMiD will, at all events, bear the burden, notwithstanding;
 Since he nourisheth a fondness for thy capricious ways.

  

XL.

O, when are the sorrows of love so easy to be borne,
 That they shall suffice for any one's food and raiment!

Speak not unto me, O monitor! regarding modesty or shame:
 From any apprehension of water, what have the naked to dread?

Love placed me as far from patience, as earth from heaven;
 And, unto the firmament, no one's comprehension can reach.

Affection hath completely set free my heart from control:
 With it, I am unable to exercise any power over patience.

Thro' the roofed building, the sun's rays penetrate not--
 The heart, by one sorrow rent and torn, is good indeed.

When will he find peace of mind, even seated on a throne,
 Whose heart may be always pining after some fair face?

The association of the beloved, with a rival, is the same to me,
 As though one should, together, purity and impurity mix.

How shall HAMiD obtain any relief from the fair,
 When, over him, power of life and death, God, to them, hath given?

[p. 122]

  

XLI.

Though thou mayst speak with warmth or anger;
 Or, though thou mayst, to staff, or to bludgeon take;

With all this useless absurdity, O blockhead!
 Thou wilt not be able to effect aught against fate.

That which was to happen to thee, hath come to pass,
 Whether the matter of a straw, or of a hundred thousand.

Save resignation, there is no remedy soever,
 For this pain and trouble, beyond all doubt.

Whoever sayeth aught about that which hath occurred,
 Nonsense talketh--he striketh at a fly, the water upon. [**]

Do not, O fool! become, from a trifling of success,
 Like unto the drum, for announcement inflated.

There will not be grief and sorrow upon man for ever,
 Nor will there be mirth and gladness every moment.

A person may, sometimes, be gay and cheerful;
 At others, from care, he may be melancholy and distressed.

At times, starving, with intestines doubled up;
 At others, gorged with food, even up to the throat.

At times, he becometh a lion, appropriating the plain;
 At others again, he becometh the mere rat of a burrow.

[p. 123]

Where is lamentation? where is the song of gladness?
 Where the plundered? where the Uzbak [**] that harried him?

Were the actions of fate, ever of one uniform colour,
 The firmament would not be thus spotted with stars.

The tyranny and injustice are not upon thee alone,
 Of fortune's ever changing, inconstant revolutions.

In these troubles and vicissitudes, many other folks
 Are thy companions, and are, hand in hand, with thee.

Ever unto distance remote, direct thou thy sight:
 Even from the heavens, the earth-supporting-fish unto. [*+]

There is a dart embedded in the heart of every one,
 Discharged therein by the ruthless hand of fate.

This fearful pestilence, indeed, hath reached
 Every house, and every dwelling-place, unto.

It, however, behoveth, that in this net of calamity,
 The prudent bird should be careful not to flutter.

HAMiD'S resignation hath to songs of gladness turned,
 Through the tyranny and oppression of every dastard.

  

XLII.

Every chieftain, who contemplateth the injury of his clan,
 Should make the ease of Jamal, [*++] a mirror for himself.

[p. 124]

From beneath his own feet, he cutteth away the branches,
 Who nourisheth, in his heart, evil towards his friends.

That chieftain, in the end, shall abominable remain,
 Whose envy exciteth him to the injury of his own kin.

He who coveteth the lives and goods of other people,
 Ere his desire be fulfilled, shall lose his own life and goods.

Indeed, he will himself fall into it--such is the proverb--
 Who is guilty of the crime of digging a well for others.

Strife and bloodshed shall first arise in their dwellings,
 Who long to see others, in contention and slaughter engaged.

Whoso may be powerless over his own hands and feet,
 With what power against his foes, shall he contend?

[p. 125]

"By strangers' aid, without one's own, bravery cannot be shown"--
 This howl raise Jamal and Jalal from the tomb.

Should the hawk pounce upon the quarry of the falcon,
 It effecteth nothing, but tireth itself in bootless tugs and pulls.

Hundreds cannot take the victory from thousands;
 Save the All-Powerful should, specially, the advantage decree.

Whoso advanceth his foot beyond his own bounds,
 Destiny will trample him, like Jamal, under foot.

He, who, by force, decketh himself out, in others' garments,
 Shall use them, all soiled and dirty, to bandage his own wounds.

No one hath yet won over the good fortune of strangers to himself;
 Moreover, by entertaining such ideas, he throweth his own away.

Every moth, that flieth about, upon this flambeau;
 Like unto Jamal, will only consume itself thereon.

The base man, who is ambitious of acquiring reputation,
 Plagueth himself to thread a needle by the lightning's flash.

A result such as this will, upon himself, return,
 Whosoever, in requital of good, giveth evil back.

Neither goodness, nor virtue, is manifested by the base;
 Nor doth the sweetest water affect the bitter fig. [**]

"If thou bringest up a wolf's whelp, it springeth upon thee"--
 To our state, and that of Jamal's also, this saying applieth.

As Yazid was infamous, on account of Hasan and Husain;
 So was Jamal a disgrace unto us, were any one to ask.

[p. 126]

That which hath happened, is from the same necessity,
 As maketh the timid hare spring on the dog, to terrify it.

Whatever those unacquainted with the case say, let them say:
 The informed, however, take our plea into due consideration.

Other people will always get burnt [**] on their account,
 Who abandon the sword's defence, for the shelter of walls.

Truly, the Almighty hath made the Khudrzis infamous by Jamal:
 Indeed, whatever happeneth to mankind, their own acts bring about.

Since in traffic, profit and loss have, from the beginning, existed,
 Wherefore, upon the broker, do mankind thus cast blame?

These, O HAMiD! are the customs and usages of the time,
 That one showeth his grief at another's death: the other, his joy.

  

XLIII.

Until thou, against the belly, makest a determined stand,
 By mildness thou wilt not escape from the Uzbak's hands. [*+]

Neither doth a stone, forsooth, grow soft, nor an enemy, a friend;
 Then do not be beguiled, O mean one! into the belly's servitude.

It is not advisable to show ever so little kindness to the belly--
 The pilfering hostess satisfieth herself by a snack from each dish.

How can there be a place therein for the remembrance of thy God,
 When thy belly, with eatables, is constantly crammed?

If thy heart desire, that thy body should be resplendent,
 Take example of the pinched-up belly, from the firmament, itself. [*++]

[p. 127]

Crave not, for thy belly, aught soever from fortune,
 For it will merely give thee the new moon in thy bowl. [**]

From a slight blow, this turban will fall unto the ground,
 Which, from pride, thou placest so jauntily, one side of thy head.

Consider the belly more contemptible than all else besides,
 If thou desire the standard planted, on Heaven's pinnacle.

That thou shouldst show no affection towards the world's people,
 Is, beyond all doubt, the safe and the peaceful side.

Thro' this thine own meekness and humility, O HAMiD!
 Thou art dust in the eyes of the conceited and the proud.

  

XLIV.

Many, many times have I rent my garment before thee;
 Still thou hast not removed thy guardians [*+] from my path.

Save causing thee to upbraid, and set thy face against me,
 Of no other use, to me, my offerings and oblations became.

The child playeth not thus with shards and with stones,
 Like as I gamble away, upon thee, my religion, and my faith.

When to such a pitiless one as thou art, I gave up my heart,
 I, certainly, thrust my own self into calamity's jaws.

There are none of constancy's or fidelity's wares therein;
 For the fair, in their shops, barter naught but hollowness itself.

When I come upon the paraphernalia of the heart-ravishers,
 The goods and chattels of my self-control become naught to me.

[p. 128]

Should I erect a hundred castles of patience round my heart,
 I see no safety for myself, from the inroads of the fair-faced ones.

A thousand times over, they will be thankful for their condition,
 Should I narrate, unto the damned, the way my life passeth.

Shouldst thou, O HAMiD! come under the aspersion of love,
 Account as profit, not yet acquired, this mulct of thine.

  

XLV.

Thy face hath shamed the rose, and thy tresses, the spikenard:
 The nightingale forsaketh the parterre, and flieth unto thee.

From how long since, indeed, dost thou inflict, and I endure?
 Bravo unto thy tyranny, and unto this resignation of mine!

My heart, thro' jealousy, becometh lacerated within my breast,
 When the senseless comb runneth its fingers thy ringlets thro'.

When smiling, thy rosy lips reveal their beauties,
 Exactly like unto the rose-bud, when it unfoldeth its leaves.

The whole world, through injustice, had become desolate,
 Had kings shown such arrogance and indifference as thou!

Though I observe a thousand fasts of patience and austerity;
 With a single glance towards me, thou subvertest them all.

How long shall I dry thy tyranny's tears with my sleeve?
 Wherefore is the bridge not constructed on the waters of the flood?

For with love, as with quicksilver, there is no repose, save in death! [**]
 How long then am I to live, when I am in agitation ever

[p. 129]

O HAMiD! the fair maids of the Sarraban [**] tribe have no equals;
 Whether it is in Egypt, or in Kanaean [*+]--in Kabul or Kashmir.

  

XLVI.

Wherefore doth the possessor of beauty boast of loveliness?
 It will, of itself, become the pointed at, like the new moon.

Though one should call it a ruby a thousand times over,
 The crowfoot's red berry [*++] therefrom, doth not to a ruby turn.

Whoever aspireth after the beauty of the Scythian-like fair, [* section]
 Like the ant, merely for his own destruction, acquireth wings. [* section section]

Just as the child playeth and gamboleth with earth and mud;
 So sporteth the poor lover, with his property and his life.

Expel selfishness from thy heart, if thou wouldst love pursue;
 For without that deficiency, this perfection existeth not.

This doctrine of love is an ecstacy, from beginning to end;
 And for the utterance, even of a word, there is no power here.

Is this a black mole upon the forehead of my beloved?
 Or is it Bilal [***] arisen, the summons unto prayer to sound?

[p. 130]

Defend us from the patronage of the self-conceited, be he ever so liberal:
 The mouth gasping thro' hunger, is good; but not opened, to beg.

Envy not, O possessor of riches, the poverty of HAMiD!
 This poor blanket, for that shawl, I will not exchange with thee!

  

XLVII.

Though I adjure thee again and again, a thousand times,
 Or give counsel unto thee, in a hundred different ways,

Neither my monitions, nor my entreaties touch thee--
 What calamity am I? what abomination fallen in the path?

If these are not the marplot's counsels, what then are they,
 That my admonitions make no impression on thy ear?

Such joy as thou displayest in cruelly torturing me,
 Such delight the nightingale showeth not, even for the rose.

In love, since I live on less than half of a dying breath,
 Death is a hundred times preferable, to such existence as this.

Since they talk to me of patience, when separated from thee,
 The admonishers chew, out of place, these cuds of monition.

Ask no promises of me regarding the affairs of love;
 Else, why is it, that poison is not with relish swallowed?

As one, that from the sheath, half draweth a sword on another,
 In such wise, do thy white arms daunt and terrify me.

A nightingale, like HAMiD, there would not be among them,
 Were not the Sarrabans [**] a garden, thro' their maidens fair.

[p. 131]

  

XLVIII.

How unseemly, how culpably, thou pratest, O addle-head one!
 Wherefore from the Almighty, askest thou not pardon for this.

Thou grievest long enough about thy modesty and good name;
 But, in the affairs of the world, who more dastard than thou?

Thou showest no concern about religion, though it should be destroyed--
 Thou misguided--thou shameless--thou unworthy creature!

Just as the child giveth pearls and jewels, in exchange for bread;
 In such wise playest thou, for the world, thy faith away.

What! thou, who givest thy heart to the world, seekest grace!
 Thy life passeth bootlessly away, thou sifter of the wind!

The foolish man yearneth after the goods of the world;
 And the baby capereth along, astride the cane horse. [**]

Nothing unlawful, is a whit more pleasant than the lawful;
 But thy own sister and daughter are foul-nosed, [*+] in thy sight.

Thou hast not, in the least, swept it with the broom of repentance--
 The path of death, thou hast left, in the same thorny state as before.

Since thou hast kept the field against men, good and brave,
 Unto the smiting-sword of HAMiD'S intellect be all praise!

  

XLIX.

Though thou canst manage to give it good food, and fine clothes;
 Still, thou wilt not be able to exempt the body from the fire of hell.

[p. 132]

Until thy body shall be decked out in the garments of piety,
 Plume not thyself on the mere adornment of the person.

These acts, which passion, to-day, prompteth thee to commit,
 I perceive in them, for thee, death and destruction to-morrow.

Since by death, thou becomest like unto a putrid carcass,
 Do not become, in life, like unto a musk-deer of Khut###804###an. [**]

Fools, that they may gain the world thereby, their faith barter;
 But such like buying and selling as this, the wise practise not.

Save thee, by whom both grave and resurrection are forgotten,
 Know, that every stranger seeketh his own country to reach.

From the goblet which is full, no sound proceedeth ever;
 But thro' deficiency and emptiness only, thy notoriety ariseth.

Since here thy sitting is among the wicked, and the unworthy;
 Flatter not thyself, that there, thou shalt, with the just, arise.

Unto thee, O HAMiD! the wise and the prudent will give ear;
 But what know the ignorant, concerning thy stringing of pearls. [*+]

  

L.

How many lions hath fortune made a spectacle of,
 Into whose dens, both dogs and cats, now fearless enter!

When destiny, in its own dire pitilessness, cometh,
 It casteth down stones, upon the furnace of glass.

Destiny maketh that head a plaything for dogs,
 Within whose domain, the lion dared not place his foot.

[p. 133]

In the conflict with fate, they fled far away,
 Whom the world feared to enter into contest with.

The teeth, by which those iron-like pulse were masticated,
 God knoweth what acids have rendered them thus blunt.

By the tears of what unfortunate, was that fire quenched,
 That, enwrapped in its flames, distant hills and dales?

Like unto a scorpion, insignificant and contemptible dieth
 That man, whose envenomed sting, maketh others weep and wail.

The skilled in language must have arranged the rhymes of HAMiD;
 Otherwise, no one would have entered them upon any page.

  

LI.

Since thou confessest unto ignorance, it proveth thy sense is good;
 But when thou boastest of thy wisdom, thou art then unwise.

When thy comprehension reacheth not unto thine own faults,
 How then knowest thou aught about the shortcomings of others?

If thou hast preserved thy heart from the deceits of the flesh,
 Then mayest thou say unto it, verily thou art wise!

Seeing that thou hast no conception of religion in thy heart,
 Thou, foolishly, pleasest thyself--thou art but lip-wise.

But wherefore is not the thief of thine own abode seized by thee,
 When thou pointest out others' stolen goods, and knowest the robber too?

First repair thine own ruined and dilapidated affairs,
 If, in truth, thou knowest a plan for restoring them.

Since, O heart-ravisher! all my wishes, thou fulfillest,
 How wonderfully well must thou, the heart of HAMiD know!

[p. 134]

  

LII.

Whom love may make lighter, even than a feather,
 Consider that person heavier than the mountain of Kaf. [**]

When, with the ashes of abjectness, it shall become daubed,
 The mirror of their hearts, shall clear, and bright become.

Though the fool may prate and vapour before the wise;
 The roasting grain will not, in the least, crack the pan.

With eyes that see, and ears that hear, thou showest thy malice:
 Art thou not, unto the breath and footstep of the Messiah, blind?

If a person shut not his eyes, purposely, on what is unlawful,
 The stranger's shoes can be easily recognised upon his feet.

Since HAMiD stretcheth forth his hand to the chin of the beloved,
 O! would that the branch of the willow did apples yield!

  

LIII.

Thou shouldst not take amiss, O beloved! my gazing upon thee;
 For the nightingales fly and flutter, continually, about the rose.

Any worthiness of association with thee, in myself, I see not;
 Hence have the pupils of mine eyes, from looking, wholly ceased.

Those eyes of thine, at last, carried away my heart from me,
 Notwithstanding with endurance and patience I guarded it.

Art thou aware of thy raids and onslaughts, or art thou not,
 Seeing that thou hast pillaged the abode of my resignation?

[p. 135]

The stones of resentment and hatred, rain down upon my head,
 When I behold my rivals, around the door of thy dwelling gathered.

Let Khizr [**] be the gate-keeper of those gates, and those walls,
 Whence thy coming and going--thy exit and entrance, may be.

When that smile of thine, in thy chin, a well-like dimple dug,
 Then was it, that I perceived my own falling helpless therein.

I would, at that time, have concealed this dejection of mine,
 Had I any idea, that from thee I should have comfort received.

Throughout the whole world there is quiet and tranquillity;
 But the Mughal [*+] of sorrow for thee, hath, against HAMiD, risen.

  

LIV.

Whereas I discovered the science of the alchemy of love,
 Therefore, this earthy form of mine hath sallow become.

When the fair, their spells and incantations commence,
 They cast burthens upon the back of forbearance and control.

With prayers upon my lips, I fell in love in my heart
 Verily, the lion hath devoured me, whilst seated by the hearth.

It heareth not the wails of the nightingale in the parterre;
 For this reason the mountain partridge laugheth so loudly.

I have sunk down, to this degree, in the ocean of love,
 That I remember not whether I am of the sea, or of the land.

So sore distressed am I, with dried up heart and humid eyes,
 That Majnun seemed insignificant and contemptible to me.

[p. 136]

The bitterness of separation will not pass down my throat,
 Notwithstanding I eat, along with it, the sugar of association.

Tears too, in the time of adversity, severed themselves from me
 Alas, one's own, as well as strangers, are but prosperity's friends!

How wonderfully gorgeous thou makest simple things, O HAMiD!
 May thy penetrating conceptions never come under the evil eye!

  

LV.

When a superior entereth into contention with an inferior,
 Through folly, he exchangeth a shawl for a woollen blanket.

He who calleth another, the son of a dog, is, himself, a dog;
 For the son of a man affiliateth not another on a dog.

Than this, that at a dog thou shouldst fling a stone or a clod,
 It is far better, that thou shouldst throw him a cake of bread.

Now, out upon such like name and indication,
 That may set up for thee the staff of injury and ill!

The acts of youth cannot be practised in old age
 Therefore, old woman! with gilded paper ornament not thy head. [**]

Every proceeding harmonizeth with its own proper season--
 White hair suiteth not for side locks, nor for back ones either. [*+]

Plodding about in the world, is of no advantage whatever--
 Then what have I to do with the embraces of this old hag?

[p. 137]

Let not the inferior sit in the dwelling of the superior!
 Let not wool be vended at the market price of silk!

Since, unto such pure white admonitions, it giveth utterance,
 God forbid that the tongue of HAMiD should falter ever!

  

LVI.

Since thou art occupied in giving ear unto envy and covetousness,
 Tho' thou shouldst the possessor of treasures become, a poor beggar art thou.

Sovereignty and dominion shall follow thee, like a shadow,
 If thou art content, like the Huma, upon dry bones to live. [**]

Wherefore then, cast away life and faith, for the sake of the belly?
 Why, O why! dost thou, broken-down-asses, upon roses graze?

Like unto dogs, that circle round about the putrid carcass,
 Thus thou, for protection, to worthy and unworthy payest court.

Thy human nature will become that of the dog by this covetousness;
 Therefore, guard well thy integrity by patience, if thou art wise.

Greediness and envy will bring such calamities upon thee
 As may never have befallen any one--so hereafter wilt thou say.

Safety from Hell's burning flames, cannot be effected by this,
 That thou shouldst gay clothes don, eat delicacies, and extol thyself.

In this world, restrain thy violent passions by devotion and piety,
 If thou entertain the desire of salvation, in the world to come.

Since in love, thou endurest such an amount of affliction,
 Thou form of HAMiD! what a terrible calamity art thou!

[p. 138]

  

LVII.

God forbid that the mouths of affliction be opened on any one;
 For these mouths, in agony, are the very mouths of dragons!

That which, very speedily, levelleth the strong fortress with the plain,
 Is either the evil mouths of cannon, or the mouths of enmity.

Tremble at the words from a single mouth of the oppressed,
 Tho' a thousand tongues may offer prayers for thy long life.

When the blast of the sigh of the woe-begone reacheth them,
 It filleth, with ashes and dust, the mouths of flattery and deceit.

Whom the inflammation of deep-drawn sighs shall strike,
 The mouths of that person's wounds shall never, never close.

Have those folks made sweet with words those speaking mouths,
 Which, to charm, have the power of the mouth of the Messiah?

When it receiveth the blow of the injuries of the oppressed,
 The soundest mouth is more useless made, than a hole in a wall.

O, where are those tongues, so enchanting and bewitching,
 Which make the mouths of denial, in confession, to assent!

Now, thou hast laid the hand of silence upon thy tongue,
 Since thou, O mouth! didst feel the blow of the fist of reply.

The morning shall not dawn upon their night of sorrow,
 Against whom, every morning, mouths maledictions utter.

HAMiD hath thus torn to pieces the slanderous world,
 Like the hungry dogs, when they place their mouths to the game

  

LVIII.

Thou meltest me, every moment, in a hundred ways;
 But thou showest not, unto me, the tinge of attachment.

[p. 139]

All unprofitably, during the reign of thy tyrannical beauty,
 Anchorites bring under cultivation patience and austerity.

To the sight, become manifest, in every wrinkle of thy brow,
 The signs and portents of the torments of the judgment-day.

Who, with thy sanguinary eyes, may contract acquaintance,
 In their families will be woe and misery for evermore.

Whereas, I go about searching every portal and gateway,
 I seek the threshold of the door of thy dwelling to find.

How shall I bring myself before the sword of thy countenance,
 When the mirror, itself, recoileth from the edge of it?

Since, the "Night of Power" of thy curls became its portion, [**]
 What night-watching is fallen to the good fortune of the comb!

I, HAMiD, twist and twine myself about, unavailingly,
 Like unto a serpent on the treasure of the faces of the fair. [*+]

  

LIX.

Although on thy sitting and rising thou mayest be hailed "Thy sacrifice;" [*++]
 Yet, when thou sittest at another's door, thou sprawlest on the stake.

[p. 140]

Account not this lowliness humiliation; for it is, truly, wealth,
 That upon thine own mat, poor and distressed, thou reclinest.

Out upon that rising, and that sitting, though it be upon a throne,
 That ever sitteth down in enmity, and, in animosity, ariseth!

From the head of that masnad, [**] thou wilt contemptible arise,
 Shouldst thou press, like a burden, on the heads of the poor.

By pity and sympathy, strive to gain the hearts of people,
 If, like the taper, thou wouldst sit pre-eminent, all others above.

Wherefore dost thou not tremble at seeing the tears of the oppressed?
 Why sittest thou tranquil and undisturbed, on the face of the flood?

Regard him not, who neither himself consumeth, nor bestoweth on others,
 That thus, like unto a serpent, upon a hidden treasure reclineth.

This world is neither the abode of stability, nor of peaceful repose;
 Yet still, foolishly, thou standest fast at the bridge's head.

The ruby of honour and fame, O HAMiD! thou wilt acquire,
 If, in meekness, with the poor and humble, thou sittest in the dust.

  

LX.

Like as thou art all powerful over me, so is thy guardian;
 For although he is the dog of thy door, he is the master of me.

Though he may do me a thousand injuries, I will not return them--
 For thy sake, civility towards him, is expedient unto me.

[p. 141]

Whatever wrongs thy heart desireth, heap them upon my head;
 Since every thing improper of thine, is meet and proper for me.

Though thy coldness drew out the very breath from my body,
 What matter, since solicitude for thy love, is a substitute for it?

At the yearnings of this maddened heart, I am confounded;
 For I know not, in the least, what thing it desireth from thee.

Even in association, it weepeth on account of separation
 What wonderful dignity hath it been the heart's fortune to acquire!

Now, taking thy love into account; again, considering its tyranny;
 At one breath the heart is impetuous, and at another it is repentant.

May the Almighty keep the thoughts of thee, ever present in my breast!
 Then what mattereth it, whether thy face may present, or absent be?

Though HAMiD, from the beloved, desireth the hand of society;
 Yet what poor beggar hath a patent of nobility acquired?

Footnotes

^87:* A prelate, a doctor learned in the law, a venerable old man.

^87:+ A priest, a learned man.

^88:* The term "placing the hand on the hip," is similar to one's scratching his head, or putting his finger in his mouth, when entirely at a loss what to do.

^90:* See Rahman, Poem XIX., first note.

^90:+ The chikor is the bartavelle or Greek partridge; and the redness of its legs refers to the custom amongst Muhammadans of dyeing the hands and feet, by young people, on festive occasions; and is a symbol of joy.

^90:++ Potiphar's wife.

^91:* Referring to the hateful rule of the Mughal Emperors of Hindustan, from the days of Babar to the foundation of the Afghan monarchy by Ahmad Shah, which all Afghans cry out against.

^92:* Yaman--Arabia Felix, celebrated throughout the East for its tulips and its rubies.

^92:+ A country of Chinese Tartary, famous for its musk, and the beauty of its women.

^94:* The Persian Gulf.

^95:* See note at page <page 48>.

^96:* Oriental anime, or species of amber, which has the virtue of attracting straws.

^96:+ This refers particularly to Afghan mothers very often becoming the innocent cause of the death of their infants, from falling asleep whilst giving suck at night, and the nipple being in the infant's mouth, the weight of the breast itself suffocates the child.

^97:* Rustam--the Persian Hercules, and the hero of the celebrated epic poem of the Shah Namah by Firdousi.

^99:* The tulip is considered the frailest flower of the garden.

^99:+ Children, in Afghanistan, when they see wild geese, run after them crying out to give them a cup.

^99:++ The rose is said to be laughing when it is wet with the drops or tears of dew, which is unreasonable; for by the dew's moisture, the rose's garment, which, as a bud, was gathered together, becomes rent or full- blown.

^102:* It is supposed that the complaints and the curses of the oppressed are most effective at the dawn of day.

^102:+ See note at page <page 39>.

^103:* See note at page <page 29>.

^104:* The Father of Rivers--the Afghan name for the Indus.

^105:* See second note at page <page 26>.

^105:+ See note at page <page 80>.

^107:* Anointing the eyelids with antimony on festive occasions, and also to increase their blackness.

^107:+ Green is the mourning colour of Muhammadan countries.

^109:* See second note at page <page 26>.

^109:+ It is the custom to stick up a piece of a broken black pot in melon grounds, to avert the evil eye, in the same manner as they raise up scarecrows in England to keep the birds away.

^112:* Referring to public dancing in the East, the occupation of a certain class of females, and confined to them only.

^114:* The infernal tree mentioned in the Kur'an, the fruit of which is supposed to be the heads of devils.

^116:* The fixed, staring eye of the locust, is an emblem of immodest eyes, that never look down.

^118:* They say, in the East, that pearls are formed by the oyster receiving a single drop of rain-water in its shell.

^119:* Yaman--Arabia Felix, said to be famous for its rubies.

^119:+ See note, page <page 29>.

^122:* There is a certain fly or beetle that skims along the surface of the water, and is difficult to strike; hence the doing of any absurd or useless thing, is like attempting to strike it.

^123:* The name of a tribe of Tartars, residing to the north of Balkh, notorious robbers.

^123:+ From the pinnacle of heaven to the bottom of the uttermost abyss. According to Muhammadan theories, the earth is supported by a fish.

^123:++ Jamal Khan, of the tribe of Mohmand and clan of Khudrzi, about the year H. 1122 (A.D. 1711), during the governorship of Nasir Khan, [p. 124] Subah-dar of Kabul, was raised to the chieftainship of his clan, during which time he plundered and destroyed the village of Aesau, one of his own tribe. About this time, the marriage of Jalal, son of Jamal, was about to be celebrated; and the Subah-dar himself sent the sum of two thousand rupees towards its expenses. Aesau, however, bent upon taking revenge, and Jamal's clan being weak in proportion to his own, he sent his spies to bring him intelligence when his enemy should be occupied in his son's nuptial ceremonies, to fall upon him. On the night of the marriage, therefore, he assembled his friends and clansmen, and came upon Jamal's village. Jamul, though totally unprepared for such an attack, came out to meet his enemies; but having been badly wounded, he had to seek shelter within the walls of his own dwelling. On this, Aesau set it on fire; and Jamal, with his son and family, and the parties assembled at the celebration of the wedding, to the amount of upwards of eighty men, women, and children, were consumed. According to the Poet Hallman, Gul Khan was the only friend who stood by Jamal on this occasion, and was burnt to death along with the others; thus proving his friendship by the sacrifice of his life. Aesau was of the same tribe as Hamid himself; and the poem above seems to have been written in reply to one by Rahman, who takes the part of Jamal, by way of defending Aesau.

^125:* The name of an Indian tree (Ficus Indica.)

^126:* Alluding to Gul Khan and others, mentioned in preceding note.

^126:+ See note at page <page 123>.

^126:++ Referring to the hollowness of the heavens, as apparent to us.

^127:* Darweshes and Fakirs carry a bowl, in which they receive alms.

^127:+ See second note at page <page 26>.

^128:* What chemists term "killing mercury."

^129:* The name of one of the two grand divisions of the Afghan tribes, inhabiting the tracts about Peshawar, and to the north.

^129:+ Canaan.

^129:++ A plant bearing a red berry, the ranunculus or crowfoot.

^129: section The Turks or Scythians have generally fine countenances and large dark eyes, hence the Muhammadan poets make frequent use of the word to express beautiful youth of both sexes.

^129: section section There is an insect called an ant by the Afghans, which, on its wings appearing in the spring, comes forth and falls a prey to the birds.

^129:** The name of the negro mu'azzain or crier, who announced unto the people when Muhammad prayed.

^130:* See first note at page <page 129>.

^131:* Children in Afghanistan ride on a long reed for a horse, as they do in England upon a stick.

^131:+ That is to say, what is foreign is good.

^132:* A district of Chinese Tartary, famous for its musk.

^132:+ The composition of poetry is termed, stringing pearls.

^134:* A fabulous mountain, supposed to surround the world, and bound the horizon.

^135:* See note at page <page 48>.

^135:+ Figuratively, a tyrant. See note at page <page 91>.

^136:* Women in Afghanistan ornament their hair by sticking patches of gilt paper in it, on festive occasions in particular, if they do not possess ornaments more substantial, in the shape of golden ducats.

^136:+ The hair of young females is either plaited into numerous small plaits, or divided into three large ones, one on each side of the head, and the other hanging down the back.

^137:* The Huma is a fabulous bird of happy omen, peculiar to the East. It exists on dry bones; never alights; and it is supposed that every head it overshadows will, in time, wear a crown. See ATTILA, by the late G. P. R. James, Chap. VI.

^139:* Laylatu-l-kadr, or shab-i-kadr--the night of power--is the 27th of the month Ramazan, and is greatly revered on many accounts, but more particularly as being the night on which the Kur'an began to descend from heaven. On its anniversary, all orthodox Muhammadans employ themselves throughout the night in fervent prayer, imagining that every supplication to the Omnipotent, then put up, will be favourably received.

^139:+ Every buried treasure is supposed to be guarded by a serpent or a dragon.

^139:++ "I am thy sacrifice"--a respectful and endearing form of answer, in use amongst the Afghans, Persians, and others.

^140:* A carpet and cushion at the upper part of a room, and accounted the seat of honour; but it generally refers to the large cushion which kings sit on as a throne.

     
Selections from the Poetry of the Afghans, by H.G. Raverty, [1868], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 142]

  

KHUSHHAL KHAN, KHATTAK.

KHUSHhaL KHaN, the renowned chieftain of the powerful Afghan tribe of Khattak--alike a warrior and a poet--was born in the year 1022 of the Hijrah (A.D. 1613). Shah-baz Khan, his father, having received a wound in a battle with the Yusufzis--one of the most numerous and powerful of all the Afghan tribes--from the effects of which he shortly after died, Khushhal, who had also been severely wounded in the head and knee, in the same battle, in the year H. 1050 (A.D. 1640), with the unanimous consent and approbation of his relations and friends, became chief of his tribe. His father's fief was confirmed to him by the Mughal Emperor, Shah Jahan, together with the charge of protecting the royal road from Attak, on the Indus, to Pes'hawar; and other duties were entrusted to him by that sovereign, in whose estimation Khushhal stood high. He accompanied Sult###804###an Murad Baksh, the son of that monarch, on his expedition to Badakhshan in 1645, and was also engaged in other wars of that period.

On the death of Shah Jahan, Khushhal continued to serve his son and successor, Aurangzeb, in the same capacity as formerly; but after some time, through the machinations of his enemies, among whom was Amir Khan, Subah-dar, or governor of the province of Kabul, he fell under the displeasure, or rather suspicion of the monarch, and was sent prisoner to the strong hill fortress of Gwalior, in Upper India, where he remained in captivity about seven years; and there it was that many of the following poems were written. At length, at the recommendation of Muhabbat Khan, the second of that name, Aurangzeb released

[p. 143]

[paragraph continues] Khushhal, and sent him, along with the noble just referred to--who had been lately appointed Subah-dar of Kabul--for the purpose of settling the affairs of the Pes'hawar district, which had fallen into a very distracted state. But the iron had entered the soul of Khushhal, and on reaching his native country, he kept as retired as possible; ceased to hold any intercourse with the governor of the province, and other subordinate officers; and declined rendering any assistance to the troops of the Emperor.

Khushhal's tribe had been long at feud with many of the other Afghans around Pes'hawar, amongst whom were the Yusufzis--fighting against whom, as before mentioned, his father lost his life--and was generally engaged in hostilities with one or other of them; but with the Afridis, who were also powerful, the Khattaks maintained a close alliance. Matters, at length, went so far between the Khattak chieftain and the Mughal authorities, as to produce an open rupture. Khushhal now girded his loins with the sword of courage; and in concert with Ae-mal Khan, and Dar-ya Khan, chiefs of the Afridis, carried on, for seven or eight years, a determined and destructive war with the Mughals, in which the latter were generally defeated.

The whole of the Afghan tribes from Banu to Jalalabad, seeing the success of their countrymen over the hated Mughals, had been drawn, by degrees, into the confederacy, which now aimed at no less than the total expulsion of the Mughals from Afghanistan. But the Yusufzis, who could have aided so effectually, held aloof; mid would render no assistance to their countrymen, through enmity to the Khattaks, notwithstanding that Khushhal went in person, even as far as the Suwat valley, to endeavour to instil into them some of his own and his confederates' patriotic spirit, but without effect--they were deaf to the voice of the charmer. These events he refers to, in the first of the following poems, written on that occasion.

[p. 144]

Affairs at Pes'hawar had assumed such a serious aspect, that Aurangzeb considered it necessary to appear in person on the scene; and for about two years he remained encamped at Attak, superintending the prosecution of the war; and that wily monarch, finding force unavailable in such a difficult country, began to try the effect of gold. In this he met with the success he desired; and some of the petty clans of the confederacy became fascinated with the gold of the Mughals, and submitted to the government; whilst others of Khushhal's friends began either to desert him, or to give him cause to doubt their sincerity; and Ae-mal Khan and Dar-ya Khan, his most powerful, and most trusty supporters, having previously been removed, by death, from the scene, such an effect was produced upon the fine spirit of Khushhal--as the following pages testify--that he became disgusted, and sought to find peace in retirement.

At length, he resigned the chieftainship of the Khattak tribe, in favour of his eldest son Ashraf, and devoted himself to books and literature. On Ashraf's becoming chief of the clan, Bahram, another son, who appears to have been always regarded with aversion by his father for his degenerate acts, succeeded in gaining over a considerable party to his side, and appeared bent upon bringing misfortune upon his brother. They met in battle several times; and on one occasion, Bahram was taken prisoner, but succeeded, by his artfulness and duplicity, in exciting the pity of his injured brother, who set him at liberty. Khushhal, well aware of the disposition of Bahram, was highly incensed with Ashraf for allowing him to escape so easily, and, as it turned out, not without reason; for no sooner was Bahram free, than he again commenced his intrigues against Ashraf; and at length, in the year n. 1093 (A.D. 1681), he succeeded in betraying him into the hands of the Mughals. Aurangzeb sent him prisoner to the strong fortress of Bejapur, in Southern India, where, after lingering in captivity for about ten years, he died. A further account of this unfortunate chieftain, will

[p. 145]

be found prefixed to his poems; for, like other sons of Khushhal, as well as numbers of his descendants, he was a poet as well as his father.

Afzal Khan, the young son of Ashraf, now took up arms in his father's cause, and was installed in the chieftainship by his grandfather, who was still regarded as their natural and rightful chief, by the majority of the tribe; but the youth and inexperience of Afzal--for he was only seventeen years of age--could not yet cope with the wily Bahram, who was also aided and upheld by the Mughals. Khushhal, therefore, taking Afzal's youth into consideration, and in order to prevent his clansmen from shedding the blood of each other, interfered between the contending parties, fearing that the tribe might hesitate to obey one of such inexperience, and allowed Bahram to enjoy the chieftainship, advising Afzal to bide his time, and not lengthen his father's captivity by opposition for the present. Afzal, therefore, retired with his family into the friendly country of the Afridis.

Not content with this success in all his schemes, Bahram would not allow his aged father to end his days in peace. Several times he made attempts upon his life. He once despatched his son Mukarram Khan, with a body of troops, to endeavour to secure the old man's person. Mukarram went, as directed, against his grandfather; but the brave old chieftain, who had attained his 77th year, having discovered the party from the place of his retreat, advanced to meet them with his drawn sword in his hand, at the same time--to quote the words of Afzal Khan, his grandson, already alluded to, who subsequently wrote a history of these events--exclaiming, "Whoever are men amongst you, come to the sword, if you dare; but veneration for the aged chieftain was so predominant in every one's breast, that no one would make any attempt to lay hands on him;" and Mukarram, ashamed, returned as he went. Bahram, his father, enraged at his son's failure, ordered him to

[p. 146]

return, with directions to kill Khushhal with his own hand, if he should refuse to deliver himself up. On Mukarram's return, to carry out this inhuman order of a degenerate son, the old chief again advanced from his place of shelter, and taking his stand upon the crest of the hill, with his good sword in his hand, again dared them to approach; and in this manner is said to have remained on the watch for several days. But no one amongst the party had either the inclination or the courage to face him, whom they still regarded as their natural chief.

Bahram, however, thinking the prey in his toils, had despatched a message to the Mughal governor at Pes'hawar, to the effect that the old lion was at length at bay; and requested him to send a sufficient escort to take charge of him, and conduct him to Pes'hawar. Khushhal, however, having been warned, as soon as night set in, made his escape, after two of Bahram's party had lost their lives, and by the next morning succeeded in reaching the boundary of the Afridi tribe--who had always been his friends--a distance of 90 miles from Akorrah, the scene of the occurrences just related.

Khushhal took up his residence in the Afridi country, and returned no more to the home of his fathers, which he loved so well. He died as he had lived, free, among the mountains of his native land, in the 78th year of his age. Before taking his departure from a world, in which he had drunk so deeply of the bitter cup of treachery and unfaithfulness, he particularly charged those few of his children and friends, who had remained faithful to him through all his trials and misfortunes, that they should bury him where--to use his own words--"the dust of the hoofs of the Mughal cavalry might not light upon his grave;" and that "they should carefully conceal his last resting-place, lest the Mughals might seek it out, and insult the ashes of him, at whose name, whilst in life, they quailed; and by whose sword, and that of his

[p. 147]

clansmen, their best troops had been scattered like chaff before the gale." A third request was, that in case any of his faithful children should succeed, at any time, in laying hands upon Bahram the Malignant, they should, divide his body into two parts, and should burn one half at the head of his grave, and the other at the foot. He was buried, accordingly, at a place named I-surraey, a small hamlet in the Khattak mountains, where his tomb may still be seen; and, according to his dying request, his last resting-place was kept concealed, till all danger of insult from the Mughals had passed away.

Khushhal Khan was the father of fifty-seven sons, besides several daughters; but, with the exception of four or five of the former, they do not appear to have been particularly worthy of their parent's affection.

Khushhal, from all accounts, was a voluminous author, and is said to have composed about three hundred and fifty different works. This, however, must be greatly exaggerated; nevertheless, he is the author of numerous works, which I have myself seen, both in Persian, and in the Pus'hto, or Afghan, consisting of Poetry, Medicine, Ethics, Religious Jurisprudence, Philosophy, Falconry, etc., together with an account of the events of his own chequered life. It is greatly to be regretted, however, that his descendants, after his death, had not the opportunity to collect all his writings together; and the upshot is, that many are known only by name. Amongst those which have thus been lost or dispersed is, I fear, the autobiography I have referred to.

Some of Khushhal's poetical effusions, written during his exile in India, and whilst struggling against the power of Aurangzeb, will, I think, be considered highly of, even in the form of a literal translation, and in an English dress, as coming from the pen of an Afghan chief, cotemporary with the times of our Charles I., evincing, as they do, a spirit of patriotism, and love of hone and

[p. 148]

country, not usual in the Oriental heart, but such as we might look for in the Scottish Highlander, or Swiss mountaineer, of bygone days, whom the hardy Afghans strongly resemble. A more extended account of Khushhal's writings, and those of his descendants, will be found in the Introductory Chapter to my Afghan Grammar, published last year, together with an account of the Afghans and their literature.

Up to the time of Khushhal's chieftainship, the bounds of the Khattak country were not well defined; that is to say, each family of the tribe had no fixed lands allotted to them. Khushhal caused a survey to be made of all available land; fixed the boundaries; entered them in a register; and, according to the number of each man's family, assigned a corresponding quantity of land for cultivation. This arrangement is still in force, and hitherto has not, that I am aware of, been deviated from; and many small towers of stone, erected to mark the different boundaries, still remain.

     
Selections from the Poetry of the Afghans, by H.G. Raverty, [1868], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 149]

  

THE POEMS

  

OF

  

KHUSHHAL KHAN, KHATTAK.

  

I.

AN ODE TO SPRING.

FROM whence hath the spring again returned unto us,
 Which hath made the country round a garden of flowers?

There are the anemone and sweet basil, the lily and thyme;
 The jasmine and white rose, the narcissus and pomegranate blossom.

The wild flowers of spring are manifold, and of every hue;
 But the dark-red tulip, above them all, predominateth.

The maidens place nosegays of flowers in their bosoms;
 The youths, too, fasten bouquets of them in their turbans.

Come now, musician! apply the bow to thy violin:
 Bring out the tone and the melody of every string!

And thou, cupbearer! bring us full and overflowing cups,
 That I may become fraught with wine's inebriety!

The Afghan youths have again dyed red their hands,
 Like as the falcon dyeth his talons in the blood of the quarry.

They have made rosy their bright swords with gore:
 The tulip-bed hath blossomed, even in the heat of summer.

[p. 150]

Ae-mal Khan and Dar-ya Khan--from death preserve them! [**]
 Were neither of them, at fault, when opportunity occurred.

They dyed red the valley of Khaibar, with the blood of the foe:
 On Karrapah, [*+] too, they poured forth war's din and tumult.

From Karrapah, even unto Bajawrr, [*++] both plain and mountain,
 Time after time, as from an earthquake, quaked and shook.

It is now the fifth year, since in this neighbourhood,
 Every day heareth the clashing of glittering swords.

Since I arrived in this part, [* section] I have become a nonentity--
 Either I am despicable, or this people are infamous grown.

I cry out unto them, "Troops, troops," until I am weary;
 But deaf to all, they neither say "Die," nor "Thy sacrifice." [* section section]

When the state of the Yusufzis became known unto me,
 Lowaghar was then my better place, not Damghar.

The dogs of the Khattaks are far better than the Yusufzis,
 Though, in disposition, the Khattaks are more worthless than dogs.

The whole of the other Afghans, from Kandahar unto Attak,
 In honour's cause, both secretly and openly, are one.

See how many battles have been fought on all sides;
 Yet still, amongst the Yusufzis, there is no sense of shame.

[p. 151]

The first fight was at the higher back of Mount Tatarah, [**]
 Where forty thousand Mughals were scattered like chaff.

When their sisters and daughters fell into the bonds of the Afghans,
 With horses and camels, elephants and baggage, string after string.

The second battle was with Mir Husain in the Doabah, [*+]
 When his head was crushed, like that of a venemous snake.

After that again, was the affair at the fort of Nohs'hairah, [*++]
 When from the Mughals I extracted my own inebriation.

And then came Jaswant Singh and Shujaaeat Khan,
 Of whom, Ae-mal Khan plucked up the roots at Gandab.

The sixth was over Mukarram Khan and Shamsher Khan,
 Both of whom, at Khapash, Ae-mal scattered to the winds.

These are the greatest triumphs that I hold in recollection;
 But the lesser ones, in all directions, who shall compute?

Up to the present time, victory hath been always with us;
 And for the future, upon God, is our dependence placed.

A year hath passed since Aurangzeb is encamped against us,
 Disordered and perplexed in appearance, and wounded in heart.

It is now year after year, that his nobles fall in battle;
 But his armies swept away, who shall number them!

The treasures of India have been spread out before us:
 The red gold muhurs have been engulphed in the hills.

[p. 152]

It would not have entered one's head in eighteen guesses,
 That such events would e'er have happened in these parts.

Still Aurangzeb's malevolence hath not a whit diminished,
 Though the curses of his father it before drew down. [**]

For this reason, also, no one can place dependence on him:
 He is malignant and perfidious; a breaker of his word.

For this state of things, no other termination can be seen,
 Than that the Mughals be annihilated, or the Afghans undone.

If this, which is beheld, be the revolutions of destiny--
 If in this be the will of the Almighty, the time is come.

Fate revolveth not in the same fashion at all times
 Now 'tis propitious to the rose; now favourable to the thorn.

At a period so pregnant with honour and glory, as the present,
 In what manner do these base and recreant Afghans act? [*+]

There is no deliverance in any thing, save the sword:
 Afghans, who nourish any other idea than this, are lost, indeed.

The Afghans are far superior to the Mughals at the sword,
 Were but the Afghans, in intellect, a little discreet.

If the different tribes would but support each other,
 Kings would have to bow down in prostration before them.

But whether it be concord or strife, or folly or wisdom,
 The affairs of every one are in the hands of the Almighty.

[p. 153]

Let us see what the Afridis, Mohmands, and Shinwaris will do;
 For the Mughals are now lying encamped at Nangrahar. [**]

I alone, amongst the Afghans, grieve for our honour and renown;
 Whilst the Yusufzis, at their ease, are tilling their fields.

They who now act so dishonourably, and so shamelessly,
 Will, hereafter, the upshot of their own acts perceive.

In my poor judgment, death is more preferable than life,
 When existence can no longer, with honour, be enjoyed.

In this world, he will not always remain with life;
 But the memory of KHUSHhaL will long, long endure!

It was the first of the Third Sister, [*+] in the year of Ghafu [*++]
 That I, whilst at Barmawul, indited these lines.

  

II.

What wonderfully delicious wine is this,
 Which the cupbearer, with welcome, presents!

The laughing of the bud in the parterre were impossible,
 Did not the zephyr, every morning, over it pass.

Its counsel regarding the nightingale was this,
 That the morn should the rosebud's garment rend. [* section]

[p. 154]

Appreciate thou the value of Philomel, O rose,
 Although thou bloomest in this thy beauty now!

Since his cure dependeth upon the object of his heart,
 Of the lover's disease, what do physicians know?

Save the beloved-one's beaming countenance, imagine not
 That KHUSHhaL will be, with any other face, content.

  

III.

Spring hath returned: the narcissus in the garden wantoneth,
 And the breeze of the morning, the spikenard disordereth.

For five short days, the rose of the parterre will bloom;
 But on the sixth, it scattereth its existence to the winds.

The enamoured nightingale layeth its head at the rose's feet,
 As the Brahman bendeth, in adoration, his idol before.

Acquire thou humility from the example of the cypress,
 That with such loftiness, showeth this much lowliness.

The KARLaRRNAEY [**] hath quaffed no other wine whatever--
 The whole of this inebriety proceedeth from creation's cup. [*+]

  

IV.

My beloved is offended: would there were any one who would conciliate her!
 Arise quickly, O mediator! for my heart is grieved on her account.

[p. 155]

He will be constantly plunging into the deep seas of injustice,
 Who rendereth up his heart unto the heart-ravishers of these days.

What a vile world it is! what are its customs! what its ways!
 It abandoneth, altogether, the starving, and giveth invitation to the cloyed!

Punished they cannot be; but would I could lay hands, as I wish, on them;
 For 'tis those sable locks of thine, that are ever of hearts making theft.

The tyranny of thy dark tresses is by no means hidden from view--
 The impassioned-one, who may be powerful, soon her tyranny displayeth.

Thou that givest thyself unto the tender passion, accept in love
 The taunts and reproaches, that the world, upon lovers, ever cast.

Thy blood-thirsty locks have not made me, only, desolate;
 And many more, like unto me, forlorn, will they, even yet, destroy.

Wouldst thou, this one so arrogant of her beauty see, draw near!
 Alas! towards KHUSHhaL, her coquetry she openly displayeth.

  

V.

Wherefore doth Aurangzeb his throne and crown adorn?
 For death will assail, and lay waste the both of them.

His evil name only will remain behind in the world;
 Knowing, as he doth, whether he as Kasra, or as Hujaj acteth. [**]

[p. 156]

O'erwhelmed in grief, I know not of festival or feast,
 Though the whole people of Dilhi make gladness and joy.

All the water went to the eyes, and the heart's fire blazed out--
 Alas, how can any one, in such a state of mind as this exist!

They turn pale when they lay finger upon my pulse;
 Then, by what means, can the physicians, my disorder cure?

Separation lacerateth my heart in the same manner,
 As the falcon rendeth the partridge and the quail.

When two friends may be separated by a distant land,
 How desirous God maketh them of a mere salutation!

My tears are produced through the emotions of the heart,
 Like as fire expelleth the moisture from the roasting meat.

Alas, every arrow that is discharged from fatality's bow,
 Destiny maketh poor KHUSHhaL'S heart the butt of!

  

VI.

Thou wast saying, "Grieve not any more; for I am thine, and thou art mine:"
 Whether thou hast falsely or truly spoken, thou hast, indeed, given me life again.

What a lovely calamity thou art! a charmer, incomparable, art thou!
 Would that there were not this defect, that thou hadst not such a cruel heart!

Should the whole universe, in every direction, be with the lovely filled;
 Even then, it would be astonishing, if one were found beautiful like thee.

[p. 157]

With so many victims slain, even yet thou showiest no pity or regret:
 But what matter, though the executioner shed blood a hundred times over?

Since out of thy garden, or thy parterre, I beg for a rose from thee,
 Shouldst thou but a straw on me bestow, yet I, as a rose, receive it.

As long as I may exist, I am, indeed, the captive of those ringlets,
 In every hair of which, hundreds of hearts will ever be enthralled.

Whether old, or whether young, all are distracted about thee:
 There is not a person in the town, that is not enamoured of thee.

The cypress-tree behold! it very soon ceaseth to be looked upon,
 When thou, with this stature and figure, through the garden trippest.

The prospect of Heaven to come, is bliss to both monk and priest;
 But KHUSHhaL hath gained Paradise, at once, in meeting thee.

  

VII.

Again the minstrel's rebeck toucheth the heart profoundly;
 For it discovereth new and fresh strains of melodious harmony.

Leave the monk in the monastery's nook! I will to the garden;
 For the flowers of spring instruct me in righteousness' ways.

Beggars have much anxiety about filling their bellies;
 And kings should be solicitous regarding dominion and realm.

If this be not the effect of my good fortune, what is it then,
 That against the guardian she crieth out to this degree?

How much more will be the extent of the love of her constancy,
 When, in injustice and inconstancy, such favour she bestoweth?

[p. 158]

Within this city, the juice of the grape is thus so openly sold;
 Because the censor, himself, favoureth the bibbers of wine.

From thy coldness to me, I grow both joyful and melancholy,
 Like unto one that giveth thanks to, and yet complaineth of another.

If to love to look upon the pretty creatures be aught of sinfulness,
 Then KHUSHhaL committeth iniquity, all his life long.

  

VIII.

When towards his father a son acteth perfidiously,
 After what manner, to others, will he sincerity show?

See, what further perfidy must be within his heart,
 When the hypocrite maketh avowal of his own misdeeds.

Neither will I pardon the enormities of the degenerate,
 Nor will the Almighty forgive the fallen angel his sins.

All these minor hills are as nothing: desirous am I,
 That my God, betwixt us, would place even Kaf [**] itself.

The conduct of his own son is best known to his father;
 Then why will people commend the degenerate unto me?

Neither can any liar utter falsehoods like him,
 Nor can any one equal him in cunning and deceit.

There are both a thousand varieties of vain lies in his heart,
 And a thousand vaunts of morality upon his tongue.

That I cherished, and brought up such an undutiful son,
 It was, alas! for this, that he should, against me, rise up!

[p. 159]

Let me not, indeed, cast eyes upon him whilst I live;
 And after death, let him not dare my grave to approach.

Sorrow and grief shall, whilst living, leave his heart,
 If fate, unto KHUSHhaL, shall due justice grant.

  

IX.

Every sick person that is impatient with his physician,
 Bringeth, if thou but consider, affliction upon himself.

The fish existeth in the river; but should it come out thereof,
 Can it be comfortable, or at ease, upon the dry land?

Though the bat hideth himself from the light of the sun,
 In what manner doth the sun sustain injury therefrom?

'Tis the nature of dogs to howl at the sight of the moon;
 And thus, by their yelping, bring disgrace on themselves.

The dung-beetle is distressed by the flower's perfume;
 Because its existence is sustained by offensiveness.

That the prophets are evil in the sight of the infidel,
 Is, because whatever they do, is with the Devil's advice.

Unfortunate, indeed, is he, who acteth on his enemy's counsel:
 Can an opponent and an enemy ever give good advice?

The heron, on the river's bank, is with thirst parched;
 For every penurious creature followeth his own avaricious ways.

With the precepts of the Kur'an, Faruk is acquainted:
 It pointeth not out the right path to Bu-Lhab, or to Bu-Jhal. [**]

[p. 160]

The purity of the Musalman, O KHUSHhaL! is possible;
 But no ablutions, no purifications, can make the Gabr [**] clean.

  

X.

Through sorrow at the poor-spiritedness of the Afghans,
 I have abandoned greatness, and taken meanness in hand.

Had this much even been gained in the matter, it were good--
 Had I wreaked upon the recreant my full meed of revenge.

From the time when the jewel of my honour became broken,
 I have not left, for a moment, my eyes free from tears.

That pearl came not into my hands, after all my trouble,
 And, therefore, my boat I have drawn up on the sea-shore.

This waist of mine, that in resistance was a mountain,
 Through chagrin and disappointment, unto the Mughal I bent.

But let good fortune once commence again to aid me,
 That it may relieve me from the weight of affliction's load

This misery of mine is not to be compared to any other grief,
 Although I may have experienced a thousand woes and sorrows.

The back of fortune, and. the world's, both are turned upon me;
 Hence, through sorrow, I turned my face from all, the Mughal unto.

Were it in my power, or were it mine own free-will,
 I would not, even two paces, towards them advance.

I am obliged to hearken to crooked words from the mouths of those,
 Unto whom, in my lifetime, I never before a straight one gave.

[p. 161]

The outcries of my own people, and of strangers, affect me,
 Notwithstanding I used, even from a whisper, to screen myself.

I am now ashamed of those proud and boastful words,
 That, before every one, were wont to issue from my lips.

A hundred reproaches and indignities are heaped upon me,
 Who ever guarded myself from detraction and reproach.

'Tis for this reason the elephant streweth dust upon his head, [**]
 That I made him acquainted with KHUSHhaL'S sorrows.

  

XI.

If, for once only, she will show her face from the veil,
 She will take the diploma of beauty from the sun.

The tulip shall borrow bloom from her countenance;
 The hyacinth will grow furious at the sight of her curls.

Wherefore Both the world accuse fortune thus falsely?
 'Tis she, that with her eyes, hath desolated the world.

Either those orbs of hers are red from wine's effects,
 Or some one hath roused her from sleep, unseasonably.

She quaffeth the blood of hearts in the place of wine;
 Then again, taketh roasted hearts, as au incitement to more.

The special death of the slaughtered by the hand of the beloved,
 Is that they may enter Paradise, without rendering account.

Let my heart be a compass, and let it never vary or turn
 In any other direction, save the altar of thine eyebrows unto.

[p. 162]

Do not be so overjoyed, O KHUSHhaL! at all her vows;
 For, from the bubble, no one hopeth for any constancy.

  

XII.

O zephyr of the morn! draw near unto the parterre;
 For the flowers are overjoyed, in expectation of blooming.

What doth the hermit know, as to what thing love is?
 Wherefore speakest thou to the owl, the garden concerning?

Though the monks perform their devotions five times a day,
 I am ever prostrate, in devotion, unto the Giver of good.

As much as I behold thee, I do not become satiated,
 Notwithstanding I gaze so intently upon thy face.

Again, indeed, place thou a scar on the anemone's heart,
 When thou roamest in the garden, so joyous and gay.

Anger and kindness I perceive between thine eyebrows:
 The tablet of thy forehead thou hast placed to be perused.

Sometimes, thou raisest strife; at others, showest kindness--
 Simple hearted that I am, at such skill, I grow amazed.

If thou hast set thine heart upon my death, I too, say,
 That thy tyranny hath brought me to death's door nigh.

  

XIII.

Draw near, and behold him now, with a clod beneath his head,
 Who could not sleep upon a bed, without a pillow of feathers!

This, which they call the transient world, hath no existence, and is naught;
 For this reason, O foolish man! 'tis hideous in the sight of the wise.

[p. 163]

This world is a scabby sheep--then what good is there in keeping it?
 The shepherd, when he findeth out its scabbiness, expelleth it from the flock.

Is this a tempest or hail-storm, that both standing corn and stacks also go?
 Out upon such a corn-field as this, since an ear of corn can not be found!

With these eyes of mine, I have beheld the noble and massive structures of kings,
 Who coveted the world's dominion, but left them, all at once, behind!

A hundred thousand squadrons assemble, and collect the treasures of the world;
 Be as Sanjar [**] for a few generations, and then neither thou nor thy race remain.

Thy house is on the face of a flood, and this thy contemptible idea is still worse;
 For no one would there his dwelling make, that it should be swept by the flood away.

[p. 164]

Shouldst thou become a Shahdad [**] in the world, still calamity will remember thee;
 And if here thou a Paradise preparest, of what profit is such an Aden [*+] to thee?

He carried away along with him, this wealth ephemeral, O young man!
 Who diffused it broadcast; but not they, that heaped it up for themselves.

I have beheld fortune's practices--its different usages and ways--
 It clambereth unto thee with difficulty; but like a stone from a mountain, rolleth away!

If thou art foolish and imprudent, like unto Mir-baz [*++] pursue it;
 But if wise and prudent, like unto KHUSHhaL, from it flee away!

  

XIV.

These dark waving curls, they are thine, thou dear one, so beautiful, so gay!
 Black narcissuses are those eyes of thine, thou dear one, so beautiful, so gay!

When thou gayest me a kiss, I became intoxicated, beyond computation;
 For like unto red wine are thy lips, thou dear one, so beautiful, so gay!

Now that I have with mine eyes gazed on this, thy lovely cheek,
 I know that it is the tulip, thou dear one, so beautiful, so gay!

[p. 165]

They, who murmur and complain unto others, of thy tyranny,
 Are faithless and inconstant too, thou dear one, so beautiful, so gay!

Free of grief, how can he sleep--in tranquillity how shall he be,
 Who is separated from thee? thou dear one, so beautiful, so gay!

He only will receive thy kisses, on whom thy affections may be,
 Tho' many are enraptured with thee, thou dear one, so beautiful, so gay!

Thou wreakest injustice on me, then sayest, "This is not done by me"--
 Then whose act is it, if not thine? thou dear one, so beautiful, so gay!

Thou sayest unto KHUSHhaL, "There are others far prettier than I:"
 Can there be one, than thee more lovely? thou dear one, so beautiful, so gay!

  

XV.

Wine's intoxication soon cometh, and as quickly disappeareth;
 But the eternal inebriation leaveth not the inebriated one.

Tho', in the world, my name is become notorious for debauchery,
 Still I will not abandon the ways of the bibbers of wine.

Though the king may cast him into prison, he will not grieve;
 For the liberty of the free is from the beginning of time.

There is neither friendship nor relationship: all is deceit, I find,
 Since I became acquainted with the ways and usages of mankind.

I am happy in hope of future joy, tho' now in sorrow plunged;
 For the day ever followeth, in rotation, after the darkness of night.

The pearl of our yearnings lieth immersed in ocean's depths;
 And after it, the divers plunge continually, into its dark abyss.

[p. 166]

That fish, who may perceive danger from the sharp hook,
 From the bottom to the shore, from prudence, will never look.

The thoughts of the lover's heart are like unto the deep, deep sea,
 The billows of which, at times, rage in fury; at others, calmly sleep.

Affection for the beloved, from KHUSHhaL'S heart, will never depart:
 It is like unto the love of the idolater, for the idol of his worship.

  

XVI.

From out of the clear, azure flask,
 O cupbearer! bring thou unto me
 A full goblet of that potent wine,
 The remedy for grief, the consoler in woe.

Speak not of the tributes of the world!
 They cannot compare with one cup of wine:
 Then, O censor, leave me and the wine, withal!
 Tho' thereby my house should devastated be.

Become thou the beggar at the tavern's door,
 If along with the crown, thou dominion seek:
 The mart of the wine-bibbers is crowded,
 From this extensive sale of wine.

Turning from the idol-temple to the monastery,
 Is both an absurd and a useless act:
 From the cupbearer, then take thou the glass;
 For therein is much gladness and joy.

O cupbearer! let me ever behold thee--
 Thou of the moon-like brow and sunny face!
 Bring the crystal cup, to overflowing full,
 And satisfy the yearnings of KHUSHhaL!

[p. 167]

  

XVII.

Tho' the miser's house may contain the water of immortality;
 Still, like unto the deadliest poison, is its effect on me.

Moses possessed nothing whatsoever, but one rod alone:
 Karun had boundless wealth, and verily, calamity befell him. [**]

He who hath riches, with it hath vexation and misfortune mix'd up;
 Hence the wise so act, that they may not their troubles increase.

The duration of the rose; the world's wealth; the mean man's friendship;
 These three or four things are all inconstant and transitory.

He, who may neither possess modesty nor virtue, genius nor understanding,
 Regard not his wealth, nor his beauty, nor his ancestral descent.

The wise man is in utter misery, whilst the fool reveleth in pleasure--
 And well, indeed, may the world be amazed at such occurrences as these.

That he should continue happy all his life, and grief never assail him,
 No one, into the world hath brought, a safe-conduct, such as this.

This is the way with fortune--some it maketh happy--some miserable;
 And however clear now, the mirror will become clouded .

Wherefore, then, trouble thyself! Be rejoiced at this, O KHUSHhaL!
 That he, who hath neither riches nor wealth, hath neither pilgrimage to perform, nor taxes to pay.

[p. 168]

  

XVIII.

Very many persons within my recollection,
 Have come, and passed, like the wind away.

They, indeed, arrive and depart, in such a way,
 That they appear to have no tarrying place at all.

It is an astonishing, and a vast workshop this,
 That the Great Master hath organized, and set up.

Cast thine eyes upon the bubble in the stream!
 What is it? and what its origin and its base?

Such art thou too, if thou canst understand:
 An excellent example is demonstrated to thee.

Concerning thyself, thou knowest nothing:
 Alas! alas! verily, thou knowest naught.

What are all thy grief and misery about?
 And why becomest thou again overjoyed?

Since it is so very hard, O KHUSHhaL!
 Is this thine heart, or is it but a lump of steel?

  

XIX.

Like unto the wind, every moment, life passeth away!
 Let then every man have the remembrance of death ever before him!

Since the foundation of this life of his, is based upon the air,
 Upon existence such as this, what reliance can be placed?

The dust of man is leavened with the water of mortality,
 By the hand of Omnipotence kneaded, in the space of forty days. [**]

[p. 169]

Both saints and prophets have, alike, gone down into the tomb--
 Thou wouldst say, forsooth, that they had never existed at all.

If thou considerest it well, the term of life here is nothing:
 No one hath attained in it the object of his desires and hopes.

If thou, indeed, seek life eternal, then I say unto thee,
 War, for ever, with the infidels of the lusts of the flesh.

The prudent traveller, whose journey lieth before him,
 Taketh provision with him, according to the length of the road.

Come, sever thine heart, O KHUSHhaL! from all extraneous things;
 And in the hope of meeting Him, let it rejoice always!

  

XX.

The Almighty gave into my arms--and I am under obligation to the mediator [**]--
 The fair-faced one, with the ruby lips, and the flowing sable tresses.

The beloved is kind and affectionate, and the consoler in every sorrow:
 Should the guardian come, what will he do? neither grief nor concern have I.

Let them consume upon it, as a charm, to ward off evil from thy face;
 For thy love is like unto fire, and thy lovers like unto wild rue [*+] are.

[p. 170]

These are not thy cheeks, nor are these thy dark flowing ringlets:
 They're the fresh fibrils of the spikenard, that have fallen two roses upon.

I follow in her pursuit, in the hope that I may obtain, even one look;
 But she casteth not her eyes behind; and, thus, along before me goeth.

If this much of thy affection is not good fortune, what is it then?
 That when thou, upon KHUSHhaL, KHATTAK, smilest, the jealous weep.

  

XXI.

Unto the old man, who sigheth after youthfulness, say--
 What is this? laughest thou at thy beard, old man?

Since in a year, it will have both youth and age,
 Than the fate of man, that of the wild rue is better.

At times, he becometh so sated at table, that he cannot eat;
 At others, he rolleth his eyes upon it, with greediness and voracity.

In their wishes, and in their words, and also in their proceedings,
 The people of the world are doubtful and timid of each other.

With beard now grown white, why should I have fear of death;
 When friends, in their prime, with beards black, have gone before me?

Him, under whose sway the whole of the earth's surface was,
 Draw near, and behold now, in the surface of the earth!

[p. 171]

This world's folks are like unto the moving sands, [**] if thou but consider;
 For, in truth, they roll over, and upset each other, in the very same way.

With these eyes of mine, I have beheld the dread furnace of fate--
 I KHUSHhaL, myself, whom, like unto dried up verdure, it consumeth.

  

XXII.

Her sweet face took from me all thoughts of the wild white rose:
 Her ringlets eradicated all consideration of the musk of China.

The curls of the pagan beauty became a cord about my neck: [*+]
 A thousand thanks, that she of my religion and faith divested me.

Although the folks offer up prayers for my patience and resignation,
 Affection hath despoiled me of the "Amen," unto these supplications.

Save the lips of the beloved, I take no other name upon my tongue;
 For love hath abstracted from me all other memory and recollection.

My heart, on that day became disgusted with my own life,
 When the hard-hearted one took it, entirely, from me.

By what law, indeed, hath she deprived me of sleep and repose,
 That I weep and lament, and sigh and bewail, all the night long?

Her two eyes are a falcon, and her waving locks are the king-feathers:
 The falcon pounced on, and carried from me the pigeon of my heart.

[p. 172]

At her coming, she used to bring with her comfort and consolation;
 And by her departure, she would rob me of all tranquillity soever.

The flowers of the parterre hang down their heads, and this they say--
 "The heart-ravisher hath appropriated to herself all admiration."

I was saying, I will consider, even yet, of some remedy for it;
 When poor KHUSHhaL, wholly withdrew his lacerated heart from me.

  

XXIII.

The skirt of fortune and prosperity cannot be seized by force!
 Is the blind man without reproach, if he apply antimony to his eyes?

What is wealth, indeed? It is like unto a beautiful bride,
 In an impotent-fellow's house, where her life is in torment.

Let it not be, that every bad rider should mount fortune's steed:
 If it be ridden by any one, at least a good horseman let him be.

From a sorry, low-bred pony, another wretched one is produced;
 'Tis from the high-bred horses of the course alone, that noble steeds come. [**]

That into my dwelling, in the first place, such animals came,
 My luck must have been bad, from the beginning of time.

These ponies are mere puppets--may confusion seize them!
 They create disturbance and tumult in the stable continually.

Like unto a good and worthy son in his father's dwelling,
 A treasure of silver and gold in his house is not to be compared.

[p. 173]

O God! thou hast given me a numerous progeny, and I am thankful;
 But let the fame of their goodness resound in every city and town!

They, who stir up enmity between brothers, are recreant and unworthy:
 Would to heaven they had learnt good, or had learnt naught besides!

Give both thine ears and eyes unto the appeals of KHUSHhaL;
 Since Bahram and Aeabid [**] are, both of them, deaf and dumb!

  

XXIV.

It is the sweet spring time, and I am separated from my beloved!
 Alas! alas! that thou passest away, O spring, without her!

Both the hills and the dales weep at the lover's state forlorn--
 They are not from melted snow, those floods, that from the mountains flow.

It is the fire of wounded hearts, that hath enveloped the trees on the hills;
 Hence, dense black smoke and flame arise, from the fir-tree and the plane.

Dost thou desire to become acquainted with the condition of the bereaved?
 Behold then, that crane, which hath become separated from the flock!

It thus appeareth, that the world is a place of mourning and sorrow;
 For the parrots have, with loud cries, green vestments donned. [*+]

[p. 174]

There are no other wailings besides--all are the wails of separation:
 Draw near, if thou wouldst hear them from the rebeck's every string!

My disease lesseneth not--indeed, it increaseth every hour:
 For God's sake, come speedily, O physician, that I may not die!

One, is death unto opponents--the other, is life unto beloved friends:
 I swear, by heaven, that when lovers meet, both are brought about!

What though one still breathe, and is accounted among the living?
 When the malady is yet without antidote, give up hopes of the sick.

Of mankind none remain--those that roam about are demons and devils;
 Hence, they have no compassion for the agonies of the distressed.

Through love, alas! to this degree, wretched and miserable am I become,
 That whether relations or strangers, they look not on KHUSHhaL through shame.

  

XXV.

Although she quarreleth with me, by word of mouth--that dear one;
 Yet in her heart, that dear one entertaineth much kindness for me.

When, with arms each other's necks around, she accompanieth me,
 Verily, from my heart she removeth the rust-spot--that dear one.

There is no necessity for the sword--her coldness is sufficient,
 If to compass my death should be the intent of that dear one.

Since she hath shown unto me the torch of her loveliness,
 Upon it, another time, she will make me the moth--that dear one.

[p. 175]

I am a poor beggar--she is a sovereign; hence it is becoming in her,
 Even though she of my affection should feel ashamed--that dear one.

He, who may have turned Malang, [**] requireth but a carpet for prayer;
 And in the end, too, a Malang will she make of me--that dear one.

With cheerful heart, she laugheth and smileth with every one besides;
 But with me, indeed, she is mournful and sad--that dear one.

No gem-studded ornament hath she inserted in her nostril;
 But with a single black clove she resteth satisfied--that dear one. [*+]

Towards my opponents, her heart is gentle and soft as wax itself;
 But towards KHUSHhaL, she hardeneth it like stone--that dear one.

  

XXVI.

Upon those lips of her's is there not a black hand-maid? [*++]
 Draw near! Khizr, [* section] at the fountain of immortality behold!

The face of the beloved is rich, both in moles and in ringlets;
 For in the house of the wealthy, every requirement will be found.

When their shade over-shadoweth me, I a king become;
 For the shadow of thy dark curls is that of the Huma itself. [* section section]

Thy cheek is an enkindled flame--what then is thy braided hair?
 It is like unto the dense black smoke, that from fire ascendeth.

[p. 176]

The dust of those feet of thine, at the rate of amber thou vendest:
 Who told thee that thou shouldst sell it at a price like this?

For how long wilt thou look another way, and appear unconscious,
 When about me in every direction clamour and uproar arise?

It is through this loveliness that thou art beautiful like the rose,
 If thou art, indeed, one of a father and a mother born.

He hath not the courage to take her name upon his tongue--.
 The poor lover who feareth the censures and reproaches of the world.

I had given up wine, and had grown quite a penitent, indeed;
 But the goblet of the cupbearer again put my contrition to flight.

He that placeth foot within her alley, bringeth destruction on himself;
 Therefore, O unfortunate, into that vicinity do thou enter not!

Whether it were her coquetry, or her conceits, I could have borne them;
 But towards me she manifesteth exceeding arrogance at all times.

The whole power of her mind hath she put forth against him;
 And thereby hath deprived the poor lover of all energy and control.

When it may convey no significance, speaking is unprofitable;
 But the Almighty willeth not that Khushhal's words be vain.

Since, on thy account, the black pupils of his eyes turned white,
 Welcome unto me, O thou, of KHUSHhaL'S eyes, the light!

  

XXVII.

I am, indeed, a wine-bibber; then, wherefore, O monk! wranglest thou with me?
 Men's destinies are from all eternity--would thou couldst like thyself make me!

[p. 177]

Wisely thou counselest--a blessing, O monitor, be upon thy tongue!
 But it were well, if by means of words, thou couldst the river's water disguise.

They, who possessed naught of sense or understanding, have gone to Heaven;
 Whilst those, who prided themselves upon their wisdom, have gone to Hell.

Unto Abu-Jahl, [**] the precepts of Muhammad were of no advantage soever;
 For who can polish the mirror of him, whom God hath with rust corroded?

In loneliness and solitude seated, tell me, O monk! what thou gainest thereby?
 Wherefore makest thou this wide and ample world, for thyself, so confined?

In every sect and religion, I, indeed, seek after the cause of the heart's sorrows;
 But thou knowest, and thine own words know, the various tales thou tellest.

Draw near, thou minstrel! commence the song of the new year's day!
 On rebeck, flute, and harp, strike up those thrilling strains of melody!

The flowers teem on all sides--there are tulips, narcissuses, and hyacinths too:
 Thou attest unwisely, if thou purposest going in any other direction than to the parterre.

[p. 178]

Some, taking with them much provision for the journey, set out to seek for her;
 And others again, for her sake, bind the Santon's prayer-carpet round their loins.

O, that the scale of thy good deeds may be heavy at the judgment day!
 For like wax shalt thou soften, towards the lover, his opponents' flinty hearts.

Though the whole of the armies of Dilhi have come to compass the death of KHUSHhaL;
 Still, thou dost not consider thyself strong enough, and hangest back from shame.

  

XXVIII.

The world's affairs have all become turned upside down:
 All those ways are not now, as they used to be seen by me.

Towards the father, the son showeth the actions of an enemy:
 Towards the mother, the daughters are ready to act like rival wives.

In thine own house, there will not be two brothers together dwelling,
 Who have not a thousand iniquities ready in their hearts.

The scavenger now feasteth on pulao, [**] and rice, and sweetmeats;
 And unclean things are become lawful, for Muhammad's descendants.

The honoured and trusted of kings are now mere thieves become;
 And in their royal courts, highway-robbers are grown trustworthy men.

[p. 179]

The nightingales and the parrots fly about the wilds, astounded;
 And crows and ravens caw and croak above the beds of flowers.

Babylonian steeds eke out an existence upon dry grass alone;
 Whilst the tanner's asses receive a stipendiary allowance of provisions.

Fools, exempt from all care and anxiety, in tranquillity repose;
 Whilst a hundred troubles and misfortunes, the prudent and the wise beset.

The meanest slave assumeth authority over his own proprietor;
 And the slave-girls are more honourable than the mistress of the house.

Alas, O KHUSHhaL! in the days of the Emperor Aealam-gir, [**]
 The house-born servants [*+] have all a wretched and contemptible lot!

  

XXIX.

What numbers of boats in this river's depths have sunk and disappeared,
 A single plank of which, even shouldst thou search, cannot be discovered!

Everywhere separation and absence have enkindled the flame of grief:
 Like unto green wood thrown upon the fire, how long wilt thou weep?

[p. 180]

Sorrow and joy--pain and pleasure--are, from the beginning, linked together;
 And as much as one may have wept, so much even shall he rejoice again!

Many lofty minarets have I beheld, in their graceful symmetry standing;
 But not a soul mentioned their names unto me, nor said unto whom they belonged.

The cares and troubles of the world are of a thousand varieties and forms;
 And the summer skylarks trill and warble in a thousand different ways.

They are different, by far, from the cherished sentiments of my heart
 The manifold rumours, that the folks bandy from one to the other.

This scroll is not the kind of thing, that it shall ever be brought to an end:
 It is spread open, and examined into--it is read, and then rolled up again.

Thine own actions are of use to thee, both in this world and the next
 Verily, the throat of every one is kept moist, by its own saliva.

The humblest fare, though barley-bread, unattended by care and trouble,
 I will account more dainty than the viands, on the king's table outspread.

The ears of the reckless and imprudent are deaf--they cannot hear
 The blunt, plain-spoken words from KHUSHhaL KHATTAK'S mouth.

[p. 181]

  

XXX.

Every moment that a person may be thus in want of employment,
 Than such, I hold him far better off, who is forced to labour for nothing. [**]

The sick and infirm, if they do not work, are to be excused;
 But wherefore should not the hale man his living earn?

Even if thou mayest not have any employment of thine own;
 Still, I say unto thee, sit not thus useless and unemployed.

Every amusement, by which care may be beguiled, is delight;
 Whether it be chess, or backgammon, or the pleasures of the chase.

Every hour, and every moment, a man's state is different:
 In one state unchangeable, is the Creator of the world alone.

Thy name, O KHUSHhaL, shall be remembered in the world;
 For, in truth, thy employment is one great and mighty work!

  

XXXI.

Neither doth any one here seek to avail himself of my abilities and experience,
 Nor are the capabilities of this country's people of any advantage unto me. [*+]

We converse together in one tongue--we speak the Pus'hto language;
 But we do not, in the least, understand what we to one another say.

[p. 182]

The Suwatis account themselves exceeding wise, whilst they are but fools;
 And 'tis amongst such a set as these, that the Almighty my lot hath cast.

Now that I have beheld the Suwat valley, I have this much discovered,
 That there is no tribe more abject and contemptible than the Yusufzis.

Tyranny and self-conceit seem to be the innate nature of all;
 And every man amongst them is covetous and ready to beg.

Although, in their dwellings, they have wealth and goods, they are hungry-eyed;
 And their head-men, than the rest, are more villainous and infamous still.

'Tis said, that the water-melon deriveth its colour from the water-melon;
 But their wise men and elders are more worthless than the people themselves.

The rights of the poor and helpless, they make out wrong and unjust,
 If they can a single penny obtain by way of a present, or a bribe.

As to those I have seen myself--about others I am unable to speak
 They are all either bullocks or skinners, without any exception soever. [**]

[p. 183]

Peregrinations such as these, in all countries, are by no means useless;
 Since all the secrets regarding them became known unto me.

Now that KHUSHhaL hath smelt the earth of Suwat, and the Sama'h, [**]
 He knoweth, that a single faithful man will not, in them, be found.

  

XXXII.

There is lamentation everywhere, from the hand of death!
 In every place, in every habitation, from the hand of death!

'The form of man HE created for the sake of death itself;
 And evil and misery, in this world, came from the hand of death!

The whole of the prophets and saints, that have ever existed,
 Have all been hidden in the earth, by the hand of death!

Surely, and without doubt, in the end shall be brought
 Ruin and desolation on these fair abodes, by the hand of death!

Come! do thou, too, occupy thyself in laying by viaticum for thy journey;
 For whole caravans have been dispatched, by the hand of death!

O KHUSHhaL! though in body thou shouldst a Shah Julian be, [*+]
 Even then, thou wouldst depart in sorrow, from the hand of death!

[p. 184]

  

XXXIII.

Whilom, indeed, I was always wise; and wise, even yet, am I!
 I was ever mad and beside myself--mad, even yet, am I!

There is association, not separation: from Him, disjunction is unreal:
 With Him, with whom I was a dweller, a dweller, even yet, am I!

Since I have entered into the world, I have come to know myself:
 I was a treasury of mysteries; and of such, a treasury, even yet, am I!

In the world, the mention of my goodness is made, far and near:
 Amongst the folks I was a fiction; and a fiction, even yet, am I!

When the veil of His face was drawn aside, unto me a torch appeared;
 At that moment I was a moth thereon--a moth, even yet, am I!

The arrows of His eyelashes, they are the misfortune of my life:
 I was a target for them an age; and their target, even yet, am I!

When He made me a friend of Himself, He turned me from all others away:
 I then was a stranger unto the world; and a stranger, even yet, am I!

That ocean which is circumambient, boundless, unfathomable,
 Of that ocean I was the pearl; and its pearl, even yet, am I!

In the same manner, with mine own beloved, without agent or delegate,
 As I, KHUSHhaL, used in amity to be, in amity, even yet, am I!

[p. 185]

  

XXXIV.

Amongst the whole village, my beloved is that person,
 Who, throughout the whole tribe, is celebrated--that person.

Though, in resemblance and in qualities, she may human seem;
 But, in truth, from head to foot, she is like a fairy--that person.

'Tis for this reason that I am as a nightingale towards her,
 That, in loveliness, she is like unto a bower of roses--that person.

Notwithstanding she may reproach me, or become angry with me;
 Yet still, from her mouth, she is a scatterer of sweets--that person.

Whether her curly ringlets, her top-knot, or her side locks;
 She is the fragrant musk of Tatary entirely--that person.

Let it not happen that I miss her in a crowd, but in case I should,
 Know, that she is fawn-eyed and rosy-cheeked--that person.

In place of a veil, I will present her my head as an offering,
 Should she nourish the desire to possess it--that person.

When I seek to kiss her, she censureth and rebuketh me--
 She is severe and tyrannical beyond measure--that person.

When arrayed, from head to foot, in gold-embroidered garments,
 From head to foot she is a golden picture--that person.

Wherefore, O partridge! art thou so proud of thy gait;
 For her step is far more graceful than thine--that person!

Since her form and disposition perfectly harmonize together,
 Unto the heart of KHUSHhaL she is precious--that person.

[p. 186]

  

XXXV.

There will be none of the world's vanities and ambitions within the tomb:
 Thine own good deeds will go with thee, and naught else besides!

Without the parrot, the cage is useless--be convinced of this!
 And the soul is like unto the parrot--the body like unto its cage.

Be careful, that it may not be, altogether, lost unto thee;
 For, like unto a pearl of great price, is this breath of thine.

Whoso casteth this pearl, so precious, unprofitably away,
 He is not a whit better than the beasts of the field.

Pass near the graves of the chiefs, and the nobles of the land!
 Behold, out of their dust, thorns and brambles have sprung up!

Whatever hath happened, cannot be changed; wherefore, then
 Dost thou manifest such apprehension, and such dread?

'Tis thy lot, from the world to bear, at most, but a shroud away;
 And that, too, will be but eight or nine yards, or may be ten.

All these things, my dear! will remain behind thee;
 Whether pretty maidens, noble steeds, or robes of finest satin.

Be ready, O KHUSHhaL! for the time of departure is come
 In every direction may be heard the sound of the warning bell! [**]

  

XXXVI.

The Turanis are all turbulent, quarrelsome, and oppressive;
 Liars, perjurers, and concoctors of calumny and slander.

[p. 187]

The Iranis [**] are of a friendly disposition--they are true and faithful:
 They have urbanity, and breeding--are respectable and deserving.

The Afghans are malevolent, and ruthless, and contentious;
 But give them for their modesty and valour due praise.

Whether Baluch or Hazarah, both are dirty, and abominable:
 They have neither religion nor faith--may shame attend them!

Whether Hindustani or Sindhi, may their faces be blackened;
 For they have neither modesty nor shame; neither bread nor meat!

The Kashmiris, whether male or female--may they all be undone!
 They have none of the chattels of humanity amongst them.

Behold! they are not of the human race--what are they?
 May perdition swallow them--both Uzbak and Kazalbash!

The Laghmanis, Bangas'his, Suwatis, Tirahis--all of them,
 Are dancers and fiddlers--and who will be friends with such?

Unto him, all matters are manifest, regarding other folks' ways;
 Then render unto KHUSHhaL'S shrewdness, its due meed of praise. [*+]

[p. 188]

  

XXXVII.

I am well acquainted with Aurangzeb's justice, and equity--
 His orthodoxy in matters of faith--his self-denial and fasts;

His own brothers, time after time, cruelly put to the sword--
 His father overcome in battle, and into prison thrown!

Tho' a person dash his head against the ground a thousand times,
 Or by his fastings, should bring his navel and spine together;

Until coupled with the desire of acting with virtue and goodness,
 His adorations, and devotions, are all impositions and lies.

The way of whose tongue is one, and the path of his heart another,
 Let his very vitals be mangled, and lacerated by the knife!

Externally, the serpent is handsome, and symmetrically formed;
 But internally, is with uncleanness and with venom filled.

The deeds of men will be many, and their words will be few;
 But the acts of recreants are few, and their boastings many.

Since the arm of KHUSHhaL cannot reach the tyrant here,
 In the day of doom, may the Almighty have no mercy on him!

  

XXXVIII.

I am intoxicated with that countenance, which hath sleepy, languid eyes:
 By them, I become so cut and gashed, thou wouldst say, those eyes sharp swords contain.

My beloved, in loveliness and grace, is incomparable, and without equal:
 But, than her whole person, more splendid, and more radiant are her eyes.

[p. 189]

I have seen the fine eyes of very many fair ones, in my lifetime;
 But only one, here and there, hath lashes full and long like thine.

Tho' the prelate and the priest may admire them a hundred times,
 Can the Houri [**] have brighter eyes, than those dark ones of thine?

Those marplots are sitting together, talking about the poor lover;
 Consequently, he keepeth his eyes, to this degree, averted from thy face.

Wheresoever thou art, there, and there only, will my sight be directed
 Wherever the heron may be, there the falcon directeth his eyes.

There is not, in the wide world--tho' I am constantly in search--
 One such fair charmer, that may, to day, possess bewitching eyes.

She looketh upon no one--to what degree will the pride of her beauty go?
 See how long this wayward creature will look so proudly from her eyes.

'Tis well for them, who are happy in the society of the beloved of their hearts;
 For every hour, on the face of their dear ones, they charm their eyes.

Draw near, if thou wouldst behold KHUSHhaL in sorrow and grief--
 Day and night, from thee severed, his eyes with tears o'erflow!

  

XXXIX.

A man is he, who is courageous, and whom success attendeth--
 Who is gentle and affable, unto all people, as long as life lasteth.

[p. 190]

His face, his real face--his word, his word--his promise, his promise:
 With no falsehood in him, no deception, not witless and lewd.

His words few, but his deeds many, and in silence performed--
 With mouth closed, but bosom laid open like the bud of the rose.

When humility may be necessary, or when stateliness be required,
 To be in loftiness, like the heavens--in humbleness, like the dust.

In dignity, like the cypress--in generosity and bounty, like the vine--
 Its branches, on all sides, under the weight of its clusters bending.

Like unto a fresh and fragrant full-blown rose in the parterre,
 Around which the sweet nightingales raise their plaintive songs.

I am quite amazed, since he speaketh in this manner,
 As from whence did KHUSHhaL all this mental genius bring.

  

XL.

In this parterre, a single leaf of thine there will not be, O rose!
 Shouldst thou become acquainted with autumn's dire inclemency.

Account as great good fortune, these thy few days in the garden,
 That the nightingales, for thy sake, beat their breasts and bewail.

Nothing whatever of the glory and dignity of that garden will remain,
 When the plaintive melody of the nightingale is hushed within it.

Upon that wine-flask, which the cupbearer hath with him,
 The eyes turn not towards, since it is devoid of any wine.

Behold the passage of this bridge, by the people of the world!
 See! some fall, whilst some outstrip others, and cross before them.

[p. 191]

It will never be effaced from its memory, as long as it liveth,
 If the partridge may ever have felt the talons of the hawk.

The decrees by fate ordained, cannot be changed by any means,
 Tho', over thyself, thou shouldst read the four kuls, [**] unceasingly.

Lovers, who unto love devote themselves, will never grieve;
 Nor for the backbitings of marplots, and tale-bearers, will they care.

What shall I, a poor darwesh [*+] do? neither hand nor might have I,
 Otherwise, indeed, I would have exhausted the whole upon the world.

Such a dear one I possess--from this, thou mayest of her loveliness judge,
 When the fragrance of musk is nothing to that of her ringlets.

How can he possibly lie on his bed, free from sorrow and care,
 Who may be aware of the dread earthquakes and tornados of fate?

In the assumed coldness of the beloved, there is a pleasure withal;
 But miserable KHUSHhaL, alas! from her real indifference, dieth.

  

XLI.

Should any one speak about intellect and ability, certainly, I possess them;
 But since good fortune assisteth me not, unto whom shall I mention such things?

In this world, the gift of fidelity and sincerity is alchemy itself; [*++]
 Wherefore, then, should I be covetous to obtain it from any one?

[p. 192]

The fruit of constancy and faith, is not to be found in the world's garden
 I search for it, bootlessly, and unavailingly, upon every tree.

That rain which falleth upon the waters, and mixeth with them,
 How shall I such rain account, amongst other genial showers?

My foolishness hath become predominant over my sense and prudence--
 Unprofitably, I cast back my pearls into the depths of ocean again.

By means of fate, it will neither decrease, nor will it increase--
 I do not consume that daily-bread which belongeth not to me.

Whatever may remain redundant, out of my daily sustenance,
 Like unto a thing given in trust, I preserve for the use of others.

What place, in the present time, is free from deceit, and from imposture?
 O tell me where! that there I may flee, and escape from them.

If there had been any safety in flight, from destiny I had been free;
 But, alas! where shall I direct my steps, to be safe from its decrees?

Cruel fortune stoneth me with the stone of calamity and perfidy;
 Whilst I, silly that I am, carry a shield of glass before my face.

When, from its advent, I obtained neither happiness nor joy,
 Wherefore should I make my heart sad, by severance therefrom?

They were wont to say that patience is the sign of success;
 Therefore, I KHUSHhaL, with resignation gird up my heart.

  

XLII.

Notwithstanding thou art unto me a sovereign, and I a beggar;
 Still turn not from me thy face, for I am distracted and distressed.

[p. 193]

I, who bear the brand of thy thraldom and enslavement,
 Do not consider any one equal with myself; for I am a king.

The door of my heart I have closed unto all extraneous things--
 Associating with the world, I am filled with anxiety for thee.

If any one is wretched about thee, I am that wretched being:
 If any one is the dust of the sole of thy foot, that dust am I.

Sometimes, I write upon paper the words of thy mystery--
 At others, through grief for thee, I tell, unto my pen, my state.

The admirers of thy pretty face, are beyond computation;
 But amongst the whole of them, I am without compare.

Exclude me not from being accounted among the dogs at thy door,
 Although I may be debarred from all benefits, and favours beside.

Shouldst thou love and kindness bestow, of them I am unworthy--
 If thou treat me with harshness and severity, I merit them.

Unto KHUSHhaL, thou wast saying, "Of what use art thou?"
 If I am of use, or if I am of no use; still, still I am thine!

  

XLIII.

Gentle breeze of the morn! shouldst thou pass over Khairabad, [**]
 Or should thy course lead thee by Sara'e, on the banks of the Sind; [*+]

Hail them, again and again, with my greetings and salutations;
 And with them, many, many expressions of my regard and love!

[p. 194]

Cry out unto the swift Aba-Sind with sonorous voice;
 But unto the Landdaey, mildly and whisperingly say [**]--

"Perhaps, I may drink, once more, a cup of thy waters;
 For, whilom, I was not on Ganges' nor on Jamna's banks."

Of the climate of Hind [*+] should I complain, how long shall I cry out?
 Whilst the vileness of its water is far more horrid still.

Shouldst thou drink water from a rivulet, it racketh the vitals;
 And that of the wells, too, is not free from danger and peril.

Since therein, from hill streams, the cool element is not to be had,
 Defend us from Hind, tho' it should teem with all the world's luxuries besides.

Surely, no one will continue in utter helplessness in this world--
 The mercy of the Merciful will be shown unto the forlorn, at last!

Of the restoration of the wounded, hope may be entertained,
 When the sore, of its purulence, shall become somewhat free.

Once more, O God! delight, by uniting me unto her again,
 That heart, which now, from her separated, is rent in twain.

The wise murmur not, neither do they ever demur,
 At any stroke of misfortune, that emanateth from the All-wise.

In Hind, O KHUSHhaL! thou wilt not remain for aye;
 For the sinner, even, at last, will escape from the fire of Hell!

[p. 195]

  

XLIV.

I never will carry my face unto the mirror again, [**]
 Nor will I again anoint mine eyes with antimony!

Never more will I dye red my white hands with hinna, [*+]
 Nor smoothe out, with the comb, my long hair any more!

I will not arrange the little ringlets, in clusters round my face,
 Nor will I redden my lips with the betel-leaf [*++] again!

For whom shall I deck out and ornament my person,
 When my beloved friend is not present the same to behold?

My whole frame turneth into red flames and dense smoke,
 When, in my heart, I think of the secrets of our love.

Though life is sweeter than aught else in the world besides,
 What shall I do with it? 'tis bitter now, from my love severed.

May he be HAPPY, that dear friend, wherever he may be!
 Let him for his own happiness care--I alone will mourn! [* section]

[p. 196]

  

XLV.

I am intoxicated! I am a worshipper of wine! I indulge! I indulge!
 Give ear, O censor! dost hear me? I drink wine! I drink wine!

All other wine soever, I have given up to the world to drink of;
 But her lip is a wine that I will not resign--for it I die! I die!

I shall not become satiated therefrom; for my thirst is unquenchable,
 Although, such overflowing cups I should quaff for ever! for ever!

I, indeed, who on such a path as this, still journey on my way,
 Used not always to be in safety; for it is the path of love! love!

What askest thou me?--"What was thy state in separation?"
 Well--I knew nothing else, save that my heart was burning! burning!

People say unto me, "Verily thy colour is become sallow--thou art in love!"
 I do not deny it: truly, my friends, I am in love! indeed, I am!

With the lover it is customary, that in love he should brook censure;
 For this reason, I, KHUSHhaL, undergo it--I suffer it, and endure!

  

XLVI.

I become quite astonished with the people of the world,
 To see what these dogs do, for the sake of the flesh's lusts.

Such acts and proceedings are developed, and perpetrated by them,
 As the Devil would never have thought of, and never have uttered.

The Kur'an they always place before them, and from it they read;
 But none of their doings will be in conformity with the tenets thereof.

[p. 197]

What road shall I follow in pursuit of them? where shall I seek?
 For, like unto Alchemy itself, the wise have become scarce indeed.

Good men are like rubies and garnets--they can rarely be found;
 But like unto any common stones, the worthless are not a few.

Do they belong to the afrit, [**] the demon, or the goblin race?
 For, among the lineage of Adam, the Afghans I cannot account.

Notwithstanding thou mayest give one the best of counsel and advice;
 Still, even the counsel of his father is not acceptable to his heart.

The whole of the deeds of the Pattans [*+] are better than those of the Mughals;
 But they have no unity amongst them, and a great pity it is.

The fame of Bahlol, and of Sher Shah too, resoundeth in my ears--
 Afghan Emperors of India, who swayed its sceptre effectively and well. [*++]

For six or seven generations, did they govern so wisely,
 That all their people were filled with admiration of them.

Either those Afghans were different, or these have greatly changed;
 Or otherwise, at present, such is the Almighty's decree.

[p. 198]

If the Afghans shall acquire the gift of concord and unity,
 Old KHUSHhaL shall, a second time, grow young therefrom.

  

XLVII.

Separation turneth sweet existence bitter unto man--
 It layeth the very vitals upon fierce, devouring flames!

Whatever strength and energy the heart in the breast may possess,
 Separation, out of these eyes, expelleth them, every now and again.

Than such existence as this, annihilation is preferable by far,
 When one's days and nights all pass away, in misery and woe.

He faileth not to hit--he woundeth me to the very heart's core;
 For the archer of grief hath bent the knee, to take aim at me.

The book of my heart is on the subject of constancy and love--
 It was torn up; but no one acquired the meaning thereof.

If the gauze, which the moon rendeth, [**] can be again repaired,
 Then the restoration of my poor heart, may also be effected.

Would to heaven such a person would appear--I am quite willing--
 As would bring back my truant heart from the path of the beloved!

In separation, if there were no hope of meeting once more,
 For the bewildered lover, there would be no possibility of existence.

When thou placest thy foot on that path, thy head payeth the forfeit;
 Yet on such a dangerous road as this, I continually wend my way.

[p. 199]

One succeedeth unto another's place; for such is the way of the world--
 And I, KHUSHhaL, also, am the successor of poor Majnun. [**]

  

XLVIII.

The carnality of my heart is an Afridi, [*+] who, for religion, careth not--
 Its good thoughts are but few; but unto wickedness it is exceedingly prone.

Like unto Akhund Darwezah, [*++] I point out godliness and piety to it;
 But the flesh teacheth it impiety and infidelity, like unto Pir Ros'han. [* section]

Two-and-sixty years, by computation, my own age hath now reached;
 And my black hair hath turned silvery, but my heart not the least white.

There are not, in the red carnelian caskets, those white pearls now; [* section section]
 Neither do those narcissuses remain, nor those white roses of the parterre. [***]

[p. 200]

With my head on the soft pillow laid, I sleep without sorrow or care;
 Whilst those who shared it with me, are now in the cold grave laid!

Very many boats have sunk in the Indus of mortality and death;
 And with them engulphed therein, were many companions and friends!

What! is it the veil of wretchedness that hath fallen my sight before,
 That with mine eyes I cannot perceive the truth, though 'tis manifest to me?

With body in such agony, and so many physicians in the world, I die
 Malediction on such conduct as this, that I seek not my own cure!

'Tis past--'tis gone! his place is Hell, unless God have mercy on him;
 For along with KHUSHhaL associated, are both the Devil and the flesh!

  

XLIX.

How handsome soever thou art, thou art not Canaan's Joseph!
 However wise thou art, with Lokman [**] thou canst never compare!

Notwithstanding thy pomp and state, and that thou art the ruler of the land,
 Remember well, in thy heart, what a magnificent king was Suliman. [*+]

[p. 201]

How many lovely-faced ones--how many sages and princes have there been?
 As they came, so they departed--in the world, do even their names remain?

A good name will remain behind--naught else soever will survive:
 The wicked for evil are remembered--the good, for their virtues, in the memory live.

Shouldst thou hear of Hujaj, [**] thou wilt also hear the name of Noshirwan [*+]--
 For justice, the unbeliever is venerated--for tyranny, the believer is cursed.

If thou desire to practise goodness, now is the time, whilst of the living accounted--
 There will be neither advantage nor profit, shouldst thou regret its neglect, in the grave.

The infidel is that man, who constantly followeth after the flesh's lusts--
 The true-believer is he, who is ever anxious about his religion and his faith.

There is not the least doubt in this, that all will fall victims unto death;
 But in this there is uncertainty, as to who will obtain a graveyard to lie in.

Happy, truly happy shall he be, who may die with piety's blessings attending--
 A grave in honour he obtaineth, and over him the blessed book is read.

[p. 202]

The season of youth hath passed--now, O KHUSHhaL, old age hath come!
 Then leave thou all other things, and the equipments of the grave prepare!

  

L.

Were thine heart a little compassionate, how good it would be!
 Were a little of thy love bestowed upon me" how kind it would be!

I, who through grief for thee, weep and lament at thy threshold--
 Were thine ear inclined to my complainings, how meet it would be!

Whoso blame, and cry out against me for my love for thee--
 Were they aware of thy beauty's perfection, how proper it would be!

They who now boast, before the world, of their austerity and self-control--
 Were they to refrain from looking at thee, how seemly it would be!

After death, should my grave, in some such place be situated,
 Where the path of the beautiful may ever lie, how delightful it would be!

In thy alley, many greyhounds and other dogs are lying about--
 Were I, too, accounted amongst them, how fortunate it would be!

My grief for thee, cannot he quenched in this short existence--
 Were the life of KHUSHhaL to be very, very long, how fitting it would be!

  

LI.

Both fair and rosy, too, are the Adam Khel Afridi maids;
 Indeed, amongst them, all sorts of pretty lasses there are--

[p. 203]

With large eyes, long drooping lashes, and arched eyebrows--
 Honey lips, rosy cheeks, and moon-like faces, too, have they.

Small mouths, like unto rose-buds, teeth regular and white--
 Their heads round, and covered with dark curls, of amber redolent.

Their bodies soft and sleek, and like an egg, so smooth and glossy--
 Their feet diminutive, their heels round, their hips prominent.

Thin stomached, broad chested, and small waisted
 In stature, straight, like the letter alif; [**] and of complexion fair.

Although my peregrinations may, like the falcon's, be among the hills;
 Still, many pretty plump partridges my quarry I have made.

Young and untaught, or old and trained, the falcon seeketh his prey;
 But more scientific, and more unerring, is the old bird's swoop.

It is either the water of the Landdaey river, or of the Barah stream, [*+]
 That tasteth sweeter, and more delicious, than sherbet in my mouth.

The hills in the Matari Pass [*++] shoot straight up into the sky;
 And one's corpulence soon diminisheth, climbing and ascending them.

Along with the Adam Khels into the Ti-rah country I came;
 And having dismissed them to Khwarrah, with regret I returned.

Love's affairs, O KHUSHhaL! are fraught with fire to excess;
 For shouldst thou conceal the flame, the smoke thou still wilt see.

[p. 204]

  

LII.

Say not unto me--"Why swearest thou by me?"
 If I swear not by thee, by whom shall I swear?

Thou, indeed, art the very light of mine eyes;
 This, by those black eyes of thine, I swear!

Thy countenance is the day--thy curls the night;--
 By the morn I swear! and by the eve I swear!

In this world, thou art my life and my soul,
 And naught else besides; unto thee, my life, I swear!

Thou art, in truth, the all-engrossing idea of my mind,
 Every hour--every moment--by my God, I swear!

The dust of thy feet is an ointment for the eyes--
 By this very dust beneath thy feet, I swear!

My heart ever yearneth towards thee, exceedingly--
 By this very yearning of mine, unto thee I swear!

When thou laughest, they are nothing in comparison--
 Both rubies and pearls, [**] by thy laugh I swear!

Truly, I am thy lover, and thine, thine only:
 And this, I, KHUSHhaL, by thy sweet face, swear!

  

LIII.

By the laughter of the happy and the gay, I vow!
 And by the lamentations of the woe-begone, I vow!

[p. 205]

By the inebriation of the intoxicated with wine;
 And by the piety and abstinence of the monk, I vow!

By the hundred transports of meeting and association,
 And by the thousand miseries of separation, I vow!

By the beautiful and fragrant roses of the spring,
 And by the sweet melodies of the nightingales, I vow!

Compared to which the graceful cypress is as nothing,
 By that tall stature, and form symmetrical, I vow!

That are tinged with the antimony of expression,
 By those dark narcissus-like eyes, I vow!

That which is more slender, even, than a hair,
 By that delicately slight waist of thine, I vow!

On account of which, lovers pine away and die,
 By that beauty, and by that elegance, I vow!

By that which cometh from the direction of the beloved--
 By the balmy breath of the morning breeze, I vow!

Who is the bearer of the message for an interview,
 By the footsteps of that bearer of glad tidings, I vow!

In the which there is not the least insincerity,
 By the truthfulness of the true and sincere, I vow!

With the whole of these many oaths and protestations,
 A hundred thousand times again and again, I vow

That I love thee far more dearly than life itself;
 And this, by thyself, I, KHUSHhaL, KHATTAK, vow!

[p. 206]

  

LIV.

The Afghans have gone mad about posts and dignities;
 But God preserve me, from such plagues and troubles!

Unto whom belongeth the gift of discretion: to the swordsman?
 Just the same as one learneth the Kur'an, in the schools?

Not one amongst them is gifted with the art of prudence;
 For, with the dispositions of all of them, I am well acquainted.

The Afghans have one very great failing, if thou but notice--
 That they, with the titles and dignities of the Mughals, coquet.

Shame and reputation, fame and honour, are of no account;
 But, certainly, they talk enough about offices, rank, and gold.

Look not towards the Mughals with the eyes of cupidity;
 Even, if in the habit of doing so, from any other cause!

The trusty Khattaki sword is buckled round my waist;
 But not the custom of servitude, in village and in town.

The dark night of Aurangzeb's prison, I hold in remembrance, [**]
 When all the night long, "O God! O God!" continually, I cried.

If the Afghans would but oppose the Mughals with the sword,
 Every Khattak, by the bridle-rein, should lead a Mughal away.

Amongst the Khattaks, O KHUSHhaL! no council of honour existeth;
 Hence, I cannot conceive from what lineage they have sprung.

  

LV.

A white beard is a mark of respectability among men;
 But the falling out of the teeth is a discredit and reproach.

[p. 207]

When a man's teeth are in their place, though the beard be white,
 There is no old age in that; far from it, there is youthfulness.

Let not the old man trouble himself concerning old age,
 If his eyesight be good, and free from all signs of failing.

What is the sight of a sweetheart, unto an old man?
 Really and truly, it is mummy [**] for the wounds of the heart.

Would the monk ever relinquish love entirely? No, no!
 Unto it, he cannot attain; hence his devotion and piety.

Although the age of KHUSHhaL hath gone beyond seventy years;
 Yet, in his heart, are still, love and affection for the fair.

  

LVI.

When thou severest thyself from cupidity with regard to every one, it is sovereignty:
 If thou understandest silence, it is equal to the eloquence of Sahban. [*+]

Mention not a word, regarding Hatim's liberality and munificence; [*++]
 For, even in so Going, there are, indeed, indications of venality.

How many different kinds do the attributes of friendship embrace?
 Lip-friendship--loaf-friendship--and friendship from the soul.

Upon the altar of sincere friends, make all things an oblation;
 Indeed, for this alone, is the transitory world of any use.

In the troubles and trials of the world, there is much gain;
 But in the gain of the world's wealth, there are misery and woe.

[p. 208]

They, who treat both friend and foe, with gentleness and humanity,
 The lives of those men are, indeed, admirably and worthily passed.

Whatsoever my dwelling contained, I entirely relinquished--
 Such is the extent of my hospitality, my own friends toward.

The priest readeth, again and again, out of thousands of books;
 But if the true faith be his study, the letter alif [**] is enough.

Even for the ignorant, O KHUSHhaL! there is mercy
 Their ignorance and stupidity, are a sufficient excuse for them!

  

LVII.

Altho' happiness was a delicious food; lo, 'tis all passed away!
 Though lordly power was an elegant garment; lo, 'tis all passed away!

Altho' there were the ties of wife and child, this is their state now:
 Altho' there were life and abiding amongst mankind; lo, 'tis all passed away!

Altho' I possessed both rank and dignity, chieftainship, and command
 Altho' lands and possessions were mine; lo, they all have passed away!

Altho' in my houses were carpets and divans, embellishments and ornaments--
 Altho' my couch, too, was perfumed with aeat###804###r; [*+] lo, all have passed away!

[p. 209]

When I used to return home from the chase, in pride and gaiety,
 My saddle-straps were ever red with the blood of the game; but, lo, 'tis passed away!

Kinsmen and strangers--the good and the bad, from all directions, came:
 In my audience-hall were bustle and clamour; but, lo, all is passed away!

Scattered and dispersed, the family of Akhorr Khel [**] struck camp, and departed:
 At this noise, my heart-strings broke; but, lo, 'tis all passed away!

Unto him, 'tis now the day of mourning--of sackcloth and of ashes;
 For Sara'e, [*+] that was the home of KHUSHhaL, is now all passed away!

  

LVIII.

The sword that is sharpened, without doubt, is for smiting; is it not?
 The locks that are curled, certes, are for one's own lover; are they not?

Wherefore sayest thou unto me, "Cast not thine eyes upon the fair!"
 The eyes that have been given one, doubtless are for seeing; are they not?

Let the monk fast and pray; but I will the flowing goblet seize:
 Every man is created to fulfil, each his own part; is he not?

[p. 210]

Thou wast saying, that the kissing of thy lips is like unto an elixir--
 I stand in need of such: 'tis for the wounds of the heart; is it not?

Thou drinkest my very heart's blood; but it is for none else besides--
 My heart was formed for thee, thou barbarous one! was it not?

Why weepest and complainest thou about the dark curls of the beloved?
 Thy going before those black snakes, [**] is of thine own accord; is it not?

They will themselves appear like unto mere weeds in comparison to it--
 Then, the tulip and the rose thou wilt bring before thy face; wilt thou not?

There is wine, O KHUSHhaL! there are harp and flute; therefore, with thy beloved,
 With thy tablets in thy hand, unto the garden thou wilt go; wilt thou not?

  

LIX.

Every misfortune that befell me, throughout the whole period of my life,
 When examined carefully, I found it was all the work of my tongue.

That, which in a single hour, turneth prosperity unto desolation,
 When well looked into, I found it was precipitancy in affairs.

[p. 211]

With these eyes of mine, I have beheld the friendship of every one;
 And, truly, he who was my friend proved a source of misfortune unto me.

He would never experience any perfidy or duplicity, at any time,
 If a man's own intentions were conformable unto honesty and truth.

Fortune showeth not severity towards the submissive and resigned--
 Those, who are impatient and unsteady, the persecutions of destiny pursue.

Within this garden, very many roses have passed before mine eyes;
 But at the side of every rose, I perceived there was a thorn also.

The heart, that nourished the hope of constancy from the unfaithful,
 Was unto itself, indeed, its own tyrant, and its own oppressor too.

Since it healeth not at all, although ointment is applied unto it,
 What sort of grief-wound was there the heart of KHUSHhaL, upon?

  

LX.

Whoso acquireth wealth, spendeth it, and bestoweth it, a man is he:
 Whoso hath a sword in his possession, the lord of the sword is he.

A mine of rubies, of garnets, and of other gems, what is it after all?
 That, from which bounty and beneficence are obtained, is a mine.

Whatsoever thou eatest for the belly's sake alone, is thrown away;
 But what is eaten, in sociability and companionship, is the fare.

Whether it is the power of wealth, of lands, or of authority, what then?
 If unto any one their power becometh useful, that is power indeed.

[p. 212]

Throughout the whole night and day--throughout both month and year,
 The time that passeth in the remembrance of the Almighty, is time truly.

Though people run before thee, and others follow after, what is that?
 When in the individual person there is dignity, that dignity is real.

Call none else besides degenerate and undone, O KHUSHhaL!
 Whose word and promise are broken, undone and degenerate is he!

  

LXI.

The call of the mu'azzin [**] is not to be heard throughout Ti-rah, [*+]
 Unless thou listen unto the crowing of the cock, at the dawn of day.

As to the Wurakzis, they are, altogether, from orthodoxy astray;
 And the Afridis, [*++] than those erring ones, are more heretical still.

They neither say prayers over the dead, nor ministers have they;
 Nor alms, nor offerings, nor the fear of God within their hearts.

Excellent is he, who is steadfast in the laws and precepts of the Prophet;
 But wicked is he, who is unsteady and wavering in their observance.

[p. 213]

The affairs of the world are all of them transitory and fleeting:
 O If there is anything eternal, verily, 'tis the name of the Most High.

Whoso is wholly sunk in the cares and concerns of the world,
 As for that son, remiss and reckless, alas! alas! we can only say.

By means of water, impurity is from the person cleansed;
 But by contrition and repentance alone, is sin washed away.

The believers in Sufi mystics, [**] and the unbelievers are all one;
 For they both account, as iniquity, the laws and precepts of Muhammad.

Now and then, upon an occasion, this much they ejaculate
 Some few among them--that, "There is, than God, none other God."

Whoso at all times commit sin, and no repentance show,
 Refuge and protection, from such a people, is what KHUSHhaL asketh.

  

LXII.

Everywhere, throughout the world, I am become dishonoured and humiliated
 House by house, my dissoluteness, and my profligacy, are manifest grown.

That which I kept closely covered up, concealed within my sleeve, [*+]
 The people of the world have come, the spectacle of that goblet to behold.

This is no heart at all, that now entertaineth kindness towards me;
 But that adamantine stone, towards me, path somewhat softer grown.

[p. 214]

That which was the capital stock of life, I renounced entirely;
 And the country of happiness and felicity, became farmed to me.

Wherefore, now, should I regret or complain? for I triumphed,
 When the marplot became a fugitive, from the door of the beloved.

I appreciate his worth, and I will make myself a sacrifice unto him,
 Who, in grief and sorrow, became the sustainer of the helpless, and forlorn.

Unto sleeping fortune many times I cried out with a loud voice;
 But it awakened from its slumber, only, upon the last soft, gentle call.

Separation from them is death itself--and man soon breatheth his last;
 But the society of the heart's idols, hath a second existence become.

Though he putteth his heart upon its guard, yet it will not be prudent;
 Hence, KHUSHhaLis accounted now, among the crazy, and the mad.

  

LXIII.

Be content with thine own lot, and do not always envy the fortune of others!
 Shouldst thou secure both these things, may happiness and affluence be thine!

The links of existence are bound together by a single flimsy thread alone:
 Leave the world's sorrows: why mourn for others? Weep for thy thyself!

Whether thine own kith and kin, or strangers, draw thy pen thro' all:
 It is the age of iniquity and depravity; so be not vain of brother, or of son.

[p. 215]

In whatever direction I wend my way, I perceive such acts from them--
 The attainment of their wishes is on to-day, and gone is all concern for to-morrow.

Behold! what blasting wind is it, that hath blown over all the world?
 The heart waxeth not kind to any one; and the whole world is deceitful grown!

I was saying that the hamlet is peopled, but, lo! when I came near unto it,
 Mere rubbish is lying about--it was an utterly desolate and deserted abode.

In whatever direction thou goest, pass them by with "God preserve us!"
 They have a hundred evils in their hearts, a hundred-bead rosary round their necks.

Much traffic hath been effected, and a hundred demands with avidity made;
 But the time of evening prayer is come, therefore now let this mart be closed.

Thou art always saying, O KHUSHhaL! "Upon the world I will turn my back;"
 But as yet, indeed, this world is still standing face to face with thee.

  

LXIV.

Whether it is the wise man, or the ignorant--the honest man, or the robber,
 I do not see any one a true colleague united with me in my task. [**]

[p. 216]

A sincere friend in distress, I cannot discover throughout the land;
 For people merely give the empty consolation of their tongues.

Like unto the ants, directed towards the grain are the steps
 Of those who favour me, with their coming, and their going.

Did not these ants entertain the hope of obtaining a store,
 They would never make any journey in that direction, at all.

Abandon not thine own stricken mountain-land, O KHUSHhaL!
 Though blood is, at every footstep, and in every direction shed.

  

LXV.

Let the mouth of the liar, forsooth, be filled with dust;
 But kiss the man's mouth, that uttereth truthful words!

Every deed that a man doeth shall not be concealed:
 Did any one tell thee to kindle a fire, and make no smoke?

If thou knowest that there is a reckoning in the next world,
 Then mind to scrutinize well thine own acts in this also.

The fountain of thy mouth is both colocynth and honey;
 Therefore, see thou pour out thy sweetness every one upon.

When the affairs of religion, and of the world come before thee;
 Before worldly matters, first those of thy religion discharge.

In order that the fragrance of the musk-pod be disseminated,
 Show unto me those dark tresses and sable ringlets of thine.

'Tis the season of spring! O cupbearer, bring, bring the wine!
 And add the delicious dessert of thy lips thereunto.

Do not, to-day, O Zealot! impede the drinking of pure wine;
 When the spring shall have passed away, then prohibit it.

[p. 217]

Since it is not free, for a moment, from the fire of love,
 Hast thou, O God! the lover's breast a chafing-dish made?

In the era of thy sweet countenance, I am Jahangir Shah--
 Sit near unto me: practise the caresses of Nur Mahal! [**]

These dark eyes of thine are, in themselves, black calamities;
 Who, then, told thee to make them still more so with kohl? [*+]

Shouldst thou, O KHUSHhaL! profess sanctity a thousand times,
 When a pretty creature cometh near thee, to kiss her take care!

  

LXVI.

Thy society is like unto the sea, and I, a fish therein;
 But, separated from thee, I lament and bewail always.

Weeping, I would ask her to let me her fair cheek press;
 But, laughing, she would ask, "What doth this man say?

She asked, too, "Who art thou, that wanderest in my street?"
 To which, "Thy dog am I;"--thus to her a ready reply I gave.

I grieve in various ways, and my body hath a reed become:
 Separation hath brought me to the plaintive pipe's condition. [*++].

Alas! alas! that this spring-time of youth is past!
 Ah! that this spring continued in the world for aye!

[p. 218]

The rose, the hyacinth, the wild rose, the tulip, and the buds--
 Thou didst bring with thee, on thy coming, the whole spring.

When I press her unto my bosom, she looketh towards me,
 Like a young gazelle inebriated with the milk of its dam.

When I die, I shall never see these sweet friends any more;
 Then let me, O God, remain in this world for ever!

I grieve, indeed, for thy honour alone, not for myself:
 Thou shouldst see how I would act, had I not this solicitude.

Thus severed from thee, in the fire I burn and consume,
 Like unto the dry fuel, that one casteth into the flames.

Upon the beauty of the fays many encomiums are lavished;
 But I see not any fairy with so lovely a face as thine.

There is no epithet that can express thy charming ways:
 Would that, to thy lover, thou didst a little tenderness show!

Is there an anvil in thy breast, or a kind, benevolent heart,
 That, for the sighs of KHUSHhaL, thou showest no sympathy?

  

LXVII.

Upon the difficult path of love, there is exceeding peril:
 Every footstep I take thereon, my life in danger I place.

Shouldst thou my bosom rend asunder, thou wilt perceive,
 That, thro' grief for thee, my whole heart is turned to blood.

The genial rain of thy kindness falleth not upon me,
 That the seed of thy love, planted in my heart, might germinate.

Thy treasured secret, even unto my tongue, I will not impart;
 For the secret, that hath reached the tongue, is ever a fireside tale.

[p. 219]

I am ignorant with regard to love, as to what thing it is;
 But this much I hear, that from beauty its effect proceedeth.

But who is he, that, unto the love ineffable, hath attained?
 Tho' in this matter, indeed, every one boasteth of success.

It was when thou and I were not, that love was born:
 'Tis not that this influence hath been originated by thee and me.

Hide, O KHUSHhaL, from the world, the woes of love!
 But how can I conceal that, which it knoweth full well?

  

LXVIII.

I was not, at first, aware, that thou art so utterly inconstant--
 Thou makest a hundred vows a day, and still art heedless of them all.

The world raiseth an outcry against me, who have given my heart to thee;
 But 'tis not aware what a lovely, bewitching creature thou art.

And thou, too, that sagest unto me, "Look not upon the fair"--
 Who will give ear unto such deadly words as those thou utterest?

A single hair of the head of one's beloved is more precious than the Huri's [**]--
 What use is it, then, O priest! to laud the virgins of Paradise, unto me?

Not every crow and kite, but the nightingale appreciateth the rose's value;
 Then ask not, O fool! what sort of person hath thus enamoured me.

[p. 220]

These are not black eyes, that have carried away my yearning heart
 Thou, O God!--All-wise, All-seeing--knowest they are calamities greater still.

That is not a mole upon thy chin, nor are those dark dishevelled tresses:
 They are, if thou canst comprehend this saying, a mystery divine.

Whether the censures of the world, or people's worst upbraidings;
 All these, I willingly accept, if thou art but reconciled to me.

I will light no lamp in my dwelling to-night, that they may not suspect
 These neighbours of the Sama'h [**]--that thou art a guest of mine.

I was saying, I would tell thee my heart's sorrows, when thou earnest;
 But what griefs shall I mention, when thou, the grief-dispeller, art near?

Since thou tossest unto the wind the musk-pods of thy fragrant tresses,
 KHUSHhaL, full well knoweth, that thou art a deer of Khat###804###a. [*+]

  

LXIX.

'Tis grief and sorrow--joy and gladness, that affect so deeply;
 But like as they are excessive, even so they pass away.

The source of this link cannot be found by any one:
 The vicissitudes of fortune assume such manifold forms.

[p. 221]

So many things will happen--so many incidents befall,
 As may never have entered the thoughts of thine heart.

In absence, there is sorrow on account of the beloved,
 That, continually, encircleth and besetteth the afflicted heart.

But whatsoever hath vanished from the eyesight away,
 That, too, at last, becometh forgotten by the heart.

Let them that ridicule the words of KHUSHhaL, beware!
 Perhaps they may themselves full soon like him become.

  

LXX.

Whoso like unto the dust, may not be prostrate at the threshold,
 For them, there will be no approach unto heaven and to bliss.

The nightingale that bewaileth when he approacheth the rose,
 Thus saith:--"Alas, some day the parterre will cease to be!"

The rent in my heart will, by no means, unite again,
 Till it shall be sewn together, with the thread of thy locks.

The name of thy tresses I will ne'er take upon my tongue again;
 For the prudent snake-charmer hath naught with black snakes to do.

Be not inferior unto the Hindu female, for the honour of thy beloved;
 For the blazing funeral pyre will have no terrors for her. [**]

Every moment, that I behold the object of my love, is a jubilee to me:
 I shall then be without a festival, when my beloved may not be.

[p. 222]

Upon what part of me wilt thou place a plaster, O physician!
 When the wound of the eyelashes of the beloved may not be seen?

The name of love is unlawful upon the lips of him,
 Whose whole frame may not be suffering about his beloved.

O KHUSHhaL! let there be no estrangement between thy love and thee;
 For the world's short hour will not be immutable always.

  

LXXI.

When the tresses become dishevelled about her fair, white face,
 The bright day becometh shrouded in evening's sombre shade.

If this, which is seen, be the beauty of her countenance,
 Very many more, like unto me, will grow distracted for her.

Those are not tears pendant from her long eyelashes;
 They are all bright gems and pearls, that are being bored.

With new tints and dyes, .fresh fragrance, and green young leaves,
 An astonishingly rare flower is blooming, the parterre within.

Should he, who is wont to repose upon her tresses, be aware
 Of my tears and sighs, he would in sleep never close his eye.

The words of KHUSHhaL'S mouth are not idle and meaningless--
 They all are spoken from a certain emotion of the heart.

  

LXXII.

If the damsels of Kashmir are famed for their beauty,
 Or those of Chin, or Ma-chin, [**] or Tartary, noted likewise;

[p. 223]

Yet the sweet Afghan maidens, that mine eyes have beheld,
 Put all the others to shame, by their conduct and ways.

As to their comeliness, this, once for all, is the fact of the matter,
 That they are, in lineage, of the tribe and posterity of Yaaekub. [**]

Of the fragrance of musk, or of rosewater, they have no need--
 They are, as the ottar of the perfumer, by prayer five times a day.

Whether jewels for forehead or for neck, or any other trinkets,
 All these are contemptible, with their dark locks compared.

Whether veils of gold brocade, or whether silken mantles,
 All are a sacrifice unto the snow-white kerchief of theirs.

The beauty of their minds excelleth their personal charms--
 Than the external form, their hearts are far sweeter still.

From first to last, their occupation is in seclusion and privacy;
 Not seen in the markets, with garments open, and persons exposed. [*+]

They cannot look one full in the face, through modesty--
 They are unused to abuse, and the discipline of the shoe. [*++]

KHUSHhaL hath mentioned, more or less, somewhat of the matter;
 But much remaineth, that may be suitable, or unsuitable to the case.

  

LXXIII.

If the Afghan people are of the human race,
 In disposition and ways they are very Hindus. [* section]

[p. 224]

They are possessed of neither skill, nor intellect;
 But are happy in ignorance, and in strife.

Neither do they obey the words of their fathers;
 Nor do they unto the teacher's instruction give ear.

When there may be one worthy man amongst them,
 They are the destroyers of his head and life.

They ever lie in wait, one to injure the other;
 Hence they are, always, by calamity, remembered.

They neither possess worth, nor do others esteem them,
 Though they are more numerous than locusts or than ants.

First I, then others, as many as there may be--
 We all of us require aid, and a helping hand.

Whether it is valour, or whether liberality,
 They have cast, through dissension, the both away.

But still, O KHUSHhaL! thank God for this,
 That they are not slaves, but free-born men.

  

LXXIV.

Vain is his affectation respecting the end of his turban; [**]
 For in the time of his manhood his condition is changed.

The rank of all will not be on a parity together--
 The burden of the ass is but a grain on the elephant's back.

Whilst some have not a single drop of wine in their cups,
 The goblets of others are running over with the purest wine.

[p. 225]

May this delightful garden for ever fresh and green continue;
 For every year do lovely and fragrant flowers bloom therein.

The just value of the tree is known from its fruit's sweetness--
 A man's worth is discovered by his good and virtuous acts.

Let no one, indeed, be blamed and rebuked unjustly--
 The enemy of the wicked is their own wicked deeds alone.

Though they should transport one to Heaven, and bear another unto Hell,
 I cannot perceive in the matter aught save their own acts.

Would to Heaven it might continue always, for thy sake!
 Since thou art at odds with every one, for the sake of the world.

That son who may not inherit the virtues of his father and grandfather,
 Must have been born in an unlucky and unfortunate year.

And thou, that boastest concerning the battle-field of the brave--
 What valour, what fortitude, hast thou ever brought to the field?

Doth the gnat ever attain unto the high rank of the falcon,
 Even though he is furnished, both with feathers and with wings?

Though all the world may agree to disparage, and speak ill of him,
 Poor KHUSHhaL is KHUSHhaL [**] in his own merits and integrity.

  

LXXV.

Like as I my dear one love, there will not be another so loving:
 Like as I am disconsolate for her, there will be none other so wretched.

[p. 226]

She herself killeth me, indeed, and then again she mourneth over me
 How good a friend! how great her love! such be my death and elegy!

A perfect garden is her lovely face, containing flowers of every hue:
 Enjoy spring's pleasant time; for garden such as this, none other will there be!

Behold the tulip--that heart-seared flower--in blood ensanguined! [**]
 No martyr, from time's beginning, e'er donned such winding-sheet!

Look upon those her sable locks, and upon both those lovely cheeks!
 Within the world's parterre are no such spikenards, no such lilies found. [*+]

Shouldst thou a mantle from the rose-leaves make, even they would irritate:
 Like unto this delicate body of thine, no one such another possesseth.

Such as that, which both day and night, I behold, my dwelling within,
 Poor Majnun, during life's whole course, will never have looked upon.

If such the law, or such her custom be, the Hindu female's right is constancy,
 That sitteth down upon her lover's pyre: what other would such burning bear? [*++]

[p. 227]

That some one, in sorrow, might wring her hands, and weep and wail for thee,
 Such is not death, but life itself, if such thy death might be.

The bliss of Iram [**] I enjoyed, the precincts of thy courts within,
 Delighted with fortune and fate, that such a home to KHUSHhaL gave.

In Persian, thou must know, such strains will not be heard,
 As those that KHUSHhaL, KHATTAK, reciteth, in the Pus'hto tongue.

  

LXXVI.

It is the navigator, that guideth the ship upon the ocean;
 But it is the Almighty, that preserveth her, or sinketh her therein.

Empire and dominion, upon fortune and destiny depend
 'Tis the Huma of happy omen, that casteth its shadow o'er one's head. [*+]

Verily, if any one should stand in need of aught from another,
 Though the sovereign of the universe, he is but a beggar still.

Who told thee not to unloose the knots of difficulty thereby?
 For thought and deliberation are the unloosers of all men's troubles,

'Tis either the sound of the women's joy-songs, at the child's birth;
 Or 'tis the dirge, and the wails, from the sword's fatal field!

He will be under no uneasiness about missing the right way,
 Who, as the companion of his journey, may have a trusty guide.

'Tis the reed, wholly dried up, breast-scarred, and void within,
 That giveth utterance to separation's plaintive wails.

[p. 228]

It behoveth to look to the virtues and qualities of the beloved,
 'Though her beauty be most ravishing, in manifold ways.

Thou, O nightingale! laudest her with a thousand songs;
 But the rose herself, is self-praising of her own loveliness.

Whether gardens, or whether wilds, or any other place soever--
 Where the heart hath become KHUSHhaL, [**] that is the happy spot!

  

LXXVII.

Since those dark eyes of thine are such enchanters,
 My boastings of devotion and piety are wholly unjust.

With these eyes I have beheld such Afghan maidens,
 That he is in error, who laudeth the damsels of Khat###804###ay.

Verily, those hearts must be hard like the stones of the desert,
 That may look upon thy face, and feel not love for thee.

Notwithstanding folks praise the fairies so exceedingly,
 With thy grace and beauty, by whom are they compared?

As to the Huris of Paradise, that the preachers remind us of,
 In this world, such have I seen, with these eyes of mine.

Either I will obtain possession of those tresses for myself,
 Or I'll stake my life upon them; and these my two vows are.

Speak not unto KHUSHhaL of honour and reputation;
 For they, who are in love, care not for name or fame.

[p. 229]

  

LXXVIII.

The vicious are vicious, while yet in the womb of their mothers;
 And vile and vicious are they, when their mothers bring them forth.

In this world, they live and subsist in wickedness and iniquity;
 And unto the next, they must, wretched and miserable, go.

When they do any laudable action, they are unhappy thereat;
 But are overjoyed at what is reprehensible, whatever its degree.

They pursue the path which the lusts of the flesh point out to them;
 Indeed, their following is after the devil, in every act and deed.

Should they at any time take a footstep in the right road,
 Immediately, at the next step, they are sorry for it again.

The books of heaven, and the books of earth, they read and learn;
 But their acts are as remote therefrom, as the heavens from earth.

Internally, their hearts are imbued with scepticism and distrust
 Externally, they are followers of Islam, by the words of their mouths.

Nothing good or kind, is discoverable in their conversation:
 Their creed is empty words--their promise to be evaded, or unblushingly denied.

Though, in devotion and adoration, they may equal Balaeam, [**]
 Even then, through giving ear unto carnality, they are infidels at last.

[p. 230]

The humble servant of that man, I KHUSHhaL, KHATTAK, am,
 The ways of whose heart are in conformity with his words.

  

LXXIX.

However tortuously the snake moveth about,
 It proceedeth straight enough unto its hole.

Awaken from the sleep of thoughtlessness;
 For pleasant existence is every moment passing away!

Relentless death will not pass any man over--
 Time by time, all creation will pass away!

The traveller, knowingly, throweth away his life,
 Who ventureth into total darkness without a guide.

He misseth his footsteps, and staggereth in his gait,
 Who, convicted of crime, before the Kazi proceedeth.

He rendereth the fire of Hell harmless, altogether,
 From whose eyes the tears fall, at the dawn of day.

That existence, like as the wind, passeth away,
 Which, more or less, passeth in misery and woe.

If resignation be shown unto the Divine decrees,
 Verily, sorrow and grief will vanish from the heart.

Since thou hast flung, uselessly, the musk away,
 What rigour bringest thou, the camphor upon? [**]

He, who hath neither wealth nor possessions to care for,
 Goeth about, everywhere, cheerful, and free from care.

[p. 231]

Abandon not, O KHUSHhaL! His footmarks,
 Though thy head, like that of the pen, should go. [**]

  

LXXX.

Certainly this man is, thro' polish and good breeding, a human being;
 For he, who is not possessed of these, is no better than the beast of the field.

They are not men, who may not inherit either faithfulness or constancy;
 Otherwise the dog, in these matters, is far more estimable than they.

The just and conscientious are, unto me, as the flowers of Paradise's parterre;
 But the false and tyrannical are, unto me, as the fuel of the fire of Hell.

When the dog groweth familiar with any one, and obtaineth something to eat,
 At him, he will never bark nor growl again, as long as his life may last.

He, who is with justice and equity endowed, need have no fear of Hell;
 And justice, in my sight, is far more important than even piety itself.

From good nature and qualities, the estimation of a man's worth is formed;
 For, by disposition, a man is either a devil, or an angel--a fiend, or a fay.

[p. 232]

Flee speedily from him, who may possess neither learning nor attainments;
 For the man, without knowledge and information, is but a straw.

When he cannot be restrained by thy counsels, nor be guided by thy advice,
 Fetters are required to control him, even though he a lion may be.

What, indeed, is either vice or virtue--right or wrong, atheists unto?
 According to the creed they follow, the dog's whelp is an innocent lamb.

In the sunshine of prosperity, the sincerity of friends cannot be tested;
 But they are thy friends, who help thee, in adversity, thy load to sustain.

Every ascetic, who without a spiritual guide, assumeth a life of austerity,
 In the estimation of KHUSHhaL, KHATTAK, is but an empty husk.

  

LXXXI.

What is it, but a sound and healthy body,
 Which, more than empire and sovereignty, is preferred?

Altho' the world's wealth is an excellent thing,
 Glory and renown are, than riches, more precious still.

What are more inestimable than the most perfect thing?
 The one, is purity--the other, is sincerity of heart.

What is it that disenthralleth a man from sorrow?
 Yea, what is it?--it is contentedness of mind.

[p. 233]

Shouldst thou boast thyself of thy godliness,
 That godliness, thereby, is rendered bootless and vain.

What is that, which hath a value beyond compute?
 Yea, what is it?--it is deliberation in all our affairs.

That, which as a favour and obligation is conferred,
 As generosity or liberality, is it ever accounted?

What is that, which, in this world, is a Hell indeed?
 Verily, it is the society and acquaintance of a fool.

Then, O KHUSHhaL! guard thou well thy mind;
 For if there be aught good, 'tis a mind upright.

  

LXXXII.

Such an amount of misery is there in my family this day,
 That the world is amazed and confounded, at the sight of our troubles.

A degenerate son soweth thorns in the path of his own father;
 But the deserving son is a rose-garden, that bloometh all life long.

An incapable, worthless son, maketh a very Hell-upon-earth therein;
 But a worthy son is, truly, a Paradise in his father's dwelling.

A good child becometh a refulgent lamp in. the house of its parent;
 But a graceless, misbegotten one is murky darkness within his abode.

In maturity, his nature becometh that of a trap and a beast of prey;
 Therefore, the good conduct of a child is the greater, the younger it may be.

[p. 234]

The vicious son destroyeth the name and reputation of father and grandfather,
 Though the banner of their greatness and renown be up-reared on high.

The virtuous son is wholly occupied in concern for name and fame;
 But the good-for-nothing son maketh the belly the object of his regard.

Indeed, since dogs of such description have been born unto him,
 I have my doubts, whether KHUSHhaL is a human being at all.

  

LXXXIII.

Either let it be a sovereign upon his throne,
 Or let it be the poor darwesh of a monastery!

Many there are, who are in the right path--
 Would there were a few, like myself, astray!

I am ready, at all times, the work to commence--
 Would that my friends were also as ready to begin!

He, whose actions are unbecoming a man,
 A man cannot be, but a crazy old crone.

By computation, I have thirty sons, no less
 Would that I could a good word for some of them say!

Were there any steps taken for assembling troops--
 Every hill and dale with them to profusion teem.

The black and the white [**] are useless in any affair--
 Either let all be white, or let all black be.

[p. 235]

It is, alas! the gloomy night of woe and sorrow--
 Would that the morn of joy and delight would dawn!

Unjust towards KHUSHhaL they would not be,
 Were people with the state of the case acquainted. [**]

  

LXXXIV.

Verily, the Afghans are deficient in sense and understanding--
 They are the tail-cut curs of the butchers' slaughter-house.

They have played away dominion, for the gold of the Mughals;
 And they lust after the offices, that the Mughals can give.

Though the camel, with its lading, hath entered their dwelling,
 They are first taken up with stealing the bell from its neck.

Out upon him, who first the name of Sarrah-ban [*+] bore!
 And malediction upon the whole of them, that after follow!

The recreant occupy themselves in baseness and dishonour;
 But every breath of the noble is devoted to the cause of renown.

They commence from Kandahar, and reach unto Damghar; [*++]
 And all are worthless and good for nothing, who dwell between.

[p. 236]

  

LXXXV.

I went and turned anchorite--such is my case, such my situation--
 My sole worldly wealth this broken bowl within my hand, and a coverlet of rags.

Behold the unfortunate! see what manner of meretricious acts they commit!
 They all desire prosperity; but prosperity is evanescent, and continueth not!

I will become a sacrifice unto him, who hath made the world his sacrifice;
 But let him be an oblation unto me, who hath become an oblation unto gold.

There is nothing whatever in it--there is a great bustle in an empty shop:
 When I duly considered the matter, I found it all mere fancy--a phantom--a dream.

One is being laid in the cold grave, whilst another, at home, sitteth unconcerned;
 Then there are three days of mourning; and on the fourth, the case is changed.

With hands placed to my ears, I flee from it, that I may escape therefrom;
 But others grow wretched after it--O God, what a dreadful plague it is!

What hast thou to do with others? show resolution for thine own deliverance;
 For thou, O KHUSHhaL! art entangled therein--alas! what a net of calamity it is!

[p. 237]

  

LXXXVI.

O rose! who art the true cause of the garden's loveliness,
 Why condescendest thou to join, in laughter, with thorns and weeds?

How cometh it, that thou art not conscious of thine own dignity?
 For thou art the one and only beauteous object in this parterre.

The songs of the nightingales will not always be made for thee;
 For thou, O lovely rose! art notorious for thy lack of constancy.

Delight, then, the senses of the nightingale with thine own fragrance,
 For the few, short days, that thou freshly bloomest, the garden within.

Should I desire to mention, unto any one, thy injustice, 'tis unspeakable;
 Yet with all this heavy amount of wrongs, thou art my life still.

But shouldst thou complain, unto any one, of the injustice of thy beloved,
 May all love's calamities befall thee; for thou sayest what is false.

O KHUSHhaL! thou that ascendest unto love and passion's giddy height
 Consider well, in thy heart, upon whom thou hast thine affections placed.

  

LXXXVII.

When of the circumstances of the wise are the ignorant aware,
 Who, through their own foolishness, are worthless and despicable too?

A star only twinkled in the eyes of the blear-eyed fellow;
 Yet, he called out to the world, that it was the sun itself.

[p. 238]

From those deep scars, that are branded upon my heart,
 I am well aware, indeed, that it is thoroughly seasoned thereby.

Should one but restrain his eyes, there would be no misery:
 It is the eyesight that hurleth the thunderbolts upon the heart.

Forbid, O God, that any one in the world should fall in love!
 For it is like unto an invading army in the body's realm.

This poor, maddened heart of mine, began to laugh yestreen;
 But see! to-day, it has commenced, once more, to weep again.

That I have drawn out the diver of thought from the depths of the ocean,
 Come and behold; for the words of KHUSHhaL are pearls, indeed!

  

LXXXVIII.

Of them, who always placed upon their heads the cap of vanity,
 The black hair hath now become, like unto white wool, changed.

The running stream and life's career are both one and the same--
 In this world, those joyous days and nights, return to us no more!

All love, save that of God, if thou perceivest, is, altogether,
 As if one built a bridge of straws upon the surface of the stream.

With all this grace and beauty that I see possessed by thee,
 Whether thou art of human mould, or a fay, I cannot say.

Without the wind's aid, I attain not to the object of my desire,
 Notwithstanding I launch upon the waters the boat of my heart.

From the dusky snakes of thy tresses he entertaineth no dread,
 Who, in his mouth, holdeth the snake-root of thy affection and love.

The heart of KHUSHhaL, in piety, was like unto a mountain;
 But, all at once 'tis to a gossamer changed, through his love for thee.

[p. 239]

  

LXXXIX.

Of the preciousness of youth what doubt can be entertained?
 The period of old age is pregnant with infirmities and defects!

Every now and again, fresh wounds break out upon my heart;
 And salt is spread and sprinkled upon my wounds always.

Should joy and gladness approach thee, be not overjoyed thereat;
 For care and sorrow ever stare happiness in the face.

Murmur not at the tyranny, or the injustice of any one;
 For it is fate that dealeth out misfortune upon us all.

Without some wise object, He hath not brought sorrow upon us;
 For affliction is the test on the face of the dastard and the brave.

As much as happiness exceedeth, so much the more lavish is misery:
 Fortunate is he, indeed, for whose belly sufficeth the dry crust.

Now that I am turned ascetic, for whom shall I gird on the sword?
 It is well, forsooth, that I even bear a club my shoulder upon. [**]

Should any one make inquiry concerning wounded hearts,
 There is KHUSHhaL, KHATTAK'S, by his own clan lacerated.

  

XC.

That one's blood should be upon one's own head, is, truly, some cause of concern;
 Still, to think that I still live, whilst my friends are in the tomb, is irksome to me.

[p. 240]

Since so many pleasant and familiar faces are buried beneath this earth,
 When I shall join them in the grave, it will be a very paradise to me.

Is old age come upon me? am I imbecile grown? or is there aught else?
 For that doth not succeed which I set about; and yet people and country are the same.

Tho' I speak unto folks ever so kindly, they take in bad part what I say unto them
 'Tis either the good fortune of the Mughals, or my intellect hath deficient become.

No! 'tis not the good fortune of the Mughals, nor am I in intellect wanting
 'Tis, entirely, through old age, that my affairs are all disordered and confused.

The Mughals whom I now set eyes upon, are not such as were wont to be:
 The day of their swords is past and gone, and but the pen remaineth unto them.

They gain over the Afghans by gold; and by fraud and deception entangle them: [**]
 Upon me these things have no effect; for the favour of God is still upon me.

I am neither a fly nor a crow, that I should hover over rottenness and filth:
 The hawk or the falcon am I, that must my heart, with my own quarry, delight.

[p. 241]

Were there but others like unto me in this affair, I should rejoice indeed;
 But since there are none like me, with distress and grief I am o'erwhelm'd.

Both Ae-mal Khan and Dar-ya Khan have passed away, in honour and in fame; [**]
 And, through bereavement from them, these my sighs, and this mourning proceed.

  

XCI.

The faithlessness of the world hath become manifest unto me;
 Therefore, through the word 'friendship,' I have drawn my pen.

Like as when fire reacheth brushwood, and it ceaseth to be;
 So with absence's pangs--they last, only, for a few short days.

Than the sun's light, that of true knowledge is still more bright:
 Forbid, that any one should emerge from such effulgence as this!

See what an admirable form, from a single drop proceedeth!
 Truly, the works of the Almighty are worthy of Himself!

Thou, O nightingale! wouldst, erewhile, have given the rose thy heart,
 If this mart of its beauty were to continue to flourish always.

There will not be, henceforth, repose like this for me again,
 Since I have become aware, O solitude, of thy preciousness!

They, who by their own efforts, seek, the world's prosperity to gain,
 The wisdom of such people is as nothing in my sight.

[p. 242]

From whom shall I seek to obtain a such-like panacea,
 That hath been purposely prepared, for the cure of my pains?

Since the calamity of separation is ever linked along with it,
 Wherefore is the beauty of the beloved so lauded and extolled?

Since the gem is grown of less value than the kauri shell [**]--
 There can be no jeweller, clear-sighted enough to distinguish them.

Seeing, that wherever there may be beauty, there the heart is,
 To what degree shall KHUSHhaL'S self-denial and abnegation praise?

  

XCII.

It is false that aught of evil or misfortune proceedeth from the stars--
 All good and evil--weal and woe--emanate from the Almighty's decrees.

If their colour be their excellence, whence is their fragrance?
 For flowers of paper are similar unto the flowers themselves.

Fortune is like unto a child, in its disposition and its ways;
 For when the child giveth one any thing, it soon regretteth it again.

When the world's prosperity turneth its face from the ignorant,
 At their words, and their proceedings, the wise become amazed.

But when the wise man may not possess aught of its wealth,
 In the world's eyes, he is the same as a blockhead, or a fool.

When possessed of power and influence, my words were as pearls;
 But now, I am satisfied if they be, even as corals, received.

[p. 243]

Let us see what events will, hereafter, show their face;
 Though, in the meantime, the world will prate a deal thereon.

As much as the love of wealth exceedeth, so much misery it bringeth;
 For they, who accumulate much of it, grow miserable indeed.

I am that same KHUSHhaL, but me they value not now;
 For 'tis of the Afghans, that all these my complainings are.

  

XCIII.

Wherever thou reclinest, that place a parterre of flowers becometh
 When thou in the mead roamest, the breast of the tulip is scarred.

When the sable locks about thy fair face, the zephyr disheveleth,
 The fragrance of musk and amber is diffused in every brain.

Since, in thy tresses, my heart is lost, show thou thy face to me;
 For in night's gloom, lost things are, with lighted lamp, sought for.

Equal to that deliciousness, which I have, from thy lips, imbibed;
 Term me a liar if such, as luscious, be in the wine-cup found.

Bear, O zephyr unto the nightingale, this message of mine--
 "The rose's fragrance or its trace, in this parterre, will, doubtless, be."

For one moment, at least, sit thou with KHUSHhaL in tranquillity,
 That his heart may, from its heavy sorrows, some slight solace find!

  

XCIV.

From the lustre of the internal, the exterior is clear and bright;
 But by intercourse with the base, there are a hundred ills.

[p. 244]

Like the name of alchemy and of the phoenix, that we hear about,
 Than both of these, sincerity and fidelity are more rarely found.

From the lips of the despicable thou hearest a thousand things;
 For when will they rest satisfied with a single harangue?

Do not allow thyself to be deceived by friends of the present day--
 Before thy face, they are for thee; but behind thee, back to back.

Do thou, O KHUSHhaL! call in that great physician's aid,
 In the refulgence of whose face there 's perfect cure for thee!

  

XCV.

Account him a good man, who, in heart, is innocent and pure;
 For modesty and uprightness are manifest in him always.

He, who may not possess these few qualities, is not a man;
 And whatever he wisheth let him do; for he is absolved from all.

They who contend with the world, for the sake of worldly goods,
 Are like unto dogs, fighting and snarling, a mass of carrion upon.

If a wise man be, in appearance unsightly, what mattereth it
 What though a homely scabbard hath been for a good blade made?

In these matters, no one else hath any business or concern whatever;
 For 'tis the money-changer, that, distinguisheth the pure from the alloy.

The jeweller will himself make them show their respective qualities,
 Though, in colour, the agate may be more pellucid than the ruby itself.

I wander everywhere in search of friendship, and find it not:
 In what direction do they dwell, that know aught of faithfulness?

[p. 245]

He will not be acquainted with the art of weaving velvet,
 Although the maker of mats is, also, among weavers accounted.

Love hath not proceeded either from what is true, or what is futile;
 But manifold are the pilgrimages made to the idol of its shrine.

Those charming ones have grown so numerous, that I fear them now
 I, KHUSHhaL, that of my piety and godliness have boasted so much.

  

XCVI.

All woman-kind are of intellect deficient;
 And the voluntary causes of all life's ills.

Thou mayst be straight and even with them;
 But they are crooked and wayward with thee.

Do them a thousand benefits and services;
 Yet, at a single word, their hearts sulky grow.

They become poison unto thee, and kill thee--
 They, whom thou deemest a healing balm.

They have no fidelity in their composition:
 They are, naturally, unto perfidiousness prone.

Created, indeed, in the figure of mankind;
 But, in reality, with no humanity in them.

They make thee out culpable, on a slight offence;
 But they cannot be wrong, however great their sins.

[p. 246]

The more crossness borne, the more petulant they:
 The more whims brooked, the more capricious they grow.

In all things, they are fickle, and changeable:
 Tame in tongue, [**] but untameable in heart.

They are beautiful in person, from head to foot;
 But are like unto the wily serpent within.

Say no more about them, O KHUSHhaL!
 It would be better had they never .existed!

  

XCVII.

I am of those eyes of thine enamoured--look thou upon me!
 I am the Hindu slave of thy locks; but dispose not of me!

With this form, and these charms, that thou possessest,
 It would be, indeed, wonderful, were any other born like thee.

In grace and loveliness, there is no one equal unto thee--
 This is the pity, that thou art, wholly, pitiless and unkind.

Though I die of grief for thee, still thou turnest away from me:
 What! is the love of thine heart turned so dark for me?

I will never abandon thy door, nor thy dwelling-place,
 Though thou mayest, without fire, cruelly, me consume.

Shouldst thou inflict a thousand cruelties on me, imagine not,
 That the love of my heart will, towards thee, ever be changed.

I am well off, sunk down contemptible, in the dust at thy door;
 But not so elsewhere, though I should upon a throne recline.

[p. 247]

  

XCVIII.

The mercy of the Almighty be upon Akorraey, [**] that selected Sara'e [*+] for his home!
 Since I have on the subject reflected, if thou believe me, 'tis, of all others, the spot.

Its dark mountain-range of Hoddaey, [*++] runneth directly into the Ti-rah country,
 And the Nil-ab and Landdaey have, wonderfully, laid their heads at its feet. [* section]

The great high road of Hindustan and Khurasan, is made along their banks;
 And by Attak lieth its ford, which both kings and beggars hold in dread.

[p. 248]

Every blessing of the earth, that can be called to mind, cometh to us thereby;
 And, as the country is rainy, who shall tell how beautiful is its spring?

Whether it be the district of Suwat, or Ashnagar, or whether Pes'hawar,
 They have recourse unto it; and its abundance goeth forth to them all.

There is game around, in every direction--sport for falcon, hawk, or hound:
 Hail! hail! Kalah-parrni! [**] what heart-ravishing sport dost thou contain!

The youth of Sara'e are healthy and stout; active and agile, in every thing:
 Merry-eyed; white and red; and tall in stature are they, the eye unto.

Whether it be son, or grand-son; whether family, or whether tribe,
 May the protection of the Almighty be extended to all who dwell therein!

Fate, alas! hath taken him from it--can the arm of any one reach fate?
 KHUSHhaL, hath not been severed from Sara'e of his own accord--ah no! [*+]

Footnotes

^150:* These are the Afridi chiefs, who aided Khushhal in his wars with Aurangzeb.

^150:+ The name of a Pass leading from Peshawar to Jalalabad.

^150:++ A small State, held by independent Afghan tribes, N###7816###. of Peshawar.

^150: section He had gone into the Yusufzi country, to endeavour to persuade that tribe to assist the confederates.

^150: section section See note at page <page 139>.

^151:* The lofty mountain to the right of the Khaibar Pass, looking from Peshawar, and giving name to another Pass, leading to Jalalabad.

^151:+ A parganah or division of the Peshawar district, lying, as its name implies, between two rivers, the Landdaey and the Kabul.

^151:++ A town of the Peshawar district, on the northern bank of the Kabul river.

^152:* Aurangzeb dethroned his father Shah Jahan, whom he confined in prison until his death, which took place seven years after.

^152:+ The Yusufzis who would not aid.

^153:* A small district of Afghanistan, of which Jalalabad, famous for its defence by Sir Robert Sale, is the chief town.

^153:+ The fifth month of the Afghan year, so called.

^153:++ According to the Abjad system of the Arabs and other Muhammadans, of computing numbers by letters, the word  (ghafu) is equivalent to the year H. 1086 (A.D. 1675.)

^153: section Cause the bud to open its leaves.

^154:* One of the three great divisions into which the whole Afghan nation is divided, and in which the Khattak tribe is included.

^154:+ See the Introductory Chapter, page <page xix>., on the word "ALASTO."

^155:* Kasra, or Cyrus, King of Persia, is the model of a just king; and Hujaj bin Yusuf, Governor of Khurasan, under the Khalifah, Aeabd-ul-Malik, the conception of a perfect tyrant.

^158:* The fabulous mountain, the boundary of the world, and surrounding the horizon on all sides.

^159:* Bu-Lhab and Bu-Jhal, the former the uncle, and the latter the cousin of Muhammad, were his greatest enemies and opposers in the propagation of his new faith. Aeumar, the second Khalifah after Muhammad, is called Faruk, The Distinguisher.

^160:* Gabr is the name given to Fire-worshippers, or Parsis.

^161:* The elephant is in the habit of sprinkling himself with dust, to drive insects away; but here it is to indicate sorrow.

^163:* Sult###804###an Muezz-ud-din Sanjar was the son of Malik Shah, sixth monarch of the race of Seljuk, and for upwards of twenty years Governor of Khurasan. His life is remarkable for the vicissitudes he suffered, having once been confined for four years in an iron cage, by the Guzzian tribe of Turkomans, but subsequently escaped. He died the 25th of Rubbiah-ul-awal, A.H. 552, after a reign of forty-one years, paramount sovereign of Persia, and in the 73rd of his age. With him the grandeur of the race of Seljuk terminated. He has been equally praised for his piety and modesty of disposition, and for his benevolence, and the love of his people; for his respect for, and his encouragement of learning and learned men; and for his zeal and exertions to promote the advancement of his religion.

^164:* For an account of Shahdad and his garden of Iram, see note at page <page 81>.

^164:+ Ibid.

^164:++ Mir-baz Khan, a connexion of Khushhal's; who was a worshipper of the wealth of the Mughals.

^167:* Karun, son of Yeshar, the uncle of Moses, and identical with Korah of the Scriptures, who, at the complaint of Moses, against whom he had brought a false accusation, was swallowed by the earth, at the command of the Almighty.

^168:* Referring to the Muhammadan account of the creation, for which see Sale's edition of the KUR'aN.

^169:* A person who acts as go-between of the parents in cases of marriage or betrothal.

^169:+ The rue-plant was anciently regarded as an infallible antidote against poison, pestilence, and the devil. It is much used in exorcisms, and has been extravagantly eulogized and extolled by all writers, from Hippocrates to Boerhaave. By the Afghans, the herb and its seeds are used as fumigations, to ward off the evil-eye.

^171:* See note at page <page 15>.

^171:+ A belt, or cord more particularly, worn round the middle by the Eastern Christians and Jews, and also by the Persian Magi. It was introduced A.D. 859, by the Khalifah Mutawakkil, to distinguish them from Muhammadans.

^172:* This appears to refer to some of the poet's wives, who bore him disobedient sons.

^173:* Two undutiful sons of the poet, particularly Bahram.

^173:+ The species of parrot here referred to we should term paroquet in this country. Green is the mourning colour in Muhammadan countries.

^175:* A kind of Darwesh or devotee, who goes about almost naked.

^175:+ It is usual with young females to wear a clove in the nostril, to keep open the orifice pierced for the insertion of the nose jewel, on marriage.

^175:++ A black mole.

^175: section See note at page <page 48>.

^175: section section See note at page <page 137>.

^177:* Lit. "The father of ignorance," an uncle of Muhammad's. See also note at page <page 159>.

^178:* A kind of dish made from flesh and rice, to which are added raisins and almonds, etc.

^179:* Aurangzeb, son of the Emperor Shah Jahan.

^179:+ Literally, house-born slaves; but here the term applies to the trusty chiefs and followers of Shah Jahan, who was dethroned by Aurangzeb.

^181:*

"A want of occupation is not rest;
  A mind quite vacant, is a mind distress'd."--COWPER.

^181:+ Written on the poet's return from Suwat, where he had gone to endeavour to induce the Yusufzis to join the confederacy against Aurangzeb.

^182:* A skinner or tanner is looked upon with great contempt by the Afghans.

^183:* Sama'h signifies a plain in the Afghan language, and is the name given to that tract of country, lying between the Kabul river, near its junction with the Indus, and the mountains bounding Suwat on the south.

^183:+ Referring to the unhappy end of the Emperor Shah Jahan, dethroned and imprisoned by Aurangzeb his son.

^186:* See note at page <page 74>.

^187:* Under the two names of Iran and Turan, from whence the people are termed Irani and Turani, Eastern authors comprehend all the higher Asia, except China and India. Iran, which is the Eastern name for the Persian Empire, includes all that immense tract of country, lying between the Oxus or Bakhtrus on the north, the Arabian sea on the south, and the Tigris on the west. The region beyond the Oxus is Turan or Scythia, or Turkomania. In some instances, Irani and Turani include all mankind, in the same manner as Greek and Barbarian--Jew and Gentile--Arab and Ajam.

^187:+ All the different tribes here mentioned are not Afghans, but are either located in Afghanistan or border on the Afghan country. The Panjabis and Sikhs not being mentioned, would indicate that in Khushhal's days they were not recognised as separate people, but included amongst Hindustanis.

^189:* A black-eyed virgin of the Muhammadan Paradise.

^191:* Reading over the sura or chapter of the Kur'an, entitled "kul huwa-l-lah," by way of benediction, and to preserve one's self from evil and misfortune.

^191:+ A religious mendicant or devotee.

^191:++ That is to say, an impossible thing.

^193:* An old fortress and village on the west bank of the Indus, facing Attak.

^193:+ The town of Sara'e, belonging to the Khattak tribe of Afghans, lies amongst the hills to the west of Attak, and not far from the west bank of the Sind or Indus. It is one of the chief towns of the tribe, and was the birthplace of the poet, and most of his ancestors are here buried; but Khushhal himself was buried at a different place. See notice preceding his poems.

^194:* Aba-Sind, signifying "the father of rivers," is the Afghan name for the Indus. The Landdaey-Sind, or "little river," is that known as the river of Kabul, after its junction with the Suwat (the ancient Suastus), until it joins the Indus a little above Attak.

^194:+ Hind, or Hindustan.

^195:* This poem was written by one of Khushhal's wives, the mother of Ashraf, himself a poet, who died in exile in Southern India. It would almost appear to be a reply to the poem preceding, which was written by Khushhal, whilst in exile in India.

^195:+ The leaves of a tree (Lawsonia inermis) from which a bright orange red colour is extracted, and with which the Muhammadan people of Asia dye the hands and feet on festive occasions.

^195:++ Used to give a bright red colour to the lips; but the bark of the walnut-tree seems to be the favourite substance for the purpose among the Afghan females now-a-days.

^195: section The play on the words in these two last lines are nearly lost in translation; for instead of inserting her own name, the writer uses her husband's, which signifies 'happy.' To have inserted her own name would have been considered indelicate.

^197:* Afrit--one of the most fierce and cruel of the genii, or demons, of Oriental tales.

^197:+ Pattans, another name for the Afghans.

^197:++ The Afghan Emperors of India, of the Ludi tribe, were Sult###804###ans Bahlol, Sikandar, and Ibrahim, who reigned from A.D. 1450 to 1526, when Babar conquered Hindustan. His son, Humayun, was again dethroned by Sher Shah, an Afghan of the tribe of Sur, in A.D. 1540. To him succeeded Salim Shah, his son, whose son, Muhammad Shah, was dethroned by Humayun, the previous Emperor, and father of Akbar, in 1556.

^198:* A kind of cloth or gauze, which is said to be rent by exposure to the moonlight; and, hence, is represented by Oriental poets as enamoured of the moon.

^199:* See note at page <page 29>.

^199:+ A tribe of Afghans, dwelling in the hills to the west and south of Peshawar, who are about the most uncivilized of the Afghans.

^199:++ The celebrated saint of the Afghans, and great antagonist of Pir Roshan, the founder of the Roshanian sect of schismatics. He changed the name of Pir Roshan, signifying, "Saint of Light," into Pir Tarik, or "Saint of Darkness."

^199: section Bayazid Ansari, who took the name of Pir Roshan, as above stated. For further accounts of this man, see page <page 51>.

^199: section section The red carnelian caskets refer to the gums, and the pearls are the teeth in them.

^199:** The eye is compared to the narcissus, and white roses to a clear complexion.

^200:* Aesop.

^200:+ Solomon.

^201:* Hujaj, the Governor of Khurasan under the Khalifahs of the house of Omeyah, and a notorious tyrant.

^201:+ A Persian monarch, celebrated throughout the East for his justice and equity, hence he is known as "Noshirwan the Just." It was during his reign that Muhammad was born.

^203:* The letter ###1575### (alif), from its form, is adopted to denote straightness of stature.

^203:+ See Poem XCVIII., third note.

^203:++ The name of a pass or defile, leading into the Ti-rah country, held by the Afridi tribe of Afghans.

^204:* The rubies signify the lips, and the pearls the teeth.

^206:* See page <page 142>.

^207:* Mummy--the substance with which Egyptian mummies are preserved, a medicine held in great estimation in Oriental countries for wounds and fractures.

^207:+ A celebrated Arabian poet, famous for his eloquence.

^207:++ The name of an Arab, celebrated throughout the East for his liberality and munificence.

^208:* The letter ###1575### (alif) is an emblem of the Almighty--the One and Only.

^208:+ Attar of roses.

^209:* The family of the Khattak tribe in which the chieftainship was, and still is hereditary.

^209:+ See note at page <page 193>.

^210:* The long curls of the hair of the Afghan females, often reaching below the waist, are compared to black snakes. See note at page <page 136>.

^212:* A crier, who summons the Faithful to prayer, by proclamation from the minaret of a mosque.

^212:+ The name of a small district to the west of Peshawar, and south of the Khaibar Pass.

^212:++ Two of the three independent tribes of the Khaibaris, altogether about 120,000 souls, who hold the Khaibar Pass. They are the most uncouth and uncivilized of the Afghan tribes.

^213:* See Introductory Remarks, for an account of the Sufis and their tenets.

^213:+ Long and wide sleeves are worn in the East.

^215:* This was written during his wars with the Mughals.

^217:* Jahangir Shah, signifying "the world-conquering king," is the title assumed by the fourth Mughal Emperor of India, and son of Akbar. Nur Mahal, "the light of the haram," is the name of his favourite queen.

^217:+ Antimony, used in Oriental countries to increase the blackness of the eyes, by applying it to the lids. See "LANE'S MODERN EGYPTIANS."

^217:++ The reed or pipe is an emblem of slightness and weakness, and the utterer of plaintive sounds.

^219:* The black-eyed virgins of the Muhammadan Paradise.

^220:* See first note at <page 183>.

^220:+ Khata or Khatay, the northern part of China, or Chinese Tartary, famous for its musk and pretty damsels.

^221:* The Hindu women boldly and fearlessly mount the funeral pyre of their deceased husbands, for what they consider honour's sake.

^222:* China and Chinese Tartary, famous for beautiful women.

^223:* The patriarch Jacob.

^223:+ Referring to the scanty garments of the women of India.

^223:++ Indian husbands chastise their wives with a shoe for very trivial matters.

^223: section In a contemptuous sense, as sold unto gold and infidelity.

^224:* There is a good deal of foppery manifested in the East regarding the tail or termination of the turban, which hangs behind.

^225:* The poet's name signifies 'happy;' hence the play upon the word here, which would lose by translation.

^226:* This would appear to refer to the dark red tulip.

^226:+ The hyacinth or spikenard is compared to the dark locks, and the lily or jasmine to the fairness of the face of the beloved one.

^226:++ See note at page <page 221>.

^227:* An earthly paradise, a fabulous garden in Arabia.

^227:+ See note at page <page 137>.

^228:* As before stated, the name of the poet signifies 'happy;' hence, "where the heart has become happy," is the meaning above.

^229:* "Balaeam (Balaam), son of Beor, who, being requested by his nation to curse Moses and the children of Israel, refused at first, saving, "How can I curse those whom the angels protect?" But afterwards he was prevailed upon by gifts; and he had no sooner done what they wished, than he began to put out his tongue like a dog, and it hung down upon his breast."--Al Beidawi, Jalal-ud-din, Al Zamakhshari.

^230:* Musk here signifies 'youth,' when the hair is of the colour of musk; and camphor, 'old age,' when the hair turns silvery.

^231:* Referring to the nib of a pen.

^234:* The faithless and insincere.

^235:* This poem appears to have reference to the coldness of the poet's confederates in the war with the Mughals, and to the trouble Khushhal had with his sons.

^235:+ The name of the ancestor of one of the great divisions of the Afghans, including some of the western tribes, and also the Yusufzis of the north-eastern parts of Afghanistan, who refused assistance to Khushhal and his confederates, in their wars with Aurangzeb.

^235:++ Damghar is the name of a small town in Suwat.

^239:* Ascetics and darweshes carry a club or staff.

^240:* The Emperor Aurangzeb, finding that Khushhal and his brother confederates could not be subdued with the sword, tried gold and diplomacy, to which the most of them succumbed. See page <page 144>.

^241:* See Khushhal, Poem I., 'An Ode to Spring,' stanza 17.

^242:* Cypraea moneta.

^246:* Not always, at least, as far as the tongues of most Englishwomen go.

^247:* Akorraey is the name of Khushhal's great-grandfather, who conquered from the Wurakzi tribe, the country now held by the Khattaks. There is a town also named after this chief, between Attak and Peshawar.

^247:+ See note at page <page 193>.

^247:++ The high mountain facing Attak, and a little lower down than the village of Khairabad on the same side, which rises up directly from the Indus, is mount Hoddaey, which gives its name to the whole range, reaching as far as Ti-rah, a district lying about south-east from Pes'hawar. The Bara river rises in Ti-rah, which is beyond the Khaibar Pass, and is inhabited by Afghans of the Afridi and Ti-rah tribes.

^247: section The Nil-ab, or Blue-water, is one of the names of the Indus, which washes the base of Hoddaey. A few miles further up is the Landdaey, in Pushto signifying the Less or Little, a name given to the river of Kabul, which joins the Indus a few miles above Attak, a town on the east bank of the Indus, on the high-road between India and Khurasan.

^248:* Kalah-parrni is the name of an extensive forest in the Khattak country, once famous for its game.

^248:+ This poem was written during the poet's exile in India; and Sara'e was his place of birth.

     
Selections from the Poetry of the Afghans, by H.G. Raverty, [1868], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 249]

  

ASHRAF KHAN, KHATTAK.

ASHRAF KHaN, eldest son of Khushhal Khan, the subject of the preceding notice, was born in the year H. 1044 (A.D. 1634); and when the war, which had been carried on by his father and other Afghan chieftains, against the Mughal Emperor, died out, Khushhal, wholly disgusted with the world, resigned the chieftainship of the Khattak tribe in favour of Ashraf, A.H. 1093 (A.D. 1681.) The circumstances, which brought these matters about, having been related at length in the notice preceding Khushhal's poems, need not be repeated here.

Ashraf endeavoured for some time to carry on the government of his clan, and also to perform his duties towards the Mughal Government, by aiding the Pes'hawar authorities in the administration of the affairs of that province; but he was opposed and thwarted in all his endeavours by his brother Bahram, the same who endeavoured to take the life of his father, who styles him "Bahram the Degenerate," and "The Malignant;" and by whose machinations, Ashraf was, at last, betrayed into the hands of Aurangzeb, in the year H. 1095 (A.D. 1683). The affairs of the Dakhan having called for the presence of that monarch, who continued in that part of India for several years, the Khattak chief was taken along with him, as a state prisoner; and was subsequently sent to the strong fortress of Bijapur, situated in what is, at present, termed the Southern Maharata country, where he continued to languish in exile for the remainder of his life. He died in the year H. 1105 (A.D. 1693), and in the 60th year of his age.

[p. 250]

Ashraf used, occasionally, to devote some of his leisure time to poetry, before he assumed the government of his clan, incited, doubtless, by the example of his brave old father, and his brothers Aeabd-ul-Kadir and Sadr Khan, who were also gifted with the "cacoethes scribendi." During his exile he wrote a great number of poems, and collected the whole, as they now stand, in the form of a Diwan, or Alphabetical Collection. According to the usual custom among Eastern poets, Ashraf assumed the name of "The Severed" or "Exiled;" and many of his poems, written in the most pathetic style, plainly tell where, and under what circumstances, they were composed. The original Diwan, or Collection, arranged and written by himself, at Bijapur, is still in the possession of his descendants, and from it the following poems were extracted; indeed, I am not aware that any other copy of his poems exists. Ashraf is regarded by the Afghans as a good poet; but his effusions are, without reason apparently, considered difficult and abstruse.

When Afzal Khan, his son, became firmly established in the chieftainship, he caused the remains of his father to be removed from Bijapur to Sara'e--where the Khattak chiefs have been usually interred--a distance of some fifteen hundred miles.

     
Selections from the Poetry of the Afghans, by H.G. Raverty, [1868], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 251]

  

THE POEMS

  

OF

  

ASHRAF KHAN, KHATTAK.

  

I.

THE promise of the kiss, the beloved ever putteth off for to-morrow;
 Then how can my heart place confidence in a pledge like this?

Whoso is vain enough to depend upon the affairs of the future,
 The wise and sagacious will laugh that foolish man to scorn.

My friend is not acquainted with the deceitfulness of the world;
 Yet still she deceiveth, having, in her heart, naught of truthfulness.

Do not presume to this degree, upon the loveliness of the face:
 Behold the autumn! doth it ever, to the rose, any bloom impart?

Thou, who through arrogance, attest thus falsely towards me;
 Time will pay back unto thee the requital of these deeds of thine.

In the land of association, the appliances of pleasure will be many;
 But the troops of bereavement, full speedily, lay it waste.

Never cast thou thine eyes upon the rose, O nightingale!
 For separation will make those fresh wounds of thine still worse.

But is the nightingale wont, through advice, the rose to forswear?
 No! 'tis the blast of autumn only that separateth them by force!

[p. 252]

Full many have departed in sorrow, with the hope of to-morrow;
 Then who will place any reliance on life's fidelity to-day?

Thou, who in the hope of existence therefrom, restest in tranquillity
 Doth the empyrean ever any opportunity for continuance allow?

To-day, I perceive the crisis of a contingency on the world impending;
 But the future may make apparent unto it some other event. [**]

THE SEVERED had never beheld Bijapur, even in his dreams; [*+]
 But, at last, that presenteth itself, which his destiny decreed!

  

II.

When, in the shape of a shield, the hair on the forehead is plaited [*++]
 The roses wreathed therein, impart the intrinsic virtues of the sun.

The live-coal-like ruby in her nose jewel [* section] is fire itself;
 And the red bulak, [* section section] like unto a spark of fire, is placed by its side.

[p. 253]

The chamkala'i [**] on her forehead is hence red with her lover's blood,
 That every jewel therein, for piercing, is like a lancet disposed.

Her eyebrows are a bent bow; her eyelashes, arrows adjusted:
 The ornaments of beauty are sometimes a sword; at others, a dagger made.

The devotee of a hundred years is, with one of her glances undone,
 When she decketh out her beauteous person, and goeth forth.

When she disposeth her flowing tresses in curls about her face,
 To the Ethiop army she accordeth permission, devastation to make.

Her dark eyes she maketh still more black, by the antimony;
 And every eyelash she will make moist in her lover's blood.

Soft and tender tales she telleth, but they are all dissimulation:
 She casteth her enchantments round the heart, by pretexts and pleas.

For her lover, Tartarus and Elysium are ready provided;
 Since the sweet Paradise of conjunction, separation turneth to Hell.

The shadow of love is, undoubtedly, the philosopher's stone;
 Since upon whomever it may be rubbed, his body is turned to gold.

The punishment is death, in the creed of passion's votaries,
 For him, who entereth love's path, and feareth its struggles and strife.

Never let him, at any time, gaze upon the face of the beloved,
 Who may be partial unto life, and for his head may fear.

[p. 254]

Like unto the inroads the heart-ravishers make my heart upon--
 When do the Khaibaris such upon the Mughals' heads ever make?

THE SEPARATED will not, thro' injustice, turn his back to the beloved;
 Though she should make his body red with blood all over!

  

III.

With the scar of sorrow, he will his own heart afflict,
 If, on the world's affairs, any one should reliance place.

Do not grow vain of its favour; for all is deception:
 Do not imagine, that, in reality, it benevolence showeth.

When it did not act faithfully with those that have gone,
 Whoever seeketh constancy from it to-day, erreth greatly.

The foundation of all its acts is on injustice based:
 From the age hope not for good faith; for it knoweth it not.

Do not pride thyself on the friendship of that friend,
 Who, in the same breath, in a thousand other places smileth.

I place not an hour's reliance on the permanence of life:
 He is a fool who nourisheth great hopes of immutability.

All those splendid edifices, that thou, in the world, beholdest,
 Cruel destiny, at last, will them to a naked desert turn.

THE SEPARATED, in the Dakhan, would not have a moment stayed;
 But when doth fate ever fulfil our wishes and requests!

  

IV.

What shall I say unto any one regarding the anguish of separation?
 Since it hath not even left within me the power to complain!

[p. 255]

Since every injury she heapeth upon me is right and lawful;
 At least, let the proud one stand once with face towards me.

The gold bracelets upon her wrists make an amazing display:
 Fit Let them never become broken from the disasters of fate!

For my case, O physician! thou ever showest commiseration--
 Thou sayest, "by antidotes, thou wilt be from thy afflictions relieved."

The diseases of the body thou knowest, without doubt;
 But when is the agony of the heart laid bare unto thee?

Khattak that I am, with exile I am never content;
 But affection for my friend hath from my kin severed me.

The grief of THE SEPARATED shall be changed into gladness,
 If any one, from the tavern, shall bring wine unto me.

  

V.

Like as absence from the beloved hath made day dark to me,
 Let there never be, unto any one, such a dark and lurid day!

Do not be overjoyed, O marplot! on account of my disjunction;
 For at last, dark and overcast like this, shall be thy day!

Though constancy may grant to no one the opportunity of association,
 The night of separation, at last, shall become the unclouded day!

The spring-time of youth was, than the flowers more pleasant;
 But, alas! it was not so very lasting, the constancy of that day!

Draw near, O friend, and honour me with a sight of thee!
 For the Almighty hath not in the world created an unchanging day!

[p. 256]

Thou that ever puttest off, for to-morrow, the promise of meeting,
 Consider what phase may be assumed by to-morrow's day!

The day of delight and pleasure hath passed, as the wind, away--
 For how long shall malice on me be vented by trouble's day!

TTruly, it will be, at last, like the wind that hath passed away,
 This, that I now behold--separation's long, dreary day!

The grief and joy of fortune's changes shall not last for aye:
 Verily, O SEPARATED! it shall reach its end, this oppression's day!

  

VI.

Account as wind or as dust, the world's pains and pleasures:
 The free man is not disquieted, by either its troubles or its cares.

Their coming, and their going, are more speedy than the dawn; [**]
 For I have, myself, experienced the heat and the cold of time.

Show thou no hankering for the fare on the board of fortune;
 For there is not a morsel thereon, free from bitterness and woe.

In a moment it produceth forms and figures of manifold fashions--
 As a mere throw of the dice account the revolutions of fate.

Whoso may plume himself on a lucky turn of good fortune,
 It dealeth him a painful wound, at the moment of exulting thereon.

If, with the eye of understanding, its sorrows and joys be viewed,
 The permanence of their duration is, than that of the flower no more.

[p. 257]

Turn thy back, O SEPARATED! unto evil; thy face towards good,
 That, on the Great Day of Assembly, [**] thou mayest not, with fear, be pale.

  

VII.

In love for thee, O never let my heart grow cold
 Like thine, that in perpetrating injustice, never groweth cold!

When will any one a true and sincere lover style me,
 If my heart, in grief for thee, unto constancy turn cold?

No! my heart shall never wax cold unto faithfulness;
 Nor, in this world, will thy nature, unto tyranny grow cold.

Nal, with all his wrongs, did not his back on Daman turn; [*+]
 Then how can any one's heart now, unto thee turn cold?

What clamour did the unscathed raise on him always;
 Yet the love of Majnun for his Layla grew not cold.

Advisers would, unto him, good counsel ever give?
 But no admonitions made Wamik, unto Aeazra cold!

Neither did the world show constancy unto the departed;
 Nor have the souls of the covetous, unto the world grown cold.

My burnt-up heart hath become as fresh at a sight of thee,
 As the seed of sweet basil maketh the heat-stricken cold.

The hope of my meeting hath cooled the fever of absence;
 And the perspiration of recovery always maketh the feverish cold.

[p. 258]

Even at thy death, THE SEPARATED will not thy love renounce;
 And forsworn is he, if, in life, his heart unto thee turn cold!

  

VIII.

O thou, who pridest thyself on the plenitude of the world's wealth!
 How is it that the condition of thy forefathers restraineth thee not?

Their obvious existence, than that of the flowers hath been less;
 Place then no reliance upon the mere phantasies of the world.

What is it to thee, though the face of the earth be broad?
 But three yards, in its bosom, is all thy portion thereof.

Since, beneath the earth's surface, thy abode is appointed,
 Fruitlessly, upon it, thou buildest thy mansions and thy courts.

Gaiety and enjoyment are intended for the callous and unconscious;
 But sorrow and concern are, wholly, the portion of the enlightened.

The votaries of the world are all tyrants and oppressors;
 From any one of them, of faithfulness, I have never yet heard.

They evince not a particle of shame, even in humanity's name:
 They worry and rend each other, like unto ravenous beasts.

Outwardly, they may practise the appearance of friendship;
 But the heart of every man is filled with opposition and strife.

Those deceptions that the world's sons now-a-day practise,
 Even the fox would not be guilty of such wiles and deceits.

Weep not, though thou shouldst experience adversity's frowns!
 For the evils and afflictions of this transient world shall not endure.

With the true and sincere, O SEPARATED! love and affection are good;
 But with the deceitful, friendship advantageth not the least.

[p. 259]

  

IX.

Since I am ever hopeful of meeting thee, either to day or to-morrow,
 Uselessly, in this insane idea, passeth my sweet life away.

With cries and supplications, I seek it to-day, but find it not;
 For the soldiery of separation destroy the period of my joy.

The tree of prosperity yielded not to me the fruit of my desires:
 In wails and lamentations, unjustly, my body I wearied make.

In the beginning, when the tree of affection was created,
 Its innate properties brought forth absence's bitter fruit.

I was wont, unconsciously, to eat of the fruit of separation,
 When, in the garden, I planted affection's tender sprout.

In disjunction, O friends! I perceive no fault whatever:
 The heart, this misfortune permitteth, when acquainted therewith.

With the sword of separation, He cleaveth asunder, at last,
 The heart of him, whom He, of a lovely face, enamoured maketh.

The game of absence, He at that time made so absorbing,
 When, in the world, He thus the mart of affection thronged.

THE SEPARATED mentioned not, unto a soul, the secret of love;
 But, in the alley of his beloved, the world humiliated him.

  

X.

When He, of His omnipotence, first the pen produced,
 The destiny of every one, He then with its tongue [**] wrote down.

[p. 260]

To-day, at every respiration, that allotment arriveth--
 To the share of some, He joy assigned; to the lot of others, grief.

By strife and contention now, he cannot great become,
 Who, from all eternity, was entered in an inferior degree.

Thro' the hatred of the envious, never can become crooked--
 The lot of him, which, in the beginning, He made straight.

When doth death seize the skirt of any one, out of season?
 Yet they will not tarry a moment, whose time is fulfilled.

The will of destiny ejected him from the abode of bliss;
 And then it charged unfortunate Adam with the sin.

At the wounds of fortune, O SEPARATED! do not sigh;
 For God hath, for the stricken, prepared a wondrous salve!

  

XI.

Whoever dwelleth in this abode of calamity and affliction,
 For every one, there is trouble, each according to his case.

I seek after a place of safety, but I am unable to find one;
 The world, to this degree, is so full of misery and woe:

Though fortune may, a thousand joys, on thee bestow,
 With one affliction, it trampleth them all in the dust.

Neither is its most propitious time worthy of rejoicing;
 Nor is its most portentous hour for lamentation befitting.

Be not cast down at its sorrows, for they do not continue;
 And with its pleasures also, do not thou grow overjoyed.

If fortune grant unto thee an interview with a pretty one,
 With the sting of separation, it speedily pierceth thy heart.

[p. 261]

Prosperity never entereth within the precincts of one's abode,
 Until misery and adversity its companions it maketh.

Good fortune, by its own words, saith, "I am not lasting,"
 If thou shouldst but reverse the letters of that word. [**]

The pigeon of vitality, it bringeth quickly down from its flight,
 When the falcon of destiny spreadeth its pillions to the wind.

It draweth, without pretext, the dragon from the cave:
 From the river it extracteth the fish, weak and paralyzed.

There is no cause for arrogance in life's immutability;
 For it passeth by like the wind, both month and year.

Like a fool, O SEPARATED! do not thou its slave become;
 For the world's joys and sorrows are a phantom and a dream!

  

XII.

Whoever have fattened on the fleeting wealth of the world,
 The worms of the earth, at last, have become glutted with them!

The world's great ones too, whose history the books relate,
 One after the other have fallen, slaughtered by the knife of death!

Their wealth, lands, and mansions, they have transmitted to others:
 Body by body, they have fallen asleep in the house of the tomb!

Of the empty adulations of the world, they were amazingly vain;
 But they were overcome with regret, when the time of departure came.

[p. 262]

Seeing that the world showed no constancy to the departed,
 How are those who remain, so ardent, to-day, in its pursuit?

The world is a faithless bride, that destroyeth her husband;
 Hence the wise, for this reason, are to her friendship so cold.

The flowers, that every season bloomed in the garden so sweetly,
 Have likewise, in the autumn, thus been scattered to the winds.

O thou, of vain pleasures so proud! for thy departure prepare!
 Thy cotemporaries have grown weary in looking out for thee!

Behold these graves! say, what wilt thou with gardens do?
 Look upon thy dear friends! observe what they have become!

Bend thy looks upon them--comely youths, and youthful brides!
 Separate from each other, in their graves they have withered away!

By virtuous actions, O SEPARATED! Heaven is attainable;
 Then never follow in the way of those who have gone astray.

  

XIII.

For the soul's journey, the white steed became saddled in the heart,
 When upon my chin grew white the hair of youthful days.

When the spring-time of youth unto the body bade adieu,
 The black hair waxed silvery in the autumn of old age.

Since the miseries of absence have not reduced them to ashes;
 What! have these bones of my body, all, into iron turned?

Either my good fortune, fallen asleep, giveth me no aid,
 Or the rulers of the present age have stony-hearted grown.

Whereas the heads thereof make no impression on their bodies,
 On their armour must have broken the arrows of my sighs.

[p. 263]

Sorrow, to this degree, causeth the blood from mine eyes to flow,
 That the garments of my body have become tinged therefrom.

Behold the state of my eyeballs, by separation caused!
 They have assumed the appearance of red roses within the parterre!

Though in the heart it may not have fallen, woe's seed sprouteth,
 When, by the plough of disjunction, its ground-plot may be turned.

Would, O SEPARATED! that absence were, in the world, unknown;
 For from its inroads have become desolate the people thereof!

  

XIV.

Of the pangs of separation I became deserving that day,
 When, weeping and sobbing, from my love I was severed.

At that time, for my life, in tears of blood I mourned,
 When, turning my back upon Attak, I weeping began.

How shall I now pine after the rocks and shrubs of my country?
 For, having made my parting salutation, I bade them farewell.

Embedded in my heart, from Roh [**] an arrow I brought away--
 I failed to bid adieu to my bower, or its sacrifice to become. [*+]

With much toil, in the world I had a garden laid out;
 And, as yet, I had not smelt a flower, when from it I was torn.

The blue heavens laughed from delight until they grew red,
 When facing Hoddaey's mountain [*++] I turned from it away.

There is no magician in the Dakhan that can charm me;
 For I am a prisoner become, in a dragon's cavern profound.

[p. 264]

The assignment of union was hung on the horns of the deer, [**]
 When I crossed to the other bank of Narbada's swift stream. [*+]

The riches of association were a hoard that I gloated over;
 But in absence's wars, I have to a mere thread and fibre changed.

How shall I, to-day, complain of bereavement unto any one?
 I, myself, made a purchase of sorrow, when I a lover became.

The vast dust of separation hath hidden happiness from me--
 I am utterly weary grown at the noise of summoning it back.

I, KHATTAK, call unto my beloved, but she is not forthcoming:
 Mortified and despairing thereat, I have become wedded unto woe!

  

XV.

Come, my love! let us, in one home, our abode take up;
 And from our minds dismiss all long and lingering hope!

Hand in hand we will saunter about; for such is fortunate:
 It is not advisable that to-day's inclinations we for to-morrow defer.

From all eternity, revolving fortune is cruel and unjust:
 It is a fallacy if we, to-day, nourish a hope of its constancy.

We were many friends, like unto a flock, gathered together,
 When the wolf of separation, by violence, tore us from each other away.

[p. 265]

Our dear, dear friends have from the world departed:
 How long then shall we exist in this sublunary sphere?

How can any one the hope of joy and happiness entertain?
 For He brought us into this abode, grief and misery to endure!

Living, O friend! THE SEPARATED would not have left thee;
 But 'tis the king's tyranny that hath, by force, parted us! [**]

  

XVI.

The wise, for this reason, unto the world's affairs will be cold;
 That all its griefs are like the blast, and like the dust its joys.

Do not, O Darwesh! false account my sorrow and my sighs;
 For, at that time, the eyes will weep, when the heart may aching be.

The head of courage will not bow for the sake of throne and crown;
 When the man, of spirit free, may know what the world's gifts are.

That man, who may traffic in perfidiousness, and in iniquity,
 Will be pale and ghastly, when he entereth the assembly of the just.

In the estimation of the wise, even worse than the ox they are,
 Who may be constantly overwhelmed in gluttony's cares.

The revolving heavens are a mill, and man the grain therein:
 He is no sooner in the world, than he will into meal be ground.

It is out of the question altogether, that in Pus'hto any other bard,
 Shall, like THE SEPARATED, so unrivalled, in the art poetic be.

[p. 266]

  

XVII.

Completely false and lying are they all, from first to last,
 Who are gathered around the table of the transient world!

The universe is like unto the shop of the sweetmeat-seller:
 Account its resorters nothing else but the flies that they are!

The degree of affection, that the flies in that quarter bestow,
 Is according to the quality of the sweets therein contained.

Place no reliance soever upon the mere display of their sincerity:
 Falsely, they deception practise: they are their own weal's friends!

In the day of prosperity, of constancy, they ever make boast;
 But when a slight disaster occurreth, they all take to flight.

The heart's eyes, for its own objects, show sycophancy to the tongue;
 Then do not pride thyself on their oaths; for all are knaves.

Should they become aware of a good friend's affliction,
 Their tongues cry, "Dear! dear!" but they exult in their hearts.

Hope not, in this world, to find a friend, sincere and true;
 For the sons of the present day are hypocrites and rogues.

There is neither love, nor affection, nor friendship in them:
 By some craft they acquire; for they are all the loaf's slaves.

The world's interests and profits are their object, and these they pursue:
 They are neither stedfast on faith's path, nor infidels are they.

Like as they plot against the very heart's blood of one another,
 In hatching each other's ruin are wolves ever thus occupied?

[p. 267]

As yet, the day of doom hath not been viewed by human eye;
 But its operations [**] I, to-day, perceive; since all are for themselves.

Never yet have I found, in any one, either fidelity or truth;
 Whether it be in brethren or kinsmen, in relations or friends!

Since I, THE SEPARATED, became acquainted with its secrets,
 I find the world hath countless women, and but few, few men!

Footnotes

^252:* The poet here appears to refer to some chance of release from captivity.

^252:+ Bijapur, the name of the fortress in which he was confined.

^252:++ This refers to a custom prevalent amongst all the Afghan tribes in the days of the poet, and still observed by the Ghalzis and other tribes of Central Afghanistan, of plaiting the front hair of young girls, from about eight years of age until the day of marriage, in a round plait about the size of a small saucer, which is allowed to hang down in front, and often reaches to the tip of the nose, but not covering the eyes, thus acting the part of a mask. On the marriage-day it is opened and plaited in the ordinary way. A picture containing a girl wearing the hair in this manner will be found in CAPTAIN L. W. HART'S work of "SKETCHES OF AFGHAN COSTUME," lithographed by HAGHE.

^252: section An ornament worn by women in the left nostril.

^252: section section A ring of gold worn in the cartilage of the nose.

^253:* An ornament for the forehead. These names are Indian, not Afghan; but Afghans bordering on the Panjab and India have borrowed these terms and ornaments from the people of those parts.

^256:* The coming and departure of day is very rapid in the East, there being but little twilight.

^257:* The resurrection.

^257:+ The names Nal and Daman, Wamik and Aeazra, Majnun and Layla, are those of lovers, celebrated in Eastern poetry.

^259:* The nib of the pen.

^261:* This very pretty idea of the poet's is a play upon the Arabic word  ik-bal, signifying, 'good fortune,' which, if read backwards, becomes  la-baka, meaning, 'without stability or permanence.'

^263:* Roh is the name applied to the Afghan countries generally; hence the name of Rohilahs, by which the Afghans are sometimes distinguished.

^263:+ See third note at page <page 139>.

^263:++ See third note at page <page 247>.

^264:* Referring to the custom of Eastern governments, of granting assignments on persons or revenues of villages, for payment of money. An assignment on a deer's horns is a proverb, with reference to any impracticable, or very difficult matter next to impossible, it being first necessary to catch your deer.

^264:+ A river of Central India.

^265:* Referring to his captivity in India.

^267:* All ties will then be broken; for all will be so much occupied with their own affairs and interests, that they will pay no attention to others, however dear they may have been in this world.

     
Selections from the Poetry of the Afghans, by H.G. Raverty, [1868], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 268]

  

AeABD-UL-KADIR KHAN, KHATTAK.

AeABD-UL-KaDIR KHaN, son of Khushhal Khan, Khattak, and brother of Ashraf, the subject of the preceding notice, was born in the year E. 1063 (A.D. 1652), and is the most eloquent writer and poet of all Khushhal's sons, several of whom were poets of no mean ability. Although his father had little reason to be very partial towards his sons generally, on account of their very unnatural conduct, and unfaithfulness towards himself, on too many occasions; yet, upon the whole, Aeabd-ul-Kadir appears to have been a favourite, and to have shared considerably in his father's affection.

Aeabd-ul-Kadir was as good at the sword as at the pen; and in the battle with the Mughal troops at Kottah, a place in the vicinity of the Pes'hawar district, the victory of the confederate Afghans was chiefly owing to the skill displayed by the poet on that occasion; and it was he also who led the assault against that fortress, which, after three hours of severe fighting, he captured. He afterwards distinguished himself; in like manner, in the war of Bangas'h, during which operations he was wounded; and the successes gained in the war were celebrated in his name.

When his father abdicated the chieftainship of the tribe (as related in the notice of Khushhal and his writings), and the sons were each struggling to supplant each other, and grasp the vacant authority, Aeabd-ul-Kadir did not hold back. He tried very hard

[p. 269]

to gain the chieftainship, but fortune was unpropitious; and Ashraf, who, as the eldest son, had certainly the best right, was chosen by his father and the tribe to succeed him. When Ashraf was betrayed into the hands of the Mughals, and sent by Aurangzeb into the Dakhan as state prisoner, "Bahram the Malignant," the brother, who had betrayed him, seized the chieftainship; but, subsequently, Afzal Khan, the son of Ashraf, became chief of the clan.

To pay obedience to this nephew appears to have been extremely difficult and bitter for Aeabd-ul-Kadir, who wished to hold the authority himself; and although the whole of his brothers, then living, sided with him in his ambitious designs, it was of no avail; for the tribe were unanimous in favour of Ashraf's son Afzal, in whom was the hereditary right, as previously stated. The upshot, however, was, that Afzal, the nephew, saw no other practicable solution of the difficulty, according to the custom of those days, than to get rid of all rivals; and, accordingly, Aeabd-ul-Kadir, together with ten of his brothers, and a number of their sons, were put to death, at the village of Zaman Garraey, in one day, and buried in one grave; thus escaping the sorrows and troubles of chieftainship.

The poems of Aeabd-ul-Kadir, which are deeply imbued with Sufi mysticism, are thought very highly of by the Afghans; and his language is extremely polished. His chief works, now known, are a Diwan or Collection of Odes, from which the following poems are taken; a translation of Molawi Jami's celebrated poem of Yusuf and Zulikha, from the Persian, which is rendered by the translator into the most difficult style of Eastern poetry, and is considered the most perfect of its kind in the Afghan language; the affecting love tale of Adam and Durkhana'i--which three or four other authors have written on, both in verse and prose--together with translations of Shaikh Saaedi's Gulistan and Bostan, from the Persian

[p. 270]

[paragraph continues] He is said, by his descendants of the present day, to have been the author of about sixty different works; but with the exception of a small volume on enigmas, charades, and verses of mysterious meaning, even the names of them are now unknown.

Specimens of his Odes in the original Pus'hto, together with a portion of Yusuf and Zulikha, and the first part of the Gulistan, will be found in the "GULSHAN-I-ROH," or Selections in the Afghan Language, published by me last year.

     
Selections from the Poetry of the Afghans, by H.G. Raverty, [1868], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 271]

  

THE POEMS

  

OF

  

AeABD-UL-KADIR KHAN, KHATTAK.

  

I.

ARISE, O cupbearer! bring the goblet; for see, the leaves burst forth!
 They give, unto the parterre, the happy tidings of the coming of spring.

In thy wine there is the intoxication of uniformity and sincerity,
 That changeth my intellect's black and white to one uniform tinge.

Like unto ice, shall the heart of the tale-bearer melt away altogether,
 If the beloved, unto me, will show her countenance like the sun.

The black-eyed ones have not the fragrance of constancy within them;
 On this point, regarding them, what hope shall any one indulge?

He, who may be existing on affection and love, never, never, dieth;
 And the Almighty, too, is competent, my life, eternal to make.

With the whole heart she hath made away; but, even yet, behold
 What enchantments, charms, deceits, and spells she employeth still!

What! hath AeABD-UL-KaDIR, this time, so benefited by her,
 That he will place this much confidence in the beloved again?

[p. 272]

  

II.

If I have my own friend chosen, with the censure attendant thereon;
 The world's calumny and detraction I have accepted likewise.

The pangs of separation from her would not have been so great,
 Had I, when enjoying her society, constantly lamented and wept.

Like unto the bee, I would have clasped the rose for ever to my breast,
 Had I perceived in it the fragrance of constancy and faith.

They who, without asking, bestow, and mention not the obligation,
 The generosity of them, above all others, have I ever preferred.

For this reason, the envious wandereth about from door to door,
 Because I have driven him away from the threshold of my abode.

AeABD-UL-KaDIR, at that time, everlasting life acquired,
 When, with the sword of her glances, she deprived me of life.

  

III.

Behold! the bee and the nightingale great folly commit,
 Who, whilst the autumn is impending, give their love to the rose!

For how long shall this lamp in the garden continue to burn?
 One day, the cold, boisterous blast of destiny shall extinguish it!

Totally changed to repulsiveness, in the morning becometh
 The prettiness of the glow-worm, that, at night, giveth such effulgence and light.

[p. 273]

The covert polytheist, equally with the open, appeareth unto them;
 For when do the sanctified, to the whole or the parts, cast their eyes? [**]

The rose-bud openeth from the effect of the dew's moisture;
 But the humidity of wine rendereth still harder the niggard's heart.

The spectators would declare the many beauties of her countenance;
 But amazement calleth out to them the more silent to remain.

Thy pen, AeABD-UL-KaDIR! became, of musk, the diffuser;
 Since thou greatly praisest the curls and ringlets of the fair.

  

IV.

Whether it be chieftainship, or lordliness, or a monarch's sway;
 If thou perceivest, they are all fruitless trouble and anxiety.

Without the fair, both life and death, are one and the sane thing;
 For the sake of the dear ones, alone, is existence of any usefulness.

By fate, the curls of the beloved must have been destined
 For the derangement and disorder of my heart, from the beginning of time.

It is through inebriation, that the goblet hath fallen to the ground:
 Account it not rage or anger, O cupbearer! 'tis but the levity of youth.

At the errors of the wise, indignation and reproach are levelled;
 But the excuse of fools is their own ignorance and foolishness.

Thou wilt either give some one's dwelling to the flames, or shed his blood;
 Seeing that thou hast donned garments of the Arghowan's red hue. [*+]

[p. 274]

The fire of love shall come forth from the earth over the graves
 Of all, whose affection for their love, from the soul itself, proceedeth.

I will leave the walls of the cloister, and go out unto the tavern;
 For therein is to be found safety from this, and the next world's ills.

The universe lieth under the seal of content and resignation:
 Shouldst thou draw it on thy finger, it is Suliman's magic ring. [**]

The red tears that course each other down thy cheeks, O AeABD-UL-KaDIR!
 Are a sumptuous banquet of rubies for thine own dear friend.

  

V.

When I beheld the beloved with my rivals associated,
 I would cry out and complain, coupled with piercing cries.

The mirror of the heart becometh bright through humility;
 Hence, too, the meek and lowly are conjoined with the dust.

'Twas from the heart's anguish, that the nightingale bewailed,
 Because he perceived the sharp thorn with the rose entwined.

But like unto a thorn, indeed, every flower my heart pierceth,
 Whenever, without thee with me, I enter the parterre.

Through thy curls my heart hath become utterly deranged:
 Let not then, O God, any Muslim be with Hind [*+] connected!

[p. 275]

Folly keepeth the fool ever occupied in delight and pleasure;
 But prudence immerseth the wise in the river of care and woe.

Since, at last, departure therefrom is with great grief attended,
 AeABD-UL-KaDIR will have naught to do with this place of spring.

  

VI.

Although it may be bitter, still swallow the wine of thy wrath:
 Act not unjustly or tyrannically towards any one, upright man!

The falcon, that drinketh the blood of his quarry, dieth full soon:
 Restrain thyself, then, my heart! from such ensanguined food.

There is no need of manacle, or fetter, or dungeon, to restrain them;
 For the words of the wise are fettered in the prison of the mouth.

Every mild and gentle being, who clemency's armour weareth,
 Is not pierced with the arrows of fortune's reverses and mishaps.

He who falleth from the heart's high rock is dashed to atoms:
 Let not the Almighty, then, cast any one from such a rock as this!

Though men, in origin are one, yet their diversity is excessive;
 Since one is equal to one, one to a hundred, one to a thousand others.

For a single dinar [**] a hundred pearls may be purchased;
 And a single pearl is, likewise, for a hundred dinars bought.

[p. 276]

Whether monarch, or whether nobles, thou thyself shalt outvie them;
 For thou, AeABD-UL-KaDIR! on any one, placest not thy hopes.

  

VII.

Why scornest thou me, O fair one! who so ill-favoured am?
 'Tis destiny's doings that made me ungraceful; thee, lovely to behold!

Come once again, and upon the flowers cast thine eyes once more,
 O zephyr of the morn! that thou mayest unclose the folded bud anew!

In thy absence, the rose would tear its own breast into a hundred shreds;
 And the cypress, O charmer! from separation, would in tears dissolve.

Why, O rose! turnest thou thy face away from the lovelorn nightingale?
 For even with these charms of thine, his wails have famous made thee.

When thou castest the fragrant aeud [**] into the fire, it yieldeth more perfume;
 And I will constancy increase, if thou thy injustice shouldst augment.

Thou art the sun of beauty, and all these other beauteous ones are stars:
 They will into nothingness vanish, if thou shouldst show thy face.

[p. 277]

Thou always designatest AeABD-UL-KaDIR as hypocrite and deceiver;
 But mayest thou, elsewhere, a more sincere lover find than he!

  

VIII.

Was it a pearl that was observed the nose jewel within,
 Or was it a sparkling dew-drop upon the Arghowan's breast?

Musk-deer from far-off Khut###804###an are both those eyes of thine,
 That ever graze the spikenard and sweet basil upon.

I can discover naught on earth in comparison to thine eyebrows;
 But I have found somewhat of similarity in the heaven's arch.

What connection is there between pearls and the teeth of the dear one?
 Those are in the oyster's bosom--the teeth are in her mouth.

Because the poets were wont with thy lips to compare it,
 The ruby became mortified, and fled back to the mine,

No one is capable of giving an explanation of their sweetness;
 For the ambrosial nectar of Paradise is indigenous to thy lips.

When I look upon thy face, I am at the Almighty's works amazed,
 Seeing that He preserveth thee safe and uninjured from its glow. [**]

I have well examined the display of the flowers of the universe;
 But there is no flower like thee in any one of its parterres.

In gratitude, that He hath bestowed such curls upon thee,
 By them, draw out those immersed in the well of thy chin! [*+]

[p. 278]

Those in thy presence, from modesty, know not what to say;
 Whilst those absent, describe thee by metaphor and simile.

Close well, then, thine eyes, AeABD-UL-KaDIR! all things upon;
 And then, within thyself, do thou the whole universe survey!

  

IX.

At last, he will depart from it, his heart with anguish seared;
 Bootlessly, then, the gardener prideth himself on this parterre!

They who may have entered within the tavern of the world,
 Shall all, in their turn, drink out of death's fatal cup!

He merely guardeth the portion of others, for they will take it;
 Wherefore, then, is the rich man of his wealth so very vain?

He doth not revel, like the nightingale, among the roses;
 But he sitteth perched, like a crow, a rotten carcass upon.

Sovereigns search about for it, but by beggars it is found;
 Whether it be rest, or tranquillity; or peace, or repose.

The radiance of the lamp cannot be found within the tomb,
 Except thou shouldst the lamp of sighs carry with thee there.

These are red tears thou seest, by unhappy Majnun [**] shed;
 For the tulip hath not bloomed, either in upland or in mead.

Set out, AeABD-UL-KaDIR! upon the path of inexistence;
 Haply thou mayest find therein trace of the dear one's door!

  

X.

Whereas the oyster with a single drop of rain-water is satisfied, [*+]
 Its priceless pearls go out into every country, and every clime.

[p. 279]

If thou seek after honour, be then with thy lot content!
 Shouldst thou to eminence aspire, of what thou hast, liberally give!

The ties of the wealth of the world are the bonds of Hell;
 Hence the free and noble placed it on the palms of their hands.

L have with mine own eyes well watched the world's people--
 One amasseth wealth with great avarice; another wasteth it away.

Since life itself is not perpetual, what then advantageth it,
 Though one, in magnificence, a Suliman, or an Asaf [**] be?

A man's superiority, in wisdom and knowledge consisteth;
 The beast's, in grazing; and on hay, and on grass, growing fat.

If thou art magnanimous, pain not the hearts of others;
 But make thine heart the target of the arrows of good and bad!

O AeABD-UL-KaDIR! have the fear of God ever before thee;
 For unto them that fear, He hath said, "Fear thou not!" [*+]

  

XI.

This exclamation from the nightingale at day-dawn reached my ear--
 "O rose! thy merriment hath plunged me into sorrow and tears!"

Its languid effect is far more exquisite than its intoxication;
 But the sleepy languor of thine eyes exceedeth that of wine.

The fair ones of the present day are worshippers of Mammon--
 In their alley, without wealth's appliances, place not thy foot!

[p. 280]

My love for the dear one increaseth from thy detractions;
 Then, O traducer! as much as thy heart desireth disparage her!

From distressing thoughts and cares the mind becometh distracted;
 But the heart acquireth comfort from reliance and resignation.

May the Almighty never leave those eyes from albugo free,
 Which, when thy face may be visible, shall look upon a rose!

Thou art, when seated, the light of the whole assembly:
 What matter, then, tho' the dawn of day the lamp extinguish?

When thou givest me wine, laugh heartily, O cupbearer!
 Learn thou this from the merry gurgle of the flask of wine!

There is, doubtless, a difference in the sight of the beholders;
 And if not so, the parts are by no means distinct from the whole. [**]

Metaphorically, this world is like unto eternity's bridge;
 Then, O AeABD-UL-KaDIR, do thou over it swiftly pass!

  

XII.

In the world, there is no perfection without declination;
 Then, on account of declination, mourn, O perfect man!

The dread of separation was as bitter as absence itself;
 Hence from association I never any pleasure derived.

From thee, the sun luminous grew, and from it the moon:
 Who then, with thy face shall the full moon compare?

At thy departure, my very soul even deserteth the body;
 But do not thou for a moment leave me, O image of my love!

[p. 281]

Since I did not die when separated from her; on meeting,
 I am so ashamed that I am unable to look her in the face.

The same who hath inflicted the wound upon my heart,
 Hath also applied the soft bandage thereunto.

Shouldst thou pass the alley of the beloved of my heart,
 Deliver, O zephyr of the morning! this message unto her--

"Tho', without thee, I am not one moment from sorrow free;
 Yet, ever joyful and gay, may the Almighty keep thee!"

With much sorrow, many loving ones have been torn away--
 May God never send unto us the Ghowas year [**] again!

The fragrance of musk and amber emanateth from every word,
 When AeABD-UL-KaDIR praiseth that black mole of thine.

  

XIII.

The flowers of spring have put forth their blossoms in garden and in mead:
 On the house-tops there are flowers, in the lanes, and in the hedges too.

The stones, the bushes, the thorns, the weeds--all are by flowers hidden:
 Of every blemish and defect the flowers have the concealers become.

Wherever the eyesight may be directed, all, all are flowers there--
 Flowers in front, and flowers behind--flowers on every side.

[p. 282]

No single spot whatever is of fragrant flowers left devoid--
 Flowers in the market, flowers in the wilds, flowers in the hills.

The nightingale, to revel and disport, with a loud voice, crieth out;
 For the spring passeth away, and every moment the flowers fade and decay!

The youths and maidens, in their gambols and revelry, place
 Flowers in their hair, flowers in their bosoms, flowers in their turbans.

The entire person of the beloved is of fragrant flowers composed--
 Her feet are flowers, her hands flowers, her sweet face flowers also.

Let the wine be rosy, the goblet rosy, the wine-flask rosy likewise!
 The cupbearer a flower, the associates flowers, the scene all flowers too!

When she smelleth unto a flower, let great caution be observed,
 Lest on her tender, delicate lips, the flower a wound should inflict.

Gentle and simple, they have filled with delight by their display--
 The flowers have, on every one, a load of obligation conferred.

But though flowers may have bloomed of a thousand hues,
 No flower hath been seen like unto the beloved one of my heart.

That they thus heartily laugh, with such gladness and such glee,
 What! of autumn's near approach, are not the flowers aware?

Since in them may be seen the emblem of his own loved one;
 AeABD-UL-KaDIR thus remembereth the flowers in his strains.

  

XIV.

The folks of the world give us their admonitions most unjustly;
 For every man pleaseth himself according to his own mind.

[p. 283]

What have others to do with us, forsooth, that they restrain us,
 If, for the sake of the beloved, we sacrifice life and goods?

When love, like a mighty river, hath overflowed the heart,
 Doth any one attempt a dam to raise on the face of the flood?

By the severance of all worldly concerns, sanctity is acquired;
 But not by saddling oneself with worldly obligations and ties.

Involuntarily, and impulsively, the heart is given to the fair:
 This matter is not brought about by counsel, or such like things.

The brutes chew the cud upon their food; but it behoveth man
 To ruminate upon every word that issueth from his mouth.

As long, O AeABD-UL-KaDIR! as thy strains may be repeated,
 From them flow so many varying, and delightful sweets.

  

XV.

If the surface of thy face be not soiled, be under no concern;
 And the mirror of my heart, too, is not by rust affected.

Whosoever cometh near pitch, becometh defiled;
 Then get thee away behind me, O thou so very white!

He, whose heart hath consumed in the flames of love,
 What apprehension need he have of the fire of Hell?

She would make the dark night one of moonlight to her lover,
 If the moon-faced one would draw aside the veil from her face.

From time to time, every thing hath gone out of my heart,
 Save the remembrance of the fair, that will never depart.

'Tis from the wails of the nightingale it is thus so affected--
 This rose-bud, that rendeth its garment into shreds.

[p. 284]

All else is a mere vail, save the love of the Deity:
 Then, O AeABD-UL-KaDIR, do thou no other love pursue!

  

XVI.

On ascending to the terrace-roof of wealth, show thou no arrogance;
 But always have before thine eyes the fear of falling therefrom!

It hath raised up many, and dashed them again to the ground:
 Fortune's wheel raiseth uppermost, that it may again cast down.

At the outset, acquire thou the wings of affection and love,
 If of soaring in the heavens thou the intention nourish.

They whose hearts beauty's face may not with love inspire,
 Their countenances are not worthy even to be looked upon!

I would say, I should go and consort with the dogs at her door;
 But she would not, even then, one day, say to me " Come here!"

Since mine eyes became not blind, [**] from the absence of my love,
 With all my heart I am now willing they should go out of my head.

Through contentment, and not through gold, is opulence acquired:
 The whiteness of the heart is essential, not the whiteness of the hair.

Thou hast rendered it sweeter than Persian, AeABD-UL-KaDIR!
 Although the Pus'hto language was so bitter before.

  

XVII.

Since the heart is torn from it, in the end, in anguish and woe,
 Why do people set their hearts this fleeting world upon?

[p. 285]

From this garden's roses, constancy's fragrance emanateth not:
 Most unjustly do the nightingales hazard their hearts upon them.

Since the thought of the curls of the beloved is dishevelled and deranged,
 Let my heart be disordered for ever! let it never be composed!

So hard, so pitiless, and so regardless, as is that heart of thine,
 There will be none other like it, the whole universe within!

Wherever its ravisher may be, there will the heart be also;
 For when do the heart-ravishers in their breasts retain their hearts?

Why hast Thou, O God! my heart filled with a giddy fair one's love?
 That, though guiltless of any fault, every moment the heart afflicteth.

Proximity and remoteness--conjunction and separation--will be all one to him,
 Whose heart hath a place acquired in immateriality's abode.

The flames of Hell I accept, with all my heart, a hundred times over;
 But God forbid that in separation's fire the heart be consumed!

Eat! drink wine! raise the song! do all, AeABD-UL-KaDIR!
 But this one thing--do not thou the heart of the Muslim afflict!

  

XVIII.

O cupbearer! unto me such a cup of forgetfulness give,
 That on quaffing it I may oblivious and insensate become!

[p. 286]

Reproached and reviled by the world, to the deserts and wilds I flee;
 Like even unto Majnun, I make the wilderness my home.

The fruit of its aims and desires, it shall then eat therefrom,
 When the grain, in the earth, shall itself to extinction give.

Since it is filled with the conceptions of the faces of the fair,
 The picture gallery of Mani, [**] this mind of mine must be.

My heart becometh, through envy and jealousy, to pieces torn,
 When her fingers draw the comb through her flowing hair.

For a minstrel, in the spring-time, I have no necessity;
 The sweet melody of the nightingale is sufficient for me.

Nightly, in my dwelling, with this intent, I gather a party together,
 That possibly, under this plea, the charmer might attend.

As an inducement, that he should risk his life to obtain it,
 The diver desireth that the oyster-shell a pearl should contain.

A hundred times over, AeABD-UL-KaDIR would sacrifice it for her,
 If, by parting with his head, he might his loved one obtain.

Footnotes

^273:* See Introduction, page <page xi>.

^273:+ See note at page <page 111>.

^274:* The magic ring of Solomon, which was supposed to reveal all things.

^274:+ India, the country of dark people, is compared to the dark curls of the beloved.

^275:* The name of a gold coin current in Persia and Arabia, a ducat.

^276:* The aeud, or wood aloes, celebrated for its fragrance.

^277:* Alluding to the rosy colour of the cheeks.

^277:+ The dimple of the chin.

^278:* See note at page <page 29>.

^278:+ The pearl is supposed to be produced from a single drop of rain-water.

^279:* The name of a great man, supposed to have been Solomon's prime minister.

^279:+ And God said unto him, "O Moses! draw near and fear not, for thou art safe."--AL KUR'aN.

^280:* See Introductory Remarks, page <page xi>.

^281:* According to the Abjad, or an arrangement of the letters of the Arabic alphabet for numbers in chronograms, the letters gh, w, a, and s, signify the year 1097 of the Hijrah (A.D. 1685), in which a terrible plague is said to have raged throughout Afghanistan and the adjacent countries.

^284:* From excessive weeping.

^286:* A celebrated Persian painter, who, about the middle of the third century of our era, gave out that he was the promised paraclete of our Lord; and soon established a numerous sect known as Manichaeans. He fled into Tartary through fear of the Persian king Shapur (Sapor), where he amused himself by drawing a number of singular figures in a book called Ertang; and, on his return, told his disciples that he had obtained it from the angels in Heaven, where he pretended to have been during his retreat.

     
Selections from the Poetry of the Afghans, by H.G. Raverty, [1868], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 287]

  

AHMAD SHAH, ABDALI,

  

SHAH DURR-I-DURRAN. [**]

AhMAD SHaH, the founder of the Durrani monarchy, rose from the mere character of a partisan, to a distinguished command in the service of the Persian conqueror, Nadir Shah. Of the family of the Saddozis, and chief of the tribe of Abdali, the most illustrious family of the Afghans, he was, in his youth, imprisoned in a fortress, with his elder brother Zu-l-fikar Khan, by Husain Khan, governor of Kandahar for the Ghalzis, which powerful tribe of Afghans, after overrunning the whole of Persia, had, a few years previously, trodden the throne of the Sufis in the dust, and conquered that mighty empire.

Ahmad Shah and his brother, whose tribe were at feud with the Ghalzis, owed their freedom to Nadir Shah, who in the year A.D. 1736-37, laid siege to Kandahar, which he captured. The brothers, with a powerful body of their clansmen, followed the fortunes of the conqueror, and greatly distinguished themselves in the war with the Turks; and were rewarded with the lands now held by the Durrani tribe in the vicinity of Kandahar.

On the day subsequent to the murder of Nadir Shah, (the particulars of which, as belonging to Persian history, need not be here detailed, although one among the causes of it has been attributed to his attachment to the Afghan troops in his service) a battle ensued

[p. 288]

between the Persians on the one side, and the Afghans and Uzbaks on the other; but the event does not appear to have decided any thing. But after this affair, Ahmad Shah saw that no time was to be lost in looking to the safety of himself and clansmen, and he accordingly fought his way through the greater part of Khurasan with a small force of between 2000 and 3000 horsemen, and repaired, by rapid marches, to Kandahar, which had now become the head-quarters of the Abdali tribe, and chief city of southwestern Afghanistan. Here he intercepted an immense treasure, which had been sent from India for the use of Nadir Shah, which Ahmad appropriated, after compelling the Durranis, who had first  upon it, to give it up.

In October of the same year, Ahmad, then but twenty-three years old, assumed the title of Shah or King of Afghanistan, and was crowned at Kandahar, with great pomp, the different chiefs of the various Afghan tribes, with but few exceptions, and the Kazalbashes, Baluchis, and Hazarahs, assisting; thus laying the foundation of the Durrani monarchy. And although the warlike and independent people, who now became his subjects, had never been accustomed to a sovereign's yoke, save in being compelled to pay tribute to a foreign ruler; yet such were his energy and capacity for government, that he was successful in gaining the affection of his own tribe; and with the exception of the Ghalzis, ever a most turbulent and unruly sept, he succeeded in instilling among the other Afghan tribes a spirit of attachment to their native monarch; and also in others, not Afghans, but dwelling in Afghanistan. With the Baluch and Hazarah tribes, his neighbours, he formed an offensive and defensive alliance.

Having first brought the refractory Ghalzis into subjection, Ahmad Shah began his conquests; and such was the uninterrupted tide of his success, that by the summer of 1751 he had conquered the whole of the countries, extending as far west as Nishapur in

[p. 289]

[paragraph continues] Persian Khurasan. In 1752 he conquered Kashmir, and obtained from the Mughal Emperor of Hindustan, a cession of the whole of the tract of country as far, east as Sirhind, thus laying the foundation of a kingdom, which soon became formidable to surrounding nations.

Ahmad Shah had now leisure to turn his attention to internal affairs, and to the settlement of Afghanistan and the newly-acquired provinces. He thus passed the next four years in tranquillity, and appears to have had time to devote himself to literature. He used to hold, at stated periods, what is termed a Majlis-i-aeulama, or Assembly of the Learned, the early part of which was generally devoted to divinity and civil law--for Ahmad Shah himself was a Molawi [**]--and concluded with conversations on science and poetry. He wrote a Collection of Odes in Pus'hto, his own native tongue, tinged, as usual, with the mysticisms of the Sufis, and from that work the following specimens have been taken. The work is scarce, particularly in eastern Afghanistan. He was also the author of several poems in the Persian language.

In the year 1756 Ahmad Shah had again to buckle on the sword, and advance into the Panjab, which the Mughals about this time attempted to recover; but he quickly regained all that had been lost; drove them out of the Panjab; and advanced straight upon Dilhi, which he entered after but a faint opposition. His troops having become sickly, from passing the whole of the hot season in India, warned Ahmad Shah to return, which he did soon after, having compelled the Mughal Emperor to bestow the Panjab and Sindh upon his son Timur, who had already been married to a Mughal princess. Ahmad Shah passed the next winter at Kandahar; but was obliged to set out soon after, for the purpose of quelling disturbances in Persia and Turkistan.

[p. 290]

During the next year, matters had gone on badly in India; and Prince Tamar was unable to stem the tide of Maharata conquest, which had now rolled upon the Panjab. The Maharatas had taken Sirhind, and were advancing from the west, which put Prince Timur under the necessity of retiring across the Indus with his troops. The Maharatas, being now unopposed, pushed on as far as the Hydaspes or Jhilum, and also detached a force to take possession of Multan.

These events happened in the summer of 1758; and Ahmad Shah was preparing to march into India, when he was detained by the rebellion of the Baluchis; and although this matter was subsequently settled by negotiation, it was not until the winter of 1759 that he could cross the Indus and advance towards Hindustan, the Maharatas retreating before him towards Dilhi, with the intention of covering that city. After totally defeating them at Budli, Ahmad Shah again captured Dilhi. He afterwards pursued his conquests in the Do-ab; but subsequently encamped at a place near Anup-shahr, where, being joined by the Wazir of Hindustan, with the few available troops of the Mughal Emperor, he prepared for passing the monsoon, or rainy season, and for the final struggle with the Maharatas, upon which the fate of India rested.

The strength of Ahmad Shah's army consisted of 41,800 horse, his own subjects, on whom he chiefly relied; 28,000 Rohilahs--Afghans, who were descended from those tribes who had emigrated from Afghanistan at different periods, and settled in India [**]--and about 10,000 Hindustani troops, under their own chiefs. He had also 700 zamburaks, or camel swivels, small pieces carrying balls of about a pound weight, and a few pieces of artillery.

The Maharata army, under Wiswas Rao, and Sheddasheo Rao--

[p. 291]

better known as the Bhow--consisted of about 70,000 horse, 15,000 infantry, trained after the European fashion, and 200 pieces of artillery, besides numberless shuturnals, or zamburaks.

At length, on the 7th of January 1761, after facing each other for some months, the Maharatas, who had been blockaded in their own intrenched camp at Panipatt, a few miles from Dilhi, were, from the extremities to which they were put, for want of food and forage, under the necessity of attacking the Durrani army. The details of this great and important battle need not be enlarged on here: suffice it to say, that Ahmad Shah was completely successful. The Maharatas were entirely defeated and put to flight; and Wiwas Rao, the heir-apparent of the Maharata empire, and almost the whole of the army, perished in the flight or pursuit.

The crowning victory at Panipatt, which was fatal to the power of the Maharatas, laid Hindustan at the feet of Ahmad Shah; but he, seeing the difficulty of retaining so remote a dominion, adhered to the wise plan ha had, from the first, carved out, and contented himself with that portion of India that had formerly been ceded to him, bestowing the rest on such native chiefs as had aided him in the struggle.

In the spring of 1761, Ahmad Shah returned to Kabul; and from that period, up to the spring of 1773, was actively employed against foreign and domestic foes; but at that time his health, which had been long declining, continued to get worse, and prevented his engaging in any foreign expeditions. His complaint was a cancer in the face, which had afflicted him first in 1764, and at last occasioned his death.; He died at Murghah, in Afghanistan, in the beginning of June 1773, in the fiftieth year of his age.

The countries under his dominion extended, at the time of his death, from the west of Khurasan, to Sirhind on the Jumna, and from the Oxus to the Indian Ocean, all either secured by treaty, or in actual possession.

[p. 292]

The character of Ahmad Shah has been so admirably depicted by Mountstuart Elphinstone, [**] that I shall not hesitate to give it here in full.

"The character of Ahmad Shah appears to have been admirably suited to the situation in which he was placed. His enterprise and decision enabled him to profit by the confusion that followed the death of Nadir, and the prudence and moderation, which he acquired from his dealings with his own nation, were no less necessary to govern a warlike and independent people, than the bold and commanding turn of his own genius.

"His military courage and activity are spoken of with admiration, both by his own subjects, and the nations with whom he was engaged, either in wars or alliances. He seems to have been naturally disposed to mildness and clemency; and though it is impossible to acquire sovereign power, and perhaps, in Asia, to maintain it, without crimes; yet the memory of no Eastern Prince is stained with fewer acts of cruelty and injustice.

"In his personal character he seems to have been cheerful, affable, and good-natured. He maintained considerable dignity on state occasions, but at other times his manners were plain and familiar; and with the Durranis he kept up the same equal and popular demeanour which was usual with their Khans or Chiefs before they assumed the title of King. He treated Moollahs and holy men with great respect, both from policy and inclination. He was himself a divine and an author, and was always ambitious of the character of a saint.

"His policy towards the different parts of his dominions was to rely principally on conciliation with the Afghans and Baluchis; with this difference between the nations, that he applied himself to the whole people in the first case, and only to the chief in the

[p. 293]

other. His possessions in Turkistan he kept under by force; but left the Tartar chiefs of the country unremoved, and used them with moderation. The Indian provinces were kept by force alone; and in Khurasan he trusted to the attachment of some chiefs, took hostages from others, and was ready to carry his arms against any who disturbed his plans.

The handsome tomb of Ahmad Shah stands near the palace at Kandahar. It is held in great estimation by the Durranis, and is respected as a sanctuary, no one venturing to touch one who has taken refuge there. It is not uncommon for persons of even the highest rank, to give up the world, and spend their lives at the monarch's tomb; and certainly, if ever an Asiatic King deserved the gratitude of his country, it was Ahmad Shah, the "Pearl of the Durranis."

Ahmad Shah was the grandfather of the unfortunate Shah-Shujaae-ul-Mulk, whom the British re-seated on the throne of the Durranis in 1839, which affair terminated so unfortunately for all concerned.

Footnotes

^287:* Durr-i-Durran signifies, "The Pearl of the Durranis," a name which the Abdalis acquired from wearing pearls in their ears.

^289:* A term equivalent to Doctor of Literature or Divinity.

^290:* Also called Pattans in India; but the name, like that of Rohilah, is applicable to Afghans generally.

^292:* "ACCOUNT OF THE KINGDOM OF CAUBUL."

     
Selections from the Poetry of the Afghans, by H.G. Raverty, [1868], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 294]

  

THE POEMS

  

OF

  

AHMAD SHAH, ABDALI,

  

I.

To this degree is the heart affected by the love of Layla,
 That Majnun, for aye, uttereth the praises of Layla. [**]

He repeated no other lesson whatever, in this world,
 Save that, on the black mole, and the ringlets of Layla.

This, unto him, is sleep, from pain and anguish free,
 That he be occupied, day and night, with thoughts of Layla.

If, by the sword of anguish, he to death's agonies be brought,
 He grieveth not, so that it be in the presence of Layla.

Lovers, that cry out, "Layla! Layla!" and mourn and bewail--
 Kill the body, and make it immortal, by the name of Layla.

He desireth grief out of excessive woe, but findeth it not:
 The lover is ever happy, in grief and sorrow for Layla.

The whole of his love-pangs will, in a moment, disappear,
 When the long sought interview is brought about with Layla.

Draw near, AhMAD SHaH! learn thou love from Majnun!
 For he is famous, in the world, for his love of Layla.

[p. 295]

  

II.

Lay thine hand very gently upon me, O physician!
 Behold my condition, and take pity upon me, my beloved!

My heart, for this reason, is wholly filled with anguish,
 That, thro' evil destiny, it beholdeth not its dear one near.

She is perfect and exquisite, in the excess of her beauty;
 Hence my heart, distracted and disordered, raveth for her.

Tho' the dear one, by her mouth, many favours conferreth;
 Still, every one receiveth the portion, by destiny decreed.

Notwithstanding, when I make many supplications unto her,
 She saith unto me, "Grieve not, poor soul! I am thine!"

But next day, when I approach her, then, O my friend!
 She saith, "Who is it I wherefore hath the rude fellow come?"

Tho' I would tear her from my heart, yet it will not be;
 For she is, by nature, exceedingly generous, and noble withal.

The long sable locks hang her fair white face about--
 She is gay and cheerful in disposition, and elegant in form.

Since God hath given unto the heart-ravisher the rose's beauty,
 Wherefore should not the nightingale lover weep and bewail?

O AhMAD SHaH! the parrot-like soul weepeth and is sad:
 It hath come again, O destiny! from the country of its love.

  

III.

May God annihilate thee, thou fly of human nature!
 For no one mouth will have been left unpolluted by thy kiss!

[p. 296]

Every wound, that may be thy place of alighting upon,
 Will for ever be afflicted with the irritation of thine eggs.

Thou deafenest the ears of the whole world, with thy din;
 Still thy mouth becometh not mute of its unpleasant buzz.

The whole world, through thee, hath into mere carrion turned;
 Yet sorrowfully, and in spite, wringest thou still thine hands. [**]

O thoughtless man! follow not the nature of the fly!
 These seeing eyes of thine from their ophthalmia cure!

Thou art the servant; then do thou the Almighty seek!
 Existence, without God, consider utterly valueless and vain!

Take unto thee implicit faith; and scepticism's dark house,
 Thereby shalt thou whiten with the whiteness of its lime.

Lowliness and humility are the height of perfection for thee:
 The fiery nature of carnality, from pepper, take thou not!

Thine own original element thou wilt again obtain,
 When the neck of thy pride thou shalt from the yoke set free.

Seize thou, O AhMAD SHaH! the good sword of courage;
 And the Hindu temptations of the devil expel from thy breast!

  

IV.

Alas! alas! for the dreadful, rolling rock of bereavement;
 That for aye committeth such ravages loving hearts upon!

It scattereth and separateth kind friends in all directions:
 O my God! let the night of separation be always brief!

[p. 297]

Since it thus, so ruthlessly, its arrows dischargeth,
 The abode of the lover only an empty cavern remaineth.

For his poor heart there will be no relief save weeping;
 He, like a widow sigheth, with raiment wet with tears.

His grief for the beloved rendeth the garment of reserve:
 The torrent of his tears furroweth the channels of his eyes.

Wherefore should not the afflicted heart weep flesh and blood,
 When the tears of bereavement form a lake therein?

Since separation giveth not to the lover so much respite,
 The blood of his heart gusheth forth in streams from his eyes.

He will have no hope of finding relief in any direction:
 His very frame becometh a load of anguish to bear.

If woe shall afflict, and press upon thee, O AhMAD SHaH!
 In all sincerity and love, flee thou thy God unto?

  

V.

Would that the crows were not assembled in the nightingale's bower!
 That loving friends were ever assembled in the parterre of flowers!

When the rose, without the presence of the beloved, may be looked upon,
 The eyesight will merely encounter a bed of thorns and brambles.

The garden bloometh in beauty from the face of the beloved;
 Then, without her, let not the heart unto the parterre incline!

Those clouds which may not contain the water of beneficence,
 Forbid that such clouds should the face of the sky overcast!

[p. 298]

When the snaky curls fall all dishevelled round her face,
 Save mine own head, I see none other suitable penance to pay.

Since the dark mole upon her cheek is destroyed thereby,
 Forbid that the rain of tears should ever her face suffuse!

The countenance of the beloved one is like unto the rose:
 Let not autumn affect it: be it ever fresh in the parterre!

The blast of autumn, that scattereth the leaves of the rose--
 Would to heaven that blast into the flames could be cast!

The anguish of separation consumeth AhMAD SHaH'S heart:
 O then once more unite him, the company of his friends unto!

  

VI.

O heart-ravisher! there will be none other in the world like unto thee:
 Draw aside thy veil, or thy lover will of sorrow and grief expire!

With breast consumed by passion, I ever follow in search of thee;
 But thy abode is neither on earth, nor in the heavens to be found.

I will wander throughout the world, as a Santon or a Darwesh;
 Or I will saturate my garments with the flood of my tears.

O fragrant zephyr of the morn! news of her bring thou to me!
 Make thou my heart to smile the parterre of flowers within!

When thus I weep and bewail, my object, in so doing, is this,
 That my heart may a nightingale be in the rose-bower of thy face.

The heart, at the depredations of thy beauty, lamenteth,
 Like as the nightingale's heart bewaileth when autumn arriveth.

[p. 299]

In this world, the heart will not from spoliation be exempt;
 Thou consumest hearts--a wondrous fire in thy nose jewel is.

The world's censures and reproaches he taketh not to heart:
 The lover standeth in the plain, and raiseth his voice on high.

With all her tyranny and injustice, I would not abandon love,
 Were I, AhMAD SHaH, with the powers of endurance prepared.

  

VII.

Alas! alas! for sweet life, that passeth thus away!
 That, like unto a stream, floweth past, and is gone!

Wherefore, then, is the heart not aware of its departure,
 When life, alas! passeth thus so swiftly away?

Why, O my heart! hast thou thus from grief become?
 When existence, like the breeze, bloweth for ever away!

Tho' thou may'st erect mansions, in all symmetry and grace,
 Filled with regret, alas! thou must leave them all behind! [**]

Sorrow! sorrow! and for ever sorrow, O my heart!
 That loving friends from each other are severed so soon!

Those dear ones are like unto spring's fragile flowers,
 That in autumn's heats, alas! wither and fade away!

[p. 300]

This separation is as hell, and absence its heated stones, [**]
 That fall, alas! the poor devoted lover's head upon.

It behoveth us here the world to renounce, for 'tis inconstant:
 Alas! it possesseth neither good nor advantage to carry away.

Had meeting ne'er taken place, separation we had not known:
 Alas! 'tis from meeting that the very heart's blood floweth.

If friendship be thy aim, with bereavement make friends;
 For, alas! it cometh upon thee from thine own hands' deeds.

Friendship is like the rose; but its produce is the thorn:
 The thorn becometh sharp, and, alas! to the quick it pierceth.

Why grievest thou, AhMAD SHaH! for 'tis a period of joy?
 The drum of meeting soundeth: alas! union's hour is near.

  

VIII.

O would that there were not, in the world, the pangs of absence!
 That the heart in this ocean of separation were not o'erwhelm'd!

Let not the heart of the beloved be of love and constancy divested,
 Though the pains of bereavement may have the lover despoiled!

Wherefore may not the heart of the lover be lacerated,
 When every moment it is stricken by separation's sharp sword?

Afflictions, like unto black snakes, twist and twine thereon,
 When the flood of bereavement goeth straight unto his heart.

Whole bands from this world depart, one following the other;
 For the ocean of separation hath laid the whole universe waste.

From this heat the very mountains will, like water, melt,
 Should the fiery glow of bereavement unto them attain.

[p. 301]

The cypress-like in stature have been laid low, AhMAD SHaH!
 But let not thy body ever bend under absence's load.

  

IX.

Why weepest thou thus to-day again, O my heart?
 Thou sighest and complainest ever, O my heart!

Like as the hart that loseth her fawn is distracted,
 So thou showest thy alarm and inquietude, O my heart!

See also! thou acquirest not patience by exhortation:
 Wailing and lamenting, thou rendest thy garment, O my heart!

Like as the Hindu widow advanceth impatiently to the pyre,
 So thou turnest thy back to sweet existence, O my heart!

I do not comprehend all these complainings of thine:
 What makest thee so soft and so sensitive, O my heart?

From the pangs of grief thou shalt then be again released,
 When thou sacrificest thine own affections, O my heart!

Thou shalt take thy recreation in the court of the beloved,
 If thou wilt resign thine own will and pleasure, O my heart!

The heart-ravishers are pert and capricious, and deceiving withal;
 Then how long wilt thou sigh and weep for them, O my heart?

In the world the roses of spring are manifold in number,
 If, like the nightingale, thou lamentest for them, O my heart!

The murky night will become unto thee the sunny day,
 When, like the moth, thou sacrificest thyself, O my heart!

The rose-bud of desire thou shalt make to bloom thereby,
 If thou make truth the rain-clouds of thy spring, O my heart!

[p. 302]

The long night of autumn shall never be tardy in passing,
 If thou on this path takest sincerity with thee, O my heart!

Thou shalt ever be gladdened with the sight of thy beloved,
 When the dark mind thou the bright dawn makest, O my heart!

AhMAD SHaH, O world! remembereth no other prayer--
 In beholding the dear one's face, employ me, O my heart!

  

X.

What an hour of bliss it was, when we, in retirement, each other's society enjoyed!
 The beauty of thy face was a bed of roses, and my heart a nightingale disporting therein.

With the wine of union it was intoxicated: of the marplot it was free from dread:
 Compared with the excessive torments of separation, to it was bliss, the meeting of to-day.

That was an hour of joy and felicity, when the Huma [**] of union o'ershadow'd its head:
 Why then should not the heart its yearnings show, when with sorrow it was constantly filled?

On whom the beloved her glance directed, the entire world was delightful unto him:
 Union with the dear one is God's gift: not that it was brought about by other means.

Indeed, with but one look towards the charmer, even Paradise itself was forgotten by me:
 My beloved was one without simile or resemblance, and her beauty the rose's excelled.

[p. 303]

There are many cypresses within the grove; but in stature my friend all, all of them surpassed:
 I enjoyed the contemplation of my dear one; for she than nectar was sweeter, by far, to me.

When I would her loveliness behold, how could sun or moon with it compare?
 For hot, long shall AhMAD SHaH extol her, when all the world was occupied with her praise?

  

XI.

I cry unto Thee, O God! for I am of my sins and wickedness ashamed;
 But hopeless of Thy mercy, no one hath ever, from Thy threshold departed.

Thy goodness and clemency are boundless; and I am of my evil acts ashamed:
 'Tis hopeless that any good deeds of mine will avail; but Thy name I'll my refuge make.

When I my iniquities review, I say, O that I were but a mere blade of grass!
 The lusts of the flesh and the Devil are so implanted within me, that, O God! I can nothing do.

Tho' I strive to the utmost, there's no escape for me out of the Devil's evil well:
 If it be possible the heart from evil to guard, how shall the eyes be protected?

O AhMAD! seek thou help from the Almighty, but not from pomp and grandeur's aid!

[p. 304]

  

XII.

If I shall say anything of the beloved, what then shall I say?
 Such is in my destiny, then of my fate, what shall I say?

Though the charmers are somewhat softened in heart,
 Of fortune's crooked, wayward course, what shall I say?

I do not complain of the sable locks of the beloved;
 But her eyes are blood-shedders: of the slaughtered, what shall I say?

I greatly longed to behold that sweet countenance of hers;
 But it killeth the heart: of such a face, what shall I say?

They, who show no tenderness, are rivals unto themselves:
 Thy beloved should be thy beloved: of a rival, what shall I say?

The morning's breeze, that causeth the rose to smile,
 Is the zephyr itself; then of the morn, what shall I say?

The thorn which may be with the rose, is also the rose:
 Since it belongeth to the rose, of the thorn, what shall I say?

The harsh words of the dear ones, tho' a load, are still acceptable:
 Since lovers are under a load of obligations, of the load, what shall I say?

If the rose be the heart's bower, it is the lamp of the nightingale's heart:
 Since it is the lamp of his heart, of the lamp, what shall I say?

The despoiled crieth out, and distracteth others' hearts too:
 He remembereth the departed loved one: of the despoiled, what shall I say?

O AhMAD SHaH! tho' it be a stake, it is a bed of flowers also:
 Since the stake of the beloved is a bower, of the stake, what shall I say?

Footnotes

^294:* See note at page <page 29>, and Introduction, page <page xx>.

^296:* This refers to flies rubbing their heads with both fore legs, which the author calls wringing their hands sorrowfully and in spite.

^299:* See Horace, Ode 13th, Book II.:--

"Linquenda tellus, et domus, et platens
  Uxor; neque, harum, quas colis, arborum
  Te, praeter invisas cupressos,
  Ulla brevem dominum sequatur."

^300:* Hell is said to be paved with stones, which thus make the infernal fire the more excessive by the transmission of heat.

^302:* See note at page <page 37>.

     
Selections from the Poetry of the Afghans, by H.G. Raverty, [1868], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 305]

  

KAZIM KHAN, KHATTAK,

  

SURNAMED

  

SHAIDA.

KaZIM KHaN was the son of Muhammad Afzal Khan, chief of the Khattaks--and author of several extensive and valuable prose works in the Pus'hto language--who was son of the poet Ashraf Khan; and hence Kazim was the great-grandson of Khushhal Khan, already noticed. He was born some time during the five years subsequent to H. 1135 (A.D. 1722). On the death of his father, the chieftainship fell to Asad-ullah Khan, Kazim's elder brother, who, after a fashion too common in Eastern countries, considered it the safest and most prudent course to act with great severity towards his brothers and other near male relatives. Kazim, who was quite a youth at the time, could not brook this tyrannical treatment, and therefore separated from him, and even abandoned the jagir, or grant of land, then in his possession. Asad-ullah, who appears to have been rather more favourably inclined to Kazim Khan than to his other brothers, on becoming acquainted with the fact of his distrust, sent for Kazim, and used every endeavour to soothe his fears and set his mind at ease; and, the more effectually to bring this about, he conferred upon him an additional grant of land, and betrothed him to a daughter of one of their uncles. However, the suspicions and fears of Kazim--who doubtless had heard of the treatment the sons and grandsons of Khushhal had experienced at the hands of his own father--increased, at all this extreme kindness, to a greater degree than before; and he secretly

[p. 306]

fled from his home. Some say that he had an antipathy to his young cousin as a wife; and that, at the time, he requested his brother not to betroth her to him, as he did not like her. This Asad-ullah would not listen to; and, according to the Afghan custom, named her as the future wife of his younger brother. Be this, however, as it may, Kazim took to a wandering life, and spent several years in Kashmir, where he acquired considerable learning. He subsequently lived a long time at Sirhind, in Upper India, but afterwards proceeded to the Afghan principality of Rampur, in that country, where he took up his residence; and there he passed the greater part of his life.

On several occasions his brother Asad-ullah sent many of his confidential friends to endeavour to induce him to return to his native country; but without effect. On one occasion the poet had gone as far as Hasan Abdal, a town some few miles east of Attak, in the Panjab, on a pleasure excursion, with some of his particular acquaintances, at which time a number of his relatives came to see him, from the Khattak country, beyond the Indus, and only two days' journey distant; but, notwithstanding all their entreaties, he would not return home, and went back to Rampur again.

When the gift of poesy was bestowed upon him, he took the poetical surname of "Shaida," signifying "The Devoted" or "Lovelorn;" for he had now turned devotee, and had become the disciple of the holy men of Sirhind; and, according to the mystic doctrines of the Sufis, considered himself devoted to the love of the Divine. His poetry, like that of Mirza, is deeply tinged with the mysticisms of that sect.

The fame of Shaida's poetry soon began to be noised abroad; and at length, Mi'an Muhammadi, son of Mi'an Aeabd-ullah of Sirhind, who belonged to the family of Shaida's spiritual guide, [**]

[p. 307]

expressed a wish to be furnished with a copy, on which the poet sent him the, at present, only known copy--which now lies before me--bearing the impression of his seal. These poems were alphabetically collected into this volume in the year n. 1181 (A.D. 1767), and, indeed, it is supposed to be the only copy that was ever made; for until shown to them by me, the descendants of his elder and other brothers, who dwell in the vicinity of Peshawar, had never seen a copy of his poems, although so celebrated among them. This unique volume, which I procured at Lahore, is most beautifully written and illuminated, and contains a number of odes inserted on the margins of the pages.

Shaida's poetry is highly polished, but deep and difficult; and approaches nearer to that of the Persians than of any other of the Afghan poets, whose simplicity is the chief charm of their writings. The poet also introduces a greater number of Persian and Arabic words.

Shaida's first disappointment appears to have given him a distaste for matrimony; and he died unmarried, at Rampur, where he had dwelt so long. Soon after his decease, his relatives came and removed his remains, and conveyed them to the poet's native country; and they found a resting-place at Sara'e, where the Khattak chieftains, and their families, have, for centuries past, been interred.

Footnotes

^306:* See Introduction, page <page xiii>.

     
Selections from the Poetry of the Afghans, by H.G. Raverty, [1868], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 308]

  

THE POEMS

  

OF

  

KAZIM KHAN, KHATTAK.

  

I.

WHAT pleasure shall the dead in heart take in beauty's display?
 With Layla's blandishments, what shall Majnun's image do?

When, like unto the gazelle, they will not be familiar with any one,
 What shall the effect of constancy with those bright eyes do?

The appliances of joy and pleasure were useless, unto the forsaken:
 With the arrival of the morning's breeze, what shall the turban's chaplet do? [**]

Since, like unto the dawn of morning, his garment may be rent, [*+]
 How can one, as this so infamous, his condition conceal?

They never derive any share whatever of hands and feet,
 What then shall the world of fishes with the hinna's bright dye do? [*++]

Folly and vanity have made thee lighter even than the bubble:
 What shall the foaming of the ocean towards thy weight and power do?

[p. 309]

Nourish not the hope, O Alexander! that it will to thee be constant:
 Behold, what the vicissitudes of fortune shall unto Darius do!

By the violence of its ravages, the whole hath been to ruin brought,
 Otherwise, in the desert, what doth the litter of its camel do?

Did he, like unto a falcon, soar in air, then it might avail;
 But what shall the restraint of that net, now, unto SHAIDa do?

  

II.

Obtain for thy requirements the dun steed of the waves!
 In the arena of the flood, practice the horsemanship of the waves!

The meek and humble, like the oyster, have the pearl acquired;
 But naught of pearl's merchandise, beareth the caravan of the waves.

The lowly and humble are more powerful than the haughty and proud:
 In the bonds of ocean, for ever confined, will be the rolling of the waves.

The obstinate and refractory are by the meek and humble subdued:
 The ground-kisser unto the sea-shore is the tempest of the waves.

See, at what time they will swallow the dark earth altogether,
 On the water's rolling throne seated, the kings of the waves.

Trouble not the inexperienced and incompetent with thy affairs:
 For upon the target of the waters, become bent the arrows of the waves.

Woe and affliction are salutary to the mind of the heart-broken;
 For firmly fixed, the flood upon, is the foundation of the waves.

[p. 310]

They are the ups and downs of the world: O SHAIDa, behold them!
 Rising and falling, without ceasing, is the world of the waves!

  

III.

Thou hast cast loose the dark tresses about that fair face of thine:
 Thou hast, time after time, desolated the world's dwelling-places!

Thou hast not left one unscathed, the whole land within;
 With the sword of amorous glances armed, whom now smitest thou?

Since from the sun of thy beauty, the veil hath been drawn aside,
 The mart of love, the world within, thou wilt with bustle fill again.

Thou hast subdued the whole land with thy beauty and goodness:
 Thy slaves thou wilt make all the fair ones of Hind. [**]

My phrenzy, O physician! will not in the least decrease:
 Thine own rose thou wilt make even spring itself for me.

Since upon the target of the heart they so like straight ones strike,
 How many wilt thou cause to groan from thine eyelashes' crooked darts?

Worthless himself, thou wilt draw demented SHAIDa to thy side again,
 Shouldst thou even fill thy skirt with stones equal to a mountain in bulk.

  

IV.

Art thou come again in search of roses, thou seller of flowers!
 That not a bird of the parterre ceaseth lamentation to make?

[p. 311]

A bubble of the broad ocean is every one of its bells: [**]
 The kar-wan [*+] moveth along silently, this desert within.

In its desire to attain it, with its own blood it became tinged;
 Yet still Both not the ruby reach unto the lobe of the ear?

Sometimes rising, sometimes falling, like the Pleiades they go:
 How many inebriated ones have from thy banquet gone forth?

For thy sake, I would dye my garment of the colour of the rose;
 Still, like unto perfume, it would from my bosom escape.

Draw near, and behold the black intoxication of her tresses,
 That without the shoulder, [*++] cannot proceed a step on the road.

The heart of the vortex like unto a millstone might split;
 Since fortune, towards SHAIDa, hath so unrelenting become!

  

V.

Everywhere the lords of love have become disgraced and dishonoured;
 And neither tone nor harmony, absolutely, hath the rebeck of love.

Like as the dew, the mountain of Kaf it will displace also,
 If the sun of love should rise over the head thereof.

What shall I say unto thee regarding this wave of calamity,
 When equal to the firmament itself is the bubble of love?

[p. 312]

That heart, which may for itself love's ermine acquire,
 The vicissitudes of it are changed into peace and repose.

The thoughts of her, O SHAIDa! will never leave my heart;
 For such a countenance I have beheld in the dream of love!

  

VI.

Again thou bringest thy dishevelled tresses thy face about:
 Or the hyacinth, in the spring, disordereth its curled petals.

It must have been the insolence of the comb, and the wind's pertness;
 For the locks of the dear one are not without cause deranged.

Look at them! what a wondrous moon-like circle are they!
 The curls wreathed round the face of that gay, but imperious one.

To-day, from the arena, a new source of evil hath come;
 Since thou hast brought the curls of dust upon thy face.

Like unto the comb, acquire a conception discerning;
 For the ringlets of my rhymes a hair-like fineness have.

Although, from their exceeding length, they reach the ground,
 Still, through coquetry, they place not their feet straight the path upon.

In what way shall SHAIDa become released from their noose,
 When the curls, with a single hair, the lions of the forest bind?

  

VII.

In such manner, am I happy from the world apart,
 That, like the forest's beasts, I am happy the desert within.

[p. 313]

Rather than that I should behold the land of the sea-shore,
 Like the billow, I am happy, wandering the waters upon.

When from the morsels thereon the hungry flies are driven,
 With an invitation to that table, how can I happy be?

Since, like unto the sun's, its countenance is not warm,
 I swear by thy head if, with the Huma's shadow, [**] I am happy!

When, like unto the partridge, it confined me in a cage, [*+]
 Than such laughter, with lamentation, I am more happy by far.

Though, like unto a picture, it awakened not from its sleep,
 In this state, O SHAIDa! with mine own lot, I am happy.

  

VIII.

Since, like the reed-pen, I have my head resigned,
 I am now in search of these fair and charming ones.

This fire is from the glances of those bright eyes of thine,
 Whereby I am burnt as black as those their dark lashes.

From the time when my heart became the home of these brunettes,
 Behold me! I am, as it were, a new Hindustan grown!

I vow by the hundred-times-rent vitals of the comb,
 That I am more disordered even than the curls, in grief for thee!

From terror of the autumn, I am unable to look upon the rose:
 I am shaking in this flower-garden, like the willow unto.

[p. 314]

Though my flight is in the air; yet I was not released:
 I am still of that graceful cypress the neck-enchained slave.

Like unto dust she carried me away, and showed no concern:
 Of such a fiery steed as this, the attached skirt-holder am I.

With Indian requital, such acts she practiseth on me--
 Me, SHAIDa! who in heart am a poor simple Afghan of Roh. [**]

  

IX.

Since from their complainings, its bells have not ceased,
 The caravan must still be wandering this desert within.

What can beauty's splendour, with defective sight effect?
 The mirror itself is amazed and astonished at the world.

From their eyes' wildness their intimacy cannot be gained:
 The herd of gazelles, at the sight of the shepherd, taketh to flight.

What! hath Farhad [*+] caused the covey of partridges to weep,
 That from the mountains they come [*++] with eyes all inflamed?

I perceive the manner of her gait, like unto the zephyr:
 She is again stepping gracefully, and is on slaughter bent.

From the time I became occupied in regarding the spring,
 Naught was gained by me thereby, save sorrow and regret.

[p. 315]

Many were the wailings from its rose-trees' every branch;
 In sorrow and mourning for it, many were the garments rent. [**]

Like unto the waves, it riseth and falleth continually:
 How then, from the world, canst thou aught of constancy hope?

Like unto the bubble, he wandereth in every direction, all forlorn;
 Since SHAIDa from his home and friends a wanderer became! [*+]

  

X.

Unto the trysting-place my charmer very slowly cometh;
 And the verdant spring to the parterre very slowly cometh.

Now and then I perceive kindness beaming from her eyes:
 Thou wouldst say that the languid [*++] ever very slowly cometh.

The dread of ill is a far greater slaughterer than ill itself:
 The sanguinary one, to shed my blood very slowly cometh.

The partridge, for this reason, hath from laughing become purple,
 That to make him her game, the graceful one very slowly cometh.

What! can separation, of his vigour, poor Farhad have deprived,
 That the cries and wails from his mountain very slowly come? [* section]

Under the weight of her majesty, the strength of Gulgun [* section section] was lost;
 Hence that Scythian [***] of graceful mien very slowly cometh.

[p. 316]

Give not utterance, O SHAIDa, without reflection, to a word;
 For every parrot, to speaking well, very slowly cometh.

  

XI.

Although every drop of dew should be the seed of a rose,
 The nightingales' hearts would not be satiated with beholding it.

When like unto that of the rose it hath not a face so lovely,
 What shall one then do with the hyacinth's black locks?

About my dark destiny what shall I unto any one say?
 For my forehead, like the sun's, is fit only to be branded. [**]

Is it the poor wayfarer hindered by night coming on,
 Or my heart enthralled the noose of her tresses within? [*+]

She hath made calamity's sword as sharp as fate itself:
 With hands imbrued she goeth about, both night and day.

From the sea's cold-heartedness, the bubble bursteth and breaketh;
 Hence it behoveth thee, O SHAIDa! to abandon all hope from thy kin.

  

XII.

The habitations of this world behold, and begone!
 A nest like that of the Phoenix behold, and begone! [*++]

[p. 317]

The old in years, like little infants sport and play:
 This very wonderful spectacle behold, and begone!

Should the sun, O Huma! upon my brow ever rest,
 Do thou, in that case, my independence behold, and begone!

With the torch of thine own mind, in this darkness,
 Lightning-like, the road to follow behold, and begone! [**]

The fish have no share in the benefit of hands or feet;
 But their swimming in the waters behold, and begone!

The wine-flask's one short hour in the convivial party,
 With this full mouth laughing, [*+] behold, and begone!

Every day it deceiveth SHAIDa with its friendship:
 The friendship and constancy of fortune behold, and begone!

  

XIII.

Without a meeting I shall not recover: come and sit by me!
 Make thyself acquainted with my state: come and sit by me!

Even the wild by nature have, at last, become tamed:
 O thou gazelle, by nature wild! come and sit by me!

At the desire of the nightingale, thou, faithless rose!
 After a year comest splendid again; then come and sit by me!

Like one dying, from other wounds, I ease obtain:
 No napkin do I ask of thee; then come and sit by me!

[p. 318]

With those arched eyebrows, and eyes at all times dark--
 Thou evening and new moon of thy lover, come and sit by me!

That we may together recall the days when we knew not sorrow,
 For one short hour, dear friend! come and sit by me!

The charms and beauty of thy beloved, in sweetest strains rehearse,
 O SHAIDa! thou of imagination fine, come and sit by me!

  

XIV.

No sooner did spring acquainted become, with garden and with mead,
 Than with eyes inflamed from weeping, it was separated again from them.

When the gate of the caravansary of the bud shall become unclosed,
 The caravan of dyes and perfumes departeth, and morning's breeze setteth in.

The smoke of a world consumed, by the name of sky thou termest:
 Of thy erroneous idea what shall I say? it is mere illusion and error.

That which even yet remaineth a source of amazement to the world--
 Even Majnun's name, hath come to behold the spectacle I am.

From thy well-directed aim, the arrow was pointed so truly,
 That thou wert, neither of its flight, nor of its wounding aware.

It is beyond all possibility, O foolish one! to people it again;
 For the prosperous city of SHAIDa'S heart that was, hath utterly desolate become!

[p. 319]

  

XV.

Thou hast again unclosed those lips of thine to speak,
 Or the parrot hath, for its dole of sugar, come again.

Unto the lot of the dark-hearted falleth not ecstasy's gem: [**]
 Where is the lump of steel? the burnished mirror where?

Like as the pearl-oyster, open it at once to bestow,
 When the indigent, at thy door, may his hand stretch forth.

The rose of thy cheek is, for thy tresses, all sufficient:
 Neither for attar, nor for ambergris, hath it any need.

They, of open countenance, manifest no awe of the great;
 For the mirror looketh even Alexander straight in the face.

All praise be unto the nakedness of that bare head,
 Which hath neither under turban nor diadem bent!

From warmth, like unto quicksilver, she fleeth from me:
 How, then, shall come to SHAIDa'S arms that impassioned one?

  

XVI.

Since I have turned my back home and family unto,
 For other chattels or effects, what necessity have I?

That for ever smooth, and without wrinkle, thy forehead may be,
 All these troubles make thou over unto the sovereign of Chin. [*+]

[p. 320]

The blood of my own heart I am well pleased to drink;
 For the fly never approacheth near unto this tray of mine.

It would not, with its consent, in the garden stay a moment:
 'Tis well the thorn seized the rose's garment by the hem.

Do hearts then trip along in the direction of thy curls;
 Or doth the caravan of Rum [**] unto India wend its way?

How shall those eyes of thine a glance on the humble bestow,
 When thine eyelashes, thro' arrogance, to the heavens are upturned?

In those worldly dwellings of thine, may all happiness be;
 But wandering SHAIDa is going to the deserts and wilds!

  

XVII.

Thou art welcome again thou fresh festival of spring! [*+]
 Thou hast brought joy unto every wild, and every bed of flowers!

Like unto the bird within a cage, the lovelorn nightingale,
 Even whilst yet within the egg, longeth on the wing to be.

The folks' garments have been dyed of such a saffron-like hue,
 That every bird to the parterre, filled with laughter, hath come. [*++]

Look at the rosy-bodied one in this garment arrayed,
 Like unto the sun when he approacheth the time of his setting.

[p. 321]

In the turban of every pilgrim a bouquet it will place,
 When morning's dawn scattereth flowers into its own skirt.

The nightingale's heart towards the gaudy rose is inclined,
 Or the flask hath approached the goblet, to pour out its wine. [**]

The rain of perspiration shall fall through shame therefrom,
 When the lightning shall behold the gorgeous crop of flowers.

In the same manner as the rose, the beholders of this spring
 Have not the least necessity for attar their garments upon.

The musician increaseth twofold wine's intoxicating strength,
 When the bacchanals sit down the banquet to begin.

Why, O SHAIDa! termest thou it, the oyster of the deep profound?
 When the pearl unto thy sweet strains its ear hath given.

  

XVIII.

What peace, in this world, doth the heart acquire,
 Which ever quaketh and trembleth from dread of fortune's ills?

Thro' separation from the departed water, O thoughtless people!
 Like the vortex, you have made strong your hearts, your breasts within.

Let not thy heart ever be unto this world's parterre given;
 Since even the rose-bud, at last, left it heart-disordered behind.

Approach! behold the weeping of agony in tears of blood:
 Like the wine-flask, my heart to shed blood I have brought.

[p. 322]

The fissure therein, by the waters, was not filled up again;
 And the whirlpool, like an anvil, hardened its heart unto pain.

Thou shalt, O SHAIDa! for flight, wings and feathers acquire,
 If thou in the nest, like the egg, thine heart pure and spotless make.

  

XIX.

I possess none of the chattels of tranquillity, the encampment within;
 Since I have a tent, like the bubble, upon the face of the deep.

If thou art not the owner of a single straw, grieve not thereat;
 For then, the village-consuming fire will in thy Haram [**] expire.

When thy face became bedewed with perspiration, by thy head I vow,
 That therein the rose-scattering splendour of dew I beheld.

'When wert thou ever shrouded the veil of retirement within?
 Thou art manifest in all the world, like a Phoenix unto.

Her eyes show not even as much regard towards me,
 As the wild gazelle that looketh round ere it taketh to flight.

'Tis needless to apply any salve to my all-sufficient wound:
 How can the recovery' of the slaughtered be brought about?

Morning and evening--day and night--with sable dress, and garment rent,
 Like unto time itself, [*+] in sorrow and mourning my existence is spent.

[p. 323]

The beautiful lineaments of her face are most amazing:
 In this writing there is no work soever for any one's pen.

His life perpetually from danger, how shall SHAIDa guard;
 When the snaky curls are in total darkness shrouded ever?

  

XX.

When thy beauty, like the sun's, bursteth forth,
 My garment, like the morning's, becometh rent.

In the society of thee, my bright-checked one!
 My whole body, like the candle's, melteth away.

That person shall never die, whose head shall be
 Struck off, like the candle's, by the sword of love.

Thy curly locks have drawn my heart towards thee:
 The fish, by the hook, are always from the water drawn.

Call him not, hard-hearted one! a statue of the hall,
 Who in dust and blood writheth in death's agony.

When, throughout the night, the rain of tears falleth, [**]
 From its effects at last appeareth the dawn of day. [*+]

He hath no strength to complain, who is by thy curls stricken;
 Like unto one by a snake stung, he is speechless rendered.

The desert will rend its garment's skirt to tatters,
 Should the trembling one from thy bonds escape.

Graceful words shall they write, their tablets upon,
 Whose hearts, like the pen's, may crack and split.

[p. 324]

On this account, SHAIDa cannot look upon a comb;
 For the derangement of thy curly locks is seen therein.

  

XXI.

In the rolling of thine eyes the universe may have sunk,
 Or its inhabitants may be submerged in the eddies of a flood.

Since they showed no mortification at thy lips and teeth;
 Why should not the coral and pearl thus be in ocean engulphed?

I am a cotemporary of the water of those good blades,
 Whose eyelashes may ever be in bloody tears submerged. [**]

Good men hold it far preferable to the perspiration of shame,
 That they may be swallowed in Aeumman's dark waves. [*+]

What would the simpleton and dolt from Mani [*++]: acquire,
 Though his pencil may be dipped in the rainbow's every hue?

Upon the raft of the bier unto the shore will approach,
 The kings who may have sunk in the throne's troubles and cares.

O SHAIDa! no effort to escape maketh the master-mariner,
 Whose eyes may be submerged the ocean of tears within.

  

XXII.

Since, like the sun, thou art the possessor of gold and silver,
 Why art thou standing, every morning, at the door of others?

[p. 325]

As with the candle, no one for my redemption endeavoureth;
 And thou, like the snuffers, art a seeker after my head.

As doth shadow on the sun's setting, follow the eyes' dark shade,
 If thou, for a pretty one, with sunny face, a candidate art!

By the slaughter of whom wilt thou, of roseate hue, thy garment dye,
 That, to-day again, thy waist, like the rose-bud's, is girded?

Like unto mince-meat, wound after wound I receive;
 Then, wherefore art thou of my state and my case unaware?

Thou didst depart like the bubble on the back of the flood
 Than myself, O my home! a greater wanderer art thou!

Thou beautiful brunette! O thou of figure so graceful!
 The straight and verdant pine, of whose grove art thou?

If in adversity thou bendest not thine head unto any one,
 In the loftiness of thy spirit, like a dark beetling mountain art thou.

O SHAIDa! thou art that parrot with Indian disposition endowed,
 That art with the confection of thine own words' roses content.

Footnotes

^308:* A chaplet in the turban, when withered, cannot be revived.

^308:+ The break of day is termed the rending of the dark garment of night.

^308:++ See second note at page <page 195>.

^310:* Hindustan.

^311:* The necks of camels and other animals in a caravan of travellers are ornamented with bells.

^311:+ A caravan.

^311:++ The simile here refers to the long tresses resting upon the shoulder for support.

^313:* See note at page <page 137>.

^313:+ The bartavelle, a large bird of the partridge species, is kept on account of its sound, compared to laughter; as also is the common bird.

^314:* See note at page <page 263>.

^314:+ The name of a famous Persian statuary, the lover of Shirin, wife of Khusrau Parwez, king of Persia, and daughter of the Greek Emperor Maurice, who, to please his mistress, dug through an immense mountain. This is the subject of a poem by Nizami, one of the most famous and the sweetest of Persian poets. See also note at page <page 87>.

^314:++ The eyes of the Chikor, a species of partridge here referred to, are of a deep red colour, as also are its legs. See note on  page.

^315:* The rent garments refer to the leaves the roses have shed.

^315:+ See memoir of the poet, at page <page 307>.

^315:++ The glances of the sleepy, languid eyes of a mistress.

^315: section See note at page <page 129>.

^315: section section The name of the steed of Shirin, the beloved of Farhad.

^315:** See note () at page <page 129>.

^316:* The spots in the sun's disc are compared to brands; and it used to be the custom with the Afghan tribes to brand the forehead of a child born in an unfortunate or unlucky hour, to drive misfortune away.

^316:+ The heart is the wayfarer here, and night the dark hair of the beloved.

^316:++ Its nest is not to be found, neither a permanent home in this world.

^317:* The lightning is supposed to obtain a glimpse of its own road from the light of its own flash.

^317:+ The gurgling of a full wine-flask is said to be its laughter.

^319:* A state of ecstasy to which the Sufis are supposed to attain when the world and all things worldly vanish. See Introductory Remarks, page <page xiii>.

^319:+ The eastern name of China. Chin in Persian also signifies a wrinkle, hence the play upon words.

^320:* The people of Ram, or Asia Minor, are ruddy in complexion, and the heart is also red. The people of India are dark, so are the curls of the beloved. These are the metaphors used by the poet here.

^320:+ A festival observed by the ancient Persians and by the Hindus, which season, among the latter people, is personified under the name of Basanta, who is said to attend on Kama, the god of love. It is usual in the Panjab and vicinity, on this day, for the Hindus to dress in saffron-coloured garments, called also basanti, Krishna's favourite colour.

^320:++ Saffron, it is said, will cause a person to laugh to death.

^321:* The nightingale sings on account of the rose which is red; and the metaphor here is, that, by its gurgle, the wine-flask is as though singing to pour forth the red wine.

^322:* The most sacred part of a palace or dwelling, the seraglio, or woman's apartments.

^322:+ Time assumes the black dress of darkness in the evening, and its garment is rent at the dawn of day.

^323:* The night of sorrow.

^323:+ The morn of relief or joy.

^324:* The curved shape of the scimitar is likened unto the eyelashes of the fair.

^324:+ The gulf of Persia so called.

^324:++ See note at page <page 287>.

     
Selections from the Poetry of the Afghans, by H.G. Raverty, [1868], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 326]

  

KHWAJAH MUHAMMAD, BANGASH.

THE materials for a notice of this poet are extremely meagre. Little is known about him, except that he lived in the reign of the Mughal Emperor, Aurangzeb, and belonged to the Bangakh or Bangas'h tribe of Afghans, who hold the valley of that name, and of which Kohatt is the chief town. The Bangas'h tribe, in bygone days, made a great figure in India; and from a peasant of it, the Nawwabs of Farrukhabad, in that country, traced their descent. [**]

Khwajah Muhammad lived the life of a Darwesh, in poverty and religious abstraction, and followed the tenets of the Chasti sect. He was a disciple of Aeabd-ur-Rahim, who was a disciple of Mi'an Panju, a celebrated Sufi teacher, who came originally from

[p. 327]

[paragraph continues] Hindustan, and dwelt for many years in Afghanistan. He is said to have traced his descent from the Arab devotee, Muaein-ud-Din, the founder of the Chasti sect. [**]

Khwajah Muhammad appears to have been a man of some learning; and passed most of his time with his teacher or spiritual guide, already mentioned. It is not known whether he left any descendants; for although I despatched a person, specially, into the Bangas'h country to make inquiry, I cannot now discover, with any certainty, either his place of birth, residence, or the branch of the tribe to which he belonged. He is known, however, to have performed the pilgrimage to Makka and Madinah; and that, after his return thence, he gave up writing poetry. His Diwan, or Collection of Odes, from which the following poems have been selected, is a very rare book; in fact, scarcely procurable; for, as far as I can discover, the copy to which I had access is the only one known.

His writings are deeply tinged with the mysticisms of the Sufis; but occasionally he devotes a poem to the remembrance of lost friends, and laments his bereavement from them.

The place and time of his decease are uncertain; and the whereabouts of the grave in which he was buried is not now known.

Footnotes

^326:* Little did I imagine, whilst stationed in the Panjab a few years since, when I was penning the notes for this short notice of a poet of the tribe, that I should behold the last of the Nawwabs, escorted by a party of my own regiment, conducted, on foot, with fetters on his legs, through the streets of Nassick, in Western India (where I then was stationed in command of a detachment), on his way to undergo perpetual banishment at Makka, for the share he took in the massacre at Farrukhabad, during the late rebellion in India. He had been sentenced to death; but his punishment was commuted to perpetual exile, in any place he might select. He chose Makka in Arabia, where, I have since heard, he subsists on alms. I spoke a few words to the wretched man at Nassick; the first he had heard in kindness, he said, for many long days. He appeared to be any thing but what one might expect, from all that has been proved against him. He was rather fair, slightly made, and about thirty years of age. To me, he appeared very wretched and heart-broken. He was only an Afghan in name: the centuries of admixture of Indian blood, by intermarriage with the people of the country, had left little of the Afghan blood remaining.

^327:* See note at page <page 1>.

    
Selections from the Poetry of the Afghans, by H.G. Raverty, [1868], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 328]

  

THE POEMS

  

OF

  

KHWAJAH MUHAMMAD, BANGASH.

  

I.

EITHER the hinna [**] hath been unto thy white hands applied,
 Or they have been made red in the blood of thy lover.

I am unable, O dear one! to endure thy glance's fire;
 For I am weak, and infirm, and powerless, altogether.

Those languid eyes of thine have many in misery plunged:
 It would be well, my beloved! shouldst thou their tyranny restrain.

Thy stricken ones, without union with thee, revive not again,
 Though Abu-Sina [*+] himself to prescribe for them should come.

Those sable locks of thine are like unto spring's lowering clouds;
 And from them shineth out thy countenance, like the sun.

Thy fascinated ones are entangled in the noose of thy ringlets;
 But the wise bird upon the net can no confidence place.

The equal to thy beauty is not in the wide world to be found;
 Whilst my poor heart breaketh at the affluence thou enjoyest.

Thou art celebrated throughout the world for thy benevolence too;
 Wherefore, then, givest thou not ear unto KHWaJAH'S complainings?

[p. 329]

  

II.

Separation from thee, O my friend! hath made me so disconsolate,
 That naught in me remaineth, but misery and woe!

The ensanguined tears chase each other down my cheeks
 My heart is rent to atoms, and my breast is all consumed.

The clear colour of my face dependeth upon thy existence;
 And now, without thee, it is colourless, and tinged with blood.

I was unacquainted with the world's profits and losses--benefits and ills:
 By the sight of thyself, without wine thou didst inebriate me.

Though I yearn and long for it, I cannot procure it in the world:
 The rapturous sight of thee is become unattainable to me.

I become immersed therein: at times I sink; at times I rise again;
 But out of the vortex of the ocean of thy love I cannot emerge.

The whole country unto me hath dark become without thee;
 O thou, the bright sun among all saints and holy men!

Thou art a mighty river, in waves and billows rolling;
 But no one drinketh one mouthful from the mighty stream.

My mind will not become comforted by any other person,
 Than by thee only; O thou, of all poles now the pole [**] unto me!

[p. 330]

I was wont to say, that in life we always together should be;
 For I was utterly ignorant regarding the dread torrent of death.

The extent of thy goodness, my beloved! was beyond computation;
 For thou didst not, from the veil, thy countenance to any one show.

Thou wert the altar of the aspirations and exigencies of all!
 For at the threshold of the Highest, acceptable were thy prayers.

  

III.

I would relate unto thee the wondrous works of the ravishers of the heart,
 But I know naught concerning it--they abstract it from my breast.

I will bear whatever cruelty the beloved may heap upon me:
 God forbid that any one recreant unto love should be found!

I obtain no relief, even though in her service my life I lay down;
 For my heart still reproacheth me, that I have not done enough.

There is no such cool water, whereby my thirst shall be quenched;
 And I shall thus wander, with breast on fire, till time shall end.

I shed floods of tears, but she showeth no sympathy towards me:
 Let not any one, O God! a mistress have, so cruel and unkind!

This also, both high and low, great and small, will understand--
 When doth any one, without being ailing, unto the physician go?

The afflictions of the sick they increase: there is no cure for them;
 For there are no skilful physicians remaining: they have all left the land!

Happy are the whole and the healthy, that need not medicine;
 For those, with this malady afflicted, obtain no ease to their pain.

[p. 331]

"I have meted unto every one his destiny," so the Kur'an saith:
 Who then shall change the lot HE unto KHWaJAH MUhAMMAD assigned?

  

IV.

Shouldst thou become the possessor of the world's throne and sceptre,
 Be not arrogant! for in the end thou wilt be plundered and despoiled.

All will be equally on a par, one with the other, after death,
 Whether it be the beggar, the wealthy man, or the prince.

Since thy place, at last, is the dark earth beneath,
 Manifest neither gladness nor predilection for the world's affairs.

It will become shattered to atoms by the stones of death,
 To whatever degree thou mayest the body's glass vessel guard.

If thou considerest it thy duty, the necessities of the poor to relieve,
 The Almighty will never let thee be under necessity unto any one.

When a friend presenteth himself, show thy bounty to the utmost;
 Since there are merely these five days of existence for thee.

Adorn thy piety by good actions and praiseworthy deeds;
 For a bride without adornment and jewels 'tis unusual to see.

The whole of this darkness shall be expelled from thine heart,
 If thou lightest up within it, the lamp of love divine.

When are such things brought about by armies or by legions,
 As are accomplished by the fervid enthusiasm of love?

[p. 332]

If the lover be small in stature, but be great in heart,
 Then of what use is Aeaj's gigantic stature unto him? [**]

Love hath brought dishonour, both in this world and the next,
 Upon one Majnun; [*+] upon another Mansur, Hillaj's son. [*++]

What would the sportsman in the forest know concerning it,
 If the partridge did not acquaint him by so loudly calling?

The fame of Kasra's [* section] justice hath unto all time remained,
 But tyranny's scar remaineth branded Hujaj's forehead upon. [* section section]

The unfinished and incomplete woof of the world's warp behold!
 The weaver by no means soever can it to perfection bring!

If thou art a lover, of slander and aspersion have no fear!
 But become thou the target of every one's arrow of reproach.

What are the sins of KHWaJAH MUhAMMAD in the eye of God,
 When the ocean of His mercy in waves of beneficence rolleth?

  

V.

How much longer, O base one! for the world's love wilt thou wander?
 Quaff of the inebriating cup of love divine, that both sugar and honey is!

[p. 333]

O thou, its seeker! about the, world to come, that is eternal, be concerned!
 Place not thy affections on the transient world, tho' all its dust were gold!

But the counsel of monitors taketh no effect whatever upon thee;
 For like unto a breast-work round thine heart, is the love of the world!

Happy the inspired, who are filled with the remembrance of the beloved!
 The general world are unacquainted with the raptures and bliss thereof!

The Perfect One's praise is the embellisher of the mouth, if thou art wise:
 Come, polish the mirror of thine heart from the tarnishing dust thereon!

O, what rapture have those lovers that drink of the wine of love!
 With the beloved, solely occupied, they are free from all griefs and woes!

Cast away, O KHWaJAH MUhAMMAD! both life and goods for it;
 But for a tittle of the perfect saint's pain and affliction pray!

  

VI.

Entertain not, O brother! great friendship towards the world:
 Dost thou not, the raids of separation, on all sides perceive?

'Tis to depart and pass away: the world is not thy tarrying place:
 Whether king or beggar, all will certainly to the grave go down!

Whether the prelate, or the priest, or the accomplished in learning,
 Not one, by any contrivance, shall from death's debt escape!

[p. 334]

They who are by sanctity inspired, pursue not mundane love;
 With that of the Beloved One, there is no love to be compared!

Since thou showest such yearning after the world's greatness,
 What is it after all? reflect well, and of thy dear friends think!

I was calmly reposing in my abode, along with my beloved,
 When the horsemen of separation carried me hand-bound away!

All my loved ones, from time to time, have been taken from me:
 The tablets of my heart have been blotted all over by grief!

I, KHWaJAH MUhAMMAD, in bereavement's flame, consume;
 Hence sighs and lamentations, irrepressibly, issue from my mouth!

  

VII.

Since He created thee for well-doing and virtuous actions,
 It behoveth not, O man! that thou shouldst evil commit.

Unto the Creator, day and night, render due meed of praise:
 Let it not be that thou for a moment fail in doing so!

Upon the throne of contentment sit, and a sovereign become;
 And under what obligation wilt thou then, to lord or chieftain be?

The world's duration is but short: it will soon pass away!
 If thou art anxious as to thy award hereafter, now is thy time!

Be prudent, and do not the world's transient pleasures pursue!
 Let it not be that the prosperous be ruined by the adverse. [**]

The torrent of death hath carried whole peoples away;
 Then what stay canst thou make upon the face of the flood?

[p. 335]

Thou wilt be awakened, at last, by the herald's summons,
 Notwithstanding thou mayest upon the softest couch repose!

In no way shalt thou be able the toils of death to escape,
 Even shouldst thou with seventy thousand screens thyself surround!

Since sweet existence is ever melting like unto snow away,
 How much longer, with harp and rebeck, wilt thou revel and rejoice?

Sometimes the green corn is cut down; sometimes the ripe:
 What dependence canst thou place, then, upon youthfulness or age?

Fear, O KHWaJAH MUhAMMAD! fear, fear for thyself!
 There, what answer wilt thou make, if the Almighty question thee?

The hopes of KHWaJAH MUhAMMAD are upon THY mercy placed:
 If THOU rebukest him he hath not the power to reply!

  

VIII.

If thou takest into consideration the many favours of the Almighty,
 When wilt thou be able, for even one of them, fitting thanks to return?

One of the favours HE hath bestowed upon thee is Islam's true faith:
 The other, that HE hath placed thee the great Huma's shadow [**] beneath.

Let it not happen, that in the end, thou shouldst lament about that,
 For which, like the nightingale, thou constantly sacrificest thyself.

[p. 336]

The world shall embrace thy feet and thy hands with affection,
 If thou make thyself the dust of the feet of holy men.

Thou shalt, at that time, attain unto the object of thy wishes,
 When thou shalt make thy life and goods an oblation unto them.

It behoveth thee to consider each respiration as the last;
 For death many people hath homeless and desolate made.

Mankind come into the world, and soon from it depart:
 How canst thou then place any hope upon this transient abode?

But I will eschew even the sovereignty of the world itself,
 If THOU make KHWaJAH MUhAMMAD a beggar, at his loved one's door.

  

IX.

If thou possessest the love and regard of the Almighty,
 Thou wilt tear thyself away both from brother and from friend.

Like unto Majnun, thou wilt begin in wilds to wander:
 Thou wilt never take account of the thorns and brambles by the way.

Until thou castest not off entirely all thy superfluous flesh,
 O contender in the race! thou wilt never reach the goal.

Day and night thou pursuest this transient world,
 And hast, O foolish one! turned from the immortal away.

At last, He will take away from thee, by force, for ever,
 This borrowed garment, [**] that is so very precious unto thee.

[p. 337]

The beasts of the field, when grazing, eat not up every herb,
 But thou turnest not away thy face from any one thing.

Until it shall be melted the saint-like teacher's crucible within,
 Thou wilt not be able to separate this silver from its tin alloy.

Notwithstanding, before him, thou mayest the beloved praise;
 Still, thou canst not manhood from the impotent hope.

I, KHWaJAH MUhAMMAD, am immersed in the ocean of grief,
 If thou, my master! wilt save me from this raging flood.

  

X.

Give ear, O brother! unto the request I make unto thee:--
 Be not, by the contemptible deception of the world, led astray!

By its deceit, it maketh people despiteful unto each other:
 It passeth around a golden cup with deadliest poison filled.

The millstones of fate, round the heads of mankind revolve;
 And some time or other, the turn for thy head shall come.

By the severe bridle of fasting, curb the lusts of the flesh;
 For with a halter thou wilt be unable, this steed to restrain.

The object of food is to keep body and soul together, and no more,
 Although thou mayest have in thy possession all sorts of things.

To clothe the body is necessary, and it behoveth us so to do,
 Though but two or three yards of blanket or of canvas it be.

Thy every breath is a pearl and coral of inestimable price:
 Be careful, therefore, and guard every respiration well!

Let the whole of thy words be conformable with thy deeds;
 And in no wise in vain and foolish conversation indulge!

[p. 338]

Tell me what extent of torment thou wilt be able to bear;
 And commit no more sin than may be equivalent thereunto.

By the rain of spring will become all saturated at last,
 The paper dress in which thou mayest have clothed thyself.

Unto the money-changer, its exterior and interior will be known;
 Notwithstanding thou shouldst, with gold, brass ever so enwrap.

The bead of this arrow will not come out from thy bones,
 Until thy flesh shall have been by the sharp diamond incised. [**]

It was because he made use of words of arrogance and pride,
 That Satan himself was wholly from God's mercy debarred.

Without doubt, all good and all misfortune are from the Almighty:
 Wherefore then unto doubt, givest thou a place in thine heart?

In thy ways indeed, thou art still more silly than children,
 Even now that thy years are beyond forty and fifty passed.

Shouldst thou drink one mouthful from the cup of love,
 Like unto Khizr [*+] and Mihtar Iliyas, [*++] thou wilt never die!

I am filled with terror and dismay, beyond all bounds;
 For the Tempter waylayeth me before and on every side!

I, KHWaJAH MUhAMMAD, am prostrate at thy threshold,
 If thou, O my master! wilt but take me by the hand!

  

XI.

The love of the world hath made thee so insensate,
 That thou hast wholly forgotten the duties of religion.

[p. 339]

Like unto the cat, thou art ever upon the watch:
 Thou art of no use soever to any one, save the rat.

Outwardly, thou hast clothed thyself in sanctity's dress,
 O deceiver! thou vender of barley, but shower of wheat!

When the opportunity hath passed away, then wilt thou grieve;
 And when the cup of death shall be given thee to quaff.

Thou hearest with thine ears the cries of the outcast;
 And the cries at thy decease too, shall reach others' ears.

Mankind HE hath created to walk in righteousness' ways:
 Thou art not a beast; then not sinfully, but worthily act!

When thou leavest the body's house, take viaticum with thee;
 For there, O beloved! are no means for obtaining it.

Thou art a pilgrim, and wilt depart: anxious therefore be:
 Bind up thine effects, and reflect upon the long journey before!

The path in front the Tempter haunteth: go not alone!
 Arise! search about thee! and thy companions select!

If one, even with every effort, cannot the goal attain;
 No man can reach it without striving so to do.

Every morning and evening raise thy voice unto God!
 Tears of blood shed in the depth of thy heart's emotion!

All other love, save one, is naught but deadly poison:
 From the cupbearer's goblet, then, joyfully take one draught!

Groan and lament, but so that no one may hear thee!
 Remember thy beloved in thine heart, but with silent lips!

The world is black, and maketh man's face so too at last;
 But drink thou the wine of love, and red-faced become! [**]

[p. 340]

Without anxiety, O Khwajah Muhammad! sleep not;
 Since thou hast been by death's repeated warnings apprised!

I, KHWaJAH MUhAMMAD, am of sins and offences full;
 But, O hider of faults! I place my trust in Thee!

  

XII.

From all ills, shield Thou me, O God, my Protector!
 For save Thee, there is none other, my Protector!

Unto Thee I have intrusted the affairs of both worlds:
 Of all things, both of faith and country, Thou art the Protector!

The flesh and the devil, alas! waylay me everywhere:
 I have no means of escape, save through Thee, O Protector!

Of the world's calamities and woes, I shall have no dread;
 Since, everywhere, Thou art my shield from ill, O Protector!

When I draw near unto Thee, go Thou before, O my guide!
 For on this road I have no other friend but Thee, O Protector!

Every morn I cry unto Thee: with Thee I for union yearn;
 Then, one morn, accept the prayer of my heart, O Protector!

Upon sinful KHWaJAH MUhAMMAD Thy love bestow,
 That he may ever praise and call upon thy name, O Protector!

  

XIII.

Wherefore dost thou not follow righteousness, O my stony heart!
 When thy beloved friends, one after the other, continually disappear?

O Thou! who hast bound so many loads upon thy back, and set out--
 How wilt thou pass along the path in front, so narrow and confined?

[p. 341]

Burn thyself and become ashes, if thou truly lovest the beloved:
 Draw near, O suitor! learn thou from the moth true love!

Give up this world! leave it to the negligent and the remiss!
 From heedlessness' dark film, make thou the mirror bright!

The garment's hem of my patron saint, I have, with both hands seized:
 In the conflict with the flesh and the devil I shall conquer perhaps.

As the breath of the charmer to the afflicted, such is a sight of thee:
 I will become thy sacrifice, thou anchorite at the loved-one's door!

Let both my life and goods be an oblation, O mediator! unto thee;
 But the face of the beloved, so beautiful, show thou unto me!

Rivers have overflowed, and distant lands have become flooded;
 But, alas! of thirst I die, at the brink of a mighty stream!

Give not away, wholly, to sorrow, O KHWaJAH MUhAMMAD!
 For the Perfect One will confer honour upon the servants at His gate!

  

XIV.

Unto the whole and healthy, I am unable of my heart's state to speak;
 And should I not tell it, I am unable its pain to endure.

To this degree I am become a reproach all people amongst,
 That I am altogether unable out of my own house of sorrow to go.

From grief, on account of slander, I am fallen, with eyes closed;
 For through shame, I am unable to look any one in the face.

[p. 342]

My throat hath become so embittered by the cup of separation,
 That I cannot taste aught of the sweetness of this world.

I cannot make my beloved acquainted with my condition;
 For through fear of the kill-joy, I am unable my case to state.

I would leave the beloved, and depart to a far distant land;
 But I am unable in any way the bonds of affection to break.

The tears of separation flow so continually down my cheeks,
 That I cannot upon my eyeballs retain the image of my beloved.

Like the tulip, [**] the blood of my own vitals I am ever consuming;
 For I, KHWaJAH MUhAMMAD, am unable, openly, to speak.

But I am altogether a recreant and a speaker of falsehood;
 Since, to the love of the beloved, I cannot my life devote.

  

XV.

I am a complainant against absence: a complainant am I!
 For it separated me, weeping and wailing, my loved-one from!

My love is the immortal soul, and I the form containing it;
 And from its soul, the separation of the body is bitter indeed!

My very vitals have become entirely consumed in the flames:
 Alas! alas! O separation! what dost thou require of me?

I am not criminal, that I grieve and complain so much:
 'Tis that my heart is broken, and my breast with fire consumed!

If prosperity attend me in all other things, what shall I do with them?
 For without thee, the whole world hath become desolate to me!

[p. 343]

The anguish of my heart, on thy account, every moment increaseth
 Henceforth of remedy or cure I shall quite hopeless become!

The physicians neglected to make her acquainted with my case;
 And, at the Last Day, I will seize them by the collars therefore!

O KHWaJAH MUhAMMAD! make thou resignation thy daily task:
 Entertain no hope that, from this world, thou shalt constancy find!

Since according to my desire thou never tamest unto me,
 Say, say, O relentless fate! in what I have offended thee!

  

XVI.

Show thou no yearnings for the greatness of this world;
 For many tribes, at death's wail, have desolate become!

Those dear friends, who were like spring's flowers unto,
 In the sultry heats of autumn, grew withered, and decayed.

They are all now prostrate fallen, the dank earth upon,
 Who, with turbans placed so jauntily, rode their fiery steeds.

And they who were wont upon the couches of the fair to lie--
 Of their deaths, many anniversaries have come and passed away.

Those youths and fair maidens are now buried in the dust,
 Whose hands were still more soft than even velvet itself.

The excellent of their time have passed from the world away,
 Around whom their disciples gathered their discourses to hear.

Upon what wound of mine will the physicians salve apply?
 For, with the diamonds [**] of separation I am all covered with wounds.

[p. 344]

When I call to mind the pleasant meetings of friends so dear,
 I, KHWaJAH MUhAMMAD weep, but not for any crime.

  

XVII.

The whole of my grief is love for thee, love, love for thee!
 My heart is to atoms broken: it hath become blood, all blood!

My very vitals are become gorged with red, red blood,
 Though clothed in garments outwardly white, all white!

Thou inflictest fresh wounds upon me, again and again,
 Altho' of my former ones unhealed are many, very many!

Thou hast not shown aught of kindness in life towards me:
 Of what use shouldst thou do so, when I die, when I die!

Thou hast expelled me entirely from the garden, my love!
 And the black crows, within it consume the ripe, ripe fruit!

Thy dark tresses have the whole land with fragrance filled:
 Thy curls are as the musk-pods of Chin, all perfume, all perfume!

Those sleepy eyes of thine are lions, both fierce and ravenous;
 For they bear away KHWaJAH MUhAMMAD unto death, cruel death!

  

XVIII.

Since thou art the sovereign over the whole of the fair,
 Inquire after the condition of the wretched and distressed!

Break not hearts! for they are rubies of Badakhshan
 It is difficult to repair such broken things again!

My heart and soul are entirely bound up in love for thee;
 Look then, these thine own heart-bound ones upon!

[p. 345]

The flowers of the parterre have all revived thereby;
 For the zephyr hath come from the nosegay of thy face.

When they beheld, with their eyes, thy stature and figure,
 The waists of all the adorned ones crooked became.

They have deprived me altogether of sense and understanding--
 Those gentle, tender words of thine, so pleasant and so sweet.

My head than the seventh heaven shall be higher exalted,
 If thou makest me one of the sitters in thy court.

Like unto thee, there is none other of disposition so noble;
 Didst thou, indeed, from the angels this nature acquire?

The heart of Khwajah that thus speaketh, hath been carried away
 By the wiles and persuasion of those closed-mouthed ones.

Life and goods, as an oblation to them, will I give;
 For I, KHWaJAH MUhAMMAD, am the disciple of the fair!

  

XIX.

They, who were enamoured of the red roses of the parterre,
 Have now the nightingales of grief and sorrow become.

With cries and lamentations thou grievest for them;
 Since the roses have all been scattered by autumn's dread blast.

They, who were then intoxicated with the flowers' perfume,
 Have now become requited by separation's dread pangs.

Their pastimes and their laughter were apart from the world:
 The world's pleasures and joys became deadly poison to them.

As yet, they had not tasted of union's sweet fruit,
 When loving friends became severed in sorrow and grief.

[p. 346]

For a few short days, the bliss of conjunction they enjoyed;
 But now years of separation have their portion become.

Should they now flee from destiny, they cannot escape;
 Since grief is the portion of lovers from the beginning of time.

The physicians of the age, if they are cognizant of much,
 How are they thus so ignorant of KHWaJAH MUhAMMAD'S pangs?

With sighs and with groans, I will lament unceasingly;
 For I ever long that the hour of my union were come!

  

XX.

Many youths and maidens have the dark dust's captives become,
 The fair faces of whom are the source of the grief of our hearts!

Place not your hopes upon this transient world, for 'tis no permanent abode!
 The whole of us, each in his own good time, shall follow after them!

They who were the great men of the land, and possessed the wealth thereof;
 From the world have wholly disappeared, both name and trace of them.

They, before whom the poor were wont in humility to stand,
 In the tomb, on their backs fallen, have now mouldered away.

For munificence and for justice their names still remain,
 Though Hat###804###im Ta-yi [**], and Nosherwan [*+] have long from the world departed.

[p. 347]

Neither by power, nor by entreaty is there any escape from death:
 Happy the sanctified, who are occupied with eternal things!

My heart hath become rent to atoms by the diamond [**] of separation;
 For, one after the other, all my dear friends have been severed from me.

All must hence depart: for what can KHWaJAH MUhAMMAD hope,
 When holy and venerated prophets have unto the dust gone down?

  

XXI.

Fruitlessly in the world thy lifetime thou hast passed,
 Whether it extended unto sixty, or unto eighty years!

The fortunate have carried away advantage from it;
 But thou, save evil, hast no other result acquired!

The friends of thy acquaintance have all gone from thee;
 And still thou perceivest it not, O man, with open eyes asleep!

When grief and sorrow man afflict, he sleepeth not:
 Art thou a beast, or a man of human parents born?

Thy fathers and grandfathers all hath death cut off;
 And thou, above all others, wilt not alone escape!

Alive in the world not one will remain behind:
 No one can have taken on himself thy obligations to fulfil!

Thy beard from age is white, and thy back is bent:
 How much longer then canst thou expect erect to remain?

Thy sixty years have passed, and thou art old become;
 Yet thou accountest thyself of the age of fourteen still!

[p. 348]

If thou art wise, turn devotee, and the world forsake;
 For they who this life choose, are in both worlds free!

The veil of scepticism from thy face draw aside;
 And unto the Master's will let thy assent be given!

Become thou the servant at the wine-sellers' door,
 That wine from the cup of love be given unto thee!

Thou One and Only God! unto righteousness direct me,
 That, the straight path upon, I may come unto Thee!

If I have evil committed, a rude slave consider me;
 And pardon me, according to Thine own peculiar way!

When man giveth aught to another, again he taketh it;
 But Thou art God, and takest not back thy gifts again!

O Thou all-possessing Deity! the sinner Khwajah Muhammad free!
 For the rich always grant liberty their aged slaves unto!

Thou art the hider of thy servant's sins, O Lord!
 In mercy, of KHWaJAH MUhAMMAD'S rend not Thou the veil!

 

 

THE END.

 

 

 

Footnotes

^328:* See second note at page <page 195>.

^328:+ The name of a celebrated Arabian physician, erroneously called Avicenna in the West.

^329:* Among the three hundred and fifty-six persons who, among the Sufis, are accounted holy men, nine only are deemed qualified to invest others with authority as teachers: these nine consist of the pole of poles, three poles, and five props, and these nine alone can be deemed perfect teachers or spiritual guides. It is to his spiritual guide, the pole of whom he was a disciple, that the poet addresses the lines above.

^332:* Og, king of Bashan.

^332:+ See note at page <page 29>.

^332:++ The name of a Sufi teacher, who is said to have attained the highest stage of Sufi-ism, and who proclaimed, "I am the truth;" or, in other words, "I am God." The constant repetition of this impious phrase alarmed the orthodox priesthood, and he was therefore seized and impaled.

^332: section The name of a Persian king, Cyrus.

^332: section section See note at page <page 201>.

^334:* The prosperous here signifies " immortal joys," and the adverse, "worldly pleasures."

^335:* Muhammad the Prophet is probably meant here; but see note at page <page 137>.

^336:* The body, the borrowed garment of the soul.

^338:* It is believed that the wound which a diamond touches will never heal.

^338:+ See note at page <page 48>.

^338:++ Elias, said to have been a grandson of Shem, son of Noah.

^339:* To become face-blackened, is to become disgraced; and red-faced, to be honoured and exalted.

^342:* The tulip of a blood-red colour.

^343:* See note at page <page 338>.

^346:* See third note at page <page 207>.

^346:+ See second note at page <page 201>.

^347:* See note at page <page 338>.

 

    


===== BOOK: spb.txt =====



The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Standard Prayer Book

  

Authorized English Translation

  

by the

  

REV. S. SINGER

  

ENLARGED AMERICAN EDITION

  

NEW YORK

  

BLOCH PUBLISHING COMPANY

  

"THE JEWISH BOOK CONCERN"

  

[1915]

Scanned, Proofed and Formatted at sacred-texts.com, January 2010, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

PUBLISHERS' FOREWORD.

THE STANDARD PRAYER BOOK is an American reprint of The Authorized Daily Prayer Book, which is in general use today throughout the British Empire. It was originally published under the authorization of the late Chief Rabbi, Dr. Nathan Marcus Adler. The English translation, by the Rev. Simeon Singer, is universally acknowledged to be the best ever published. This American edition is set from new and larger type and is characterized by the continuity of the text, which has necessitated the addition of nearly 300 pages, making it the most complete daily prayer-book ever published.

Copyright 1915, by Bloch Publishing Concern

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

TABLE OF CONTENTS.

           

       PAGE

     
      Morning Prayer for Children

       <page 1>

     
      Prayer on Entering the Synagogue

       <page 2>

     
      Morning Service

       <page 2>

     
      Mourner's Kaddish

       <page 94>

     
      Psalms for the Days of the Week

       <page 94>

     
      Kaddish d'Rabbonon

       <page 103>

     
      Prayer for Sustenance

       <page 104>

     
      The Ten Commandments

       <page 105>

     
      The Thirteen Principles of the Faith

       <page 107>

     
      Afternoon Service for Weekdays

       <page 103>

     
      Evening Service for Weekdays and the Termination of the Sabbath

       <page 128>

     
      Inauguration of the Sabbath

       <page 151>

     
      Evening Service for Sabbaths and Festivals

       <page 159>

     
      Kiddush for Sabbath Evening

       <page 181>

     
      Morning Service for Sabbaths and Festivals

       <page 182>

     
      Order of Reading the Law on Sabbaths and Festivals

       <page 207>

     
      Additional Service for Sabbaths

       <page 226>

     
      Hymn of Glory

       <page 246>

     
      Kiddush for Sabbath Morning

       <page 249>

     
      Afternoon Service for Sabbaths

       <page 250>

     
      Ethics of the Fathers

       <page 271>

     
      Service for the Conclusion of the Sabbath

       <page 293>

     
      Meditation and Blessings on taking the Lulab

       <page 312>

     
      Hallel

       <page 313>

     
      Additional Service for the New Moon

       <page 319>

     
      Service for Festivals

       <page 325>

     
      Kiddush for Festivals

       <page 333>

     
      Meditation and Blessings in the Tabernacle

       <page 335>

     
       

       PAGE

     
      Additional Service for Festivals, and for the Intermediate Days of   Festivals

       <page 336>

     
      Service for New Year

       <page 349>

     
      Kiddush for New Year

       <page 357>

     
      Additional Service for New Year

       <page 359>

     
      Tashlich Service

       <page 375>

     
      Service for the Eve of the Day of Atonement

       <page 376>

     
      Service for the Day of Atonement

       <page 377>

     
      Additional Service for the Day of Atonement

       <page 390>

     
      Afternoon Service for the Day of Atonement

       <page 404>

     
      Conclusion Service for the Day of Atonement

       <page 404>

     
      Order of Counting the Omer

       <page 455>

     
      Service for Chanukah

       <page 420>

     
      Service for Purim

       <page 422>

     
      Grace Before and After Meals

       <page 424>

     
      Blessings on Various Occasions

       <page 432>

     
      Prayers Before Retiring to Rest at Night

       <page 438>

     
      Marriage Service

       <page 443>

     
      Grace After the Wedding Feast

       <page 445>

     
      Service at the Consecration of a House

       <page 445>

     
      Service at a Circumcision

       <page 449>

     
      Grace After the Meal following a Circumcision

       <page 455>

     
      Service for the Redemption of the First-born

       <page 453>

     
      Prayer to be said by a Sick Person

       <page 455>

     
      Confession on a Death Bed

       <page 453>

     
      The Burial Service

       <page 459>

     
      Prayer in the House of Mourning

       <page 463>

     
      Service at the Setting of a Tombstone

       <page 466>

     
      Memorial Service for the Dead

       <page 467>

     
      Night Prayer for Young Children

       <page 469>

     
   

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

MORNING PRAYER FOR YOUNG CHILDREN.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who removest sleep from mine eyes, and slumber from mine eyelids.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast given us the Law of truth, and hast planted everlasting life in our midst.

Moses commanded us the Law as an inheritance of the congregation of Jacob.

Hear, O Israel: the Lord our God, the Lord is One, Blessed be His name, whose glorious kingdom is for ever and ever.

And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might.

And these words which I command thee this day shall be upon thine heart: and thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up. And thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be for frontlets between thine eyes. And thou shalt write them upon the doorposts of thy house and upon thy gates.

O my God, guard my tongue from evil, and my lips from speaking guile.

Open my heart to thy Law, and let my soul pursue thy commandments.

Let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart be acceptable before thee, O Lord, my Rock and my Redeemer.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 2]

  

PRAYER ON ENTERING THE SYNAGOGUE.

On entering the Synagogue say the following:--

As for me, in the abundance of thy lovingkindness will I come into thy house: I will worship toward thy holy temple in the fear of thee.

Into the house of God we will walk with the throng.

How goodly are thy tents, O Jacob, thy dwelling places, O Israel! As for me, in the abundance of thy lovingkindness will I come into thy house: I will worship toward thy holy temple in the fear of thee. Lord, I love the habitation of thy house, and the place where thy glory dwelleth. As for me, I will worship and bow down: I will bend the knee before the Lord, my Maker. And as for me, may my prayer unto thee, O Lord, be in an acceptable time: O God, in the abundance of thy lovingkindness, answer me in the truth of thy salvation.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

MORNING SERVICE.

1. Magnified and praised be the living God: he is, and there is no limit in time unto his being.

2. He is One, and there is no unity like unto his unity; inconceivable is he, and unending is his unity.

3. He hath neither bodily form nor substance: we can compare nought unto him in his holiness.

4. He was before anything that hath been created--even the first: but his existence had no beginning.

5. Behold he is the Lord of the universe: to every creature he teacheth his greatness and his sovereignty.

6. The rich gift of his prophecy he gave unto the men of his choice, in whom he gloried.

[p. 3]

7. There hath never yet arisen in Israel a prophet like unto Moses, one who hath beheld his similitude,

8. The Law of truth God gave unto his people by the hand of his prophet who was faithful in his house.

9. God will not alter nor change his Law to everlasting for any other.

10. He watcheth and knoweth our secret thoughts: he beholdeth the end of a thing before it existeth.

11. He bestoweth lovingkindness upon a man according to his work; he giveth to the wicked evil according to his wickedness.

12. He will send our anointed at the end of days, to redeem them that wait for the end--his salvation.

13. In the abundance of his lovingkindness God will quicken the dead. Blessed for evermore be his glorious name.

He is Lord of the universe, who reigned ere any creature yet was formed:

At the time when all things were made by his desire, then was his name proclaimed King.

And after all things shall have had an end, he alone, the dreaded one, shall reign;

Who was, who is, and who will be in glory.

And he is One, and there is no second to compare to him, to consort with him:

Without beginning, without end: to him belong strength and dominion.

And he is my God--my Redeemer liveth--and a rock in my travail in time of distress;

And he is my banner and my refuge, the portion of my cup on the day when I call.

Into his hand I commend my spirit, when I sleep and when I wake:

And with my spirit, my body also: the Lord is with me, and I will not fear.

[p. 4]

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast sanctified us by thy commandments, and given us command concerning the washing of the hands.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast formed man in wisdom, and created in him many orifices and vessels. It is revealed and known before the throne of thy glory, that if one of these be opened, or one of those be closed, it would be impossible to exist and to stand before thee. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who healest all flesh and doest wondrously.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast sanctified us by thy commandments, and commanded us to occupy ourselves with the words of the Law.

Make pleasant, therefore, we beseech thee, O Lord our God, the words of thy Law in our mouth and in the mouth of thy people, the house of Israel, so that we with our offspring and the offspring of thy people, the house of Israel, may all know thy name and learn thy Law. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who teachest the Law to thy people Israel.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast chosen us from all nations and given us thy Law. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who givest the Law.

[p. 5]

The Lord bless thee, and keep thee: the Lord make his face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee: the Lord turn his face unto thee, and give thee peace.

Mishnah. Treatise Peah, ch. i.

These are the things which have no fixed measure (by enactment of the Law): the corners of the field, the first fruits, the offerings brought on appearing before the Lord at the three festivals, the practice of charity and the study of the Law.--These are the things, the fruits of which a man enjoys in this world, while the stock remains for him for the world to come: viz., honoring father and mother, the practice of charity, timely attendance at the house of study morning and evening, hospitality to wayfarers, visiting the sick, dowering the bride, attending the dead to the grave, devotion in prayer, and making peace between man and his fellow; but the study of the Law is equal to them all.

O my God, the soul which thou gavest me is pure; thou didst create it, thou didst form it, thou didst breathe it into me; thou preservest it within me; and thou wilt take it from me, but wilt restore it unto me hereafter. So long as the soul is within me, I will give thanks unto thee, O Lord my God and God of my fathers, Sovereign of all works, Lord of all souls! Blessed art thou, O Lord, who restorest souls unto dead bodies.

[p. 6]

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the un verse, who hast given to the cock intelligence to distinguish between day and night.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast not made me a heathen.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast not made me a bondman.

Men say:--

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast not made me a woman.

Women say:--

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast made me according to thy will.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who openest the eyes of the blind.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who clothest the naked.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who loosest them that are bound.

[p. 7]

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who raisest up them that are bowed down.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who spreadest forth the earth above the waters.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast supplied my every want.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast made firm the steps of man.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who girdest Israel with might.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the. universe, who crownest Israel with glory.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who givest strength to the weary.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who removest sleep from mine eyes and slumber from mine eyelids.

And may it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, to make us familiar with thy Law, and to make us cleave to thy commandments,

[p. 8]

[paragraph continues] O lead us not into the power of sin, or of transgression or iniquity, or of temptation, or of scorn: let not the evil inclination have sway over us: keep us far from a bad man and a bad companion: make us cleave to the good inclination and to good works: subdue our inclination so that it may submit itself unto thee; and let us obtain this day, and every day, grace, favor and mercy in thine eyes, and in the eyes of all who behold us; and bestow lovingkindnesses upon us. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who bestowest lovingkindnesses upon thy people Israel.

May it be thy will, O Lord my God and God of my fathers, to deliver me this day, and every day, from arrogant men and from arrogance, from a bad mar., from a bad companion and from a bad neighbor, and from any mishap, and from the adversary that destroyeth; from a hard judgment, and from a hard opponent, whether he be a son of the covenant or be not a son or the covenant.

At all times let a man fear God as well in private as in public, acknowledge the truth, and speak the truth in his heart; and let him rise early and say:

Sovereign of all worlds! Not because of our righteous acts do we lay our supplications before thee, but because of thine abundant mercies. What are we? What is our life? What is our piety? What our righteousness?

[p. 9]

What our helpfulness? What our strength? What our might? What shall we say before thee, O Lord our God and God of our fathers? Are not all the mighty men as nought before thee, the men of renown as though they had not been, the wise as if without knowledge, and the men of understanding as if without discernment? For most of their works are void, and the days of their lives are vanity before thee, and the pre-eminence of man over the beast is nought, for all is vanity.

Nevertheless we are thy people, the children of thy covenant, the children of Abraham, thy friend, to whom thou didst swear on Mount Moriah; the seed of Isaac, his only son, who was bound upon the altar the congregation of Jacob, thy first barn son, whose name thou didst call Israel and Jeshurun by reason of the love wherewith thou didst love him, and the joy wherewith thou didst rejoice in him.

It is, therefore, our duty to thank, praise and glorify thee, to bless, to sanctify and to offer praise and thanksgiving unto thy name. Happy are we! how goodly is our portion, and how pleasant is our lot, and how beautiful our heritage! Happy are we who, early and late, morning and evening, twice every day, declare:

Hear, O Israel: the Lord our God, the Lord is One. Blessed be His name, whose glorious kingdom is forever and ever.

[p. 10]

Thou wast the same ere the world was created; thou hast been the same since the world hath been created; thou art the same in this world, and thou wilt be the same in the world to come. Sanctify thy name upon them that sanctify it, yea, sanctify thy name throughout thy world; and through thy salvation let our horn be exalted and raised on high. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who sanctifiest thy name amongst the many,

Thou art the Lord our God in heaven and on earth, and in the highest heaven of heavens. Verily thou art the first and thou art the last, and beside thee there is no God. O gather them that hope for thee from the four corners of the earth. Let all the inhabitants of the world perceive and know that thou art God, thou alone, over all the kingdoms of the earth. Thou hast made the heavens and the earth, the sea and all that is therein; and which among all the works of thy hands, whether among those above or among those beneath, can say unto thee, What doest thou? Our Father who art in heaven, deal kindly with us for the sake of thy great name by which we are called; and fulfil unto us, O Lord our God, that which is written, At that time will I bring you in, and at that time will I gather you; for I will make you

[p. 11]

a name and a praise among all the peoples of the earth, when I bring back your captivity before your eyes, saith the Lord.

Numbers xxviii. 1-8.

And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Command the children of Israel, and say unto them, My oblation, my food for my offerings made by fire, of a sweet savor unto me, shall ye observe to offer unto me in its due season. And thou shalt say unto them, This is the offering made by fire which ye shall offer unto the Lord; he-lambs of the first year without blemish, two day by day, for a continual burnt offering. The one lamb shalt thou offer in the morning, and the other lamb shalt thou offer at even; and the tenth part of an ephah of fine flour for a meal offering, mingled with the fourth part of an hin of beaten oil. It is a continual burnt offering, which was ordained in mount Sinai f or a sweet savor, an offering made by fire unto the Lord. And the drink offering thereof shall be the fourth part of an hin for the one lamb: in the holy place shalt thou pour out a drink offering of strong drink unto the Lord. And the other lamb shalt thou offer at even: as the meal offering of the morning, and as the drink offering thereof, thou shalt offer it, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savor unto the Lord.

Leviticus i. 11.

And he shall slay it on the side of the altar northward before the Lord: and Aaron's sons, the priests, shall sprinkle its blood upon the altar round about.

[p. 12]

On Sabbath the following is added:--

Numbers xxviii. 9, 10.

And on the sabbath day two he-lambs of the first year without blemish, and two tenth parts of an ephah of fine flour for a meal offering, mingled with oil, and the drink offering thereof: this is the burnt offering of every sabbath, beside the continual burnt offering, and the drink offering thereof.

On New Moon the following is added:--

Numbers xxviii. 11-15.

And in the beginnings of your months ye shall offer a burnt offering unto the Lord; two young bullocks, and one ram, seven he-lambs of the first year without blemish; and three tenth parts of an ephah of fine flour for a meal offering, mingled with oil, for each bullock; and two tenth parts of fine flour for a meal offering, mingled with oil, for the one ram; and a several tenth part of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal offering unto every lamb; for a burnt offering of a sweet savor, an offering made by fire unto the Lord. And their drink offerings shall be half an hin of wine for a bullock, and the third part of an hin for the ram, and the fourth part of an hin for a lamb: this is the burnt offering of every month throughout the months of the year. And one the-goat for a sin offering unto the Lord; it shall be offered beside the continual burnt offering, and the drink offering thereof.

[p. 13]

Mishnah, Treatise Zebachim, ch. v.

1. Which are the places where the sacrifices were offered?--Those that were most holy were slain on the north side of the altar: the bull and the he-goat of the Day of Atonement were slain on the north side; their blood was received in a vessel of ministry on the north side, and had to be sprinkled between the staves of the ark, and towards the veil, and upon the golden altar: one of these sprinklings omitted rendered the whole ceremony invalid. The remaining blood the priest poured out at the western base of the outer altar; if, however, he did not do so, the omission did not render the ceremony invalid.

2. The bulls and he-goats which were to be wholly burnt. were slain on the north side; their blood was received in a vessel of ministry on the north side, and had to be sprinkled towards the veil and upon the golden altar: one of these sprinklings omitted rendered the whole ceremony invalid. The remaining blood the priest poured out at the western base of the outer altar; if, however, he failed to do so, it did not render the ceremony invalid: both these and the preceding offerings were burnt in the repository of ashes.

3. The sin offerings of the congregation and of the individual.--These are the sin offerings of the congregation: the he-goats offered on the new moon and on the festivals. They were slain on the north side; their blood was received in a vessel of ministry on the north side, and of this blood four sprinklings had to be made, one upon each of the four corners of the altar. How was this done? The priest went up the ascent, passed on to the middle terrace that surrounded the altar, and came successively to the

[p. 14]

south-east, the north-east, the north-west and the south-west corners. The remaining blood he poured out at the southern base of the altar. These sacrifices might be eaten, dressed after any manner, by the males of the priesthood, within the hangings of the court, the same day and evening until midnight.

4. The burnt offering belonged to the class of the most holy. It was slain on the north side; its blood was received in a vessel of ministry on the north side; and of its blood two sprinklings had to be made (at opposite angles of the altar) so as to constitute four, (a portion of the blood thus reaching each of the four sides of the altar). This offering had also to be flayed, dismembered and totally consumed by fire.

5. The peace offerings of the congregation and the trespass offerings.--These are the trespass offerings: the trespass offerings for robbery, for profane appropriation of sanctified objects, for carnally knowing a handmaid already promised in marriage; the trespass offering of a Nazirite who has become defiled by a dead body; the trespass offering of a leper at his cleansing; the trespass offering of one who is in doubt whether he has committed an act that has to be atoned for by a sin offering. All these were slain on the north side; their blood was received in a vessel of ministry on the north side; and of their blood two sprinklings had to be made at the altar in such a manner as to constitute four. These sacrifices might be eaten, dressed after any manner, by the males of the priesthood, within the hangings of the court, the same day and evening until midnight.

6. The thank offering and the ram of the Nazirite were holy in a minor degree. They might be slain in any part of the court, of their blood two sprinklings

[p. 15]

had to be made at the altar in such a manner as to constitute four; and they might be eaten, dressed after any manner, by any person, in any part of the city, the same day and until midnight. To the portions thereof belonging to the priests the same rule 'applied as to the rest, except that the former might only be eaten by the priests, their wives, their children and their slaves.

7. The peace offerings were also holy in a minor degree. They might be slain in any part of the court; of their blood two sprinklings had to be made at the altar in such a manner as to constitute four, and they might be eaten, dressed after any manner, by any person, in any part of the city, during two days and one night. To the portions thereof belonging to the priests the same rule applied as to the rest, except that the former might only be eaten by the priests, their wives, their children and their slaves.

8. The first-born, the tithe of cattle and the paschal lamb were likewise holy in a minor degree. They might be slain in any part of the court; only one sprinkling of their blood had to be made; this, however, had to be done towards the base of the altar. In respect to their consumption the following differences prevailed: the first-born might be eaten only by the priests, while the tithe might be eaten by any person: both might be eaten, dressed after any manner, in any part of the city, during two days and one night. The paschal lamb might only be eaten the same evening until midnight; it might be partaken of by none but the previously appointed number of persons, and it might only be eaten roasted.

Boraitha d'R. Ishmael.

Rabbi Ishmael says: There are thirteen exegetical principles

[p. 16]

by which the Law is expounded:--1. The inference from minor to major. 2. The inference from a similarity of phrases. 3. A general law may be derived by induction from different cases which, occurring in the same or in different verses, have yet some feature in common. 4. A general proposition followed by the enumeration of particulars already comprehended in the general proposition, (in which case the scope of the proposition is limited by the things specified) 5. An enumeration of particulars followed by a general proposition in which they are also comprehended, (in which case the scope of the proposition extends also to the things not specified). 6. Two general propositions, separated from each other by an enumeration of particulars, include only such things as are similar to those specified 7. An inference drawn from a general proposition complemented by a particular term, and an inference drawn from a particular term complemented by a general proposition. 8. If anything is included in a general proposition and is then made the subject of a special statement, that which is predicated of it is not to be understood as limited to itself alone, but is to be applied to the whole of the general proposition 9. If anything is included in a general proposition, and is then singled out in order to be made the subject of a special statement, similar to the general proposition, this particularisation is intended, so far as its subject is concerned, to lessen and not to add to its restrictions. 10. If anything is included in a general proposition, and is then singled out in order to be made the subject of a special statement, not similar to the general proposition, this particularisation is intended in some respects to lessen and in others to add to its restrictions. 11. If anything is included in a general proposition, and is then made the subject of a fresh statement (not in harmony with the former), the terms of the general proposition will not apply to it, unless the Scripture distinctly indicates that they shall apply. 12. The meaning of a passage may be deduced from its context, or from some subsequent passage. 13. Similarly, when two passages are in contradiction to each other, the explanation can be determined only when a third text is found, capable of harmonizing the two.

May it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, that the temple be speedily rebuilt in our days and grant our portion in thy Law. And there we will serve thee with awe, as in the days of old, and as in ancient years.

[p. 17]

Before putting on the Tallith, say the following:--

I am here enwrapping myself in this fringed robe, in fulfilment of the command of my Creator, as it is written in the Law, They shall make them a fringe upon the corners of their garments throughout their generations. And even as I cover myself with the Tallith in this world, so may my soul deserve to be clothed with a beauteous spiritual robe in the world to come, in the garden of Eden. Amen.

On putting on the Tallith, say:--

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast sanctified us by thy commandments, and hast commanded us to enwrap ourselves in the fringed garment.

How precious is thy lovingkindness, O God! And the children of men take refuge under the shadow of thy wings. They sate themselves with the fatness of thy house; and thou givest them to drink of the river of thy pleasures. For with thee is the fountain of life: in thy light do we see light. O continue thy lovingkindness unto them that know thee, and thy righteousness to the upright in heart.

Meditation before laying the Tephillin.

I am here intent upon the act of laying the Tephillin, in fulfilment of the command of my Creator, who hath commanded us to lay the Tephillin, as it is written in the Law, And thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be for frontlets between thine eyes. Within these Tephillin are placed four sections of the Law, [**] that declare the absolute

[p. 18]

unity of God, and that remind us of the miracles and wonders which he wrought for us when he brought us forth from Egypt, even he who hath power over the highest and the lowest to deal with them according to his will. He hath commanded us to lay the Tephillin upon the hand as a memorial of his outstretched arm; opposite the heart, to indicate the duty of subjecting the longings and designs of our heart to his service, blessed be he; and upon the head over against the brain, thereby teaching that the mind, whose seat is in the brain, together with all senses and faculties, is to be subjected to his service, blessed be he. May the effect of the precept thus observed be to extend to me long life with sacred influences and holy thoughts, free from every approach, even in imagination, to sin and iniquity. May the evil inclination not mislead or entice us, but may we be led to serve the Lord as it is in our hearts to do. Amen.

On placing the Tephillah on the arm, say:--

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast sanctified us by thy commandments, and hast commanded us to lay the Tephillin.

On placing the Tephillah on the forehead, say:--

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast sanctified us by thy commandments, and hast given us command concerning the precept of the Tephillin.

Blessed be His name, whose glorious kingdom is for ever and ever.

[p. 19]

The Retsuah is placed thrice round the middle finger, and the following is said:--

And I will betroth thee unto me for ever; yea, I will betroth thee unto me in righteousness, and in judgment, and in lovingkindness, and in mercy: I will even betroth thee to me in faithfulness; and thou shalt know the Lord.

In some Congregations Psalm xxx (page <page 103>) is said here.

Blessed be he who spake, and the world existed: blessed be he: blessed be he who was the maker of the world in the beginning: blessed be he who speaketh and doeth: blessed be he who decreeth and performeth: blessed be he who hath mercy upon the earth: blessed be he who hath mercy upon his creatures: blessed be he who payeth a good reward to them that fear him: blessed be he who liveth for ever, and endureth to eternity: blessed be he who redeemeth and delivereth: blessed be his name.--Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, O God and merciful Father, praised by the mouth of thy people, lauded and glorified by the tongue of thy loving ones and thy servants. We also will praise thee, O Lord our God, with the songs of David thy servant; with praises and psalms we will magnify, laud and glorify thee, and we will make mention of thy name, and proclaim thee our King, O our

[p. 20]

[paragraph continues] God, thou the only one, the life of all worlds. O King, praised and glorified be thy great name for ever and ever. Blessed art thou, O Lord, a King extolled with praises.

1 Chron. xvi. 8-36.

O give thanks unto the Lord, call upon his name; make known his doings among the peoples. Sing unto him, sing praises unto him; tell ye of all his marvellous works. Glory ye in his holy name: let the heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord. Search ye for the Lord and his strength; seek ye his face evermore. Remember his marvellous works that he hath done: his wonders, and the judgments of his mouth; O ye seed of Israel, his servant, ye children of Jacob, his chosen ones. He is the Lord our God: his judgments are in all the earth. Remember his covenant for ever, the word which he commanded to a thousand generations; (the covenant) which he made with Abraham, and his oath unto Isaac; and confirmed the same unto Jacob for a statute, to Israel for an everlasting covenant: saying, Unto thee will I give the land of Canaan, as the lot of your inheritance: when ye were but a few men in number; yea, few, and sojourners in it; and they went about from nation to nation, and from one kingdom to another people. He suffered no man to oppress them; yea, he rebuked kings for their sakes; (saying), Touch not mine

[p. 21]

anointed ones, and do my prophets no harm. Sing unto the Lord, all the earth; proclaim his salvation from day to day. Recount his glory among the nations, his marvels among all the peoples. For great is the Lord, and exceedingly to be praised: he is to be feared above all gods. For all the gods of the peoples are things of nought; but the Lord made the heavens. Grandeur and majesty are before him: strength and gladness are in his place. Give unto the Lord, ye families of the peoples, give unto the Lord glory and strength. Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name: take an offering, and come before him: worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness. Tremble before him all the earth; the world also is set firm, that it cannot be moved. Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad; and let them say among the nations, The Lord reigneth. Let the sea roar, and the fulness thereof; let the plain exult, and all that is therein. Then shall the trees of the forest exult before the Lord, for he cometh to judge the earth. O give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good: for his lovingkindness endureth forever. And say ye, Save us, O God of our salvation, and gather us and deliver us from the nations, to give thanks unto thy holy name, and to triumph in thy praise. Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel, from everlasting even to everlasting. And all the people said, Amen, and praised the Lord.

Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship at his footstool;

[p. 22]

holy is he. Exalt ye the Lord our God, aim worship at his holy mount; for the Lord our God is holy. And he, being merciful, forgiveth iniquity, and destroyeth not: yea, many a time he turneth his anger away, and doth not stir up all his wrath. Withhold not thou thy tender mercies from me, O Lord: let thy lovingkindness and thy truth continually preserve me. Remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies and thy lovingkindnesses; for they have been ever of old. Ascribe ye strength unto God: his majesty is over Israel, and his strength is in the skies. O God, thou art to be feared out of thy holy places: the God of Israel he giveth strength and power unto his people. Blessed be God. O God of vengeance, Lord, O God of vengeance, shine forth. Lift up thyself, thou judge of the earth: render to the proud their desert. Salvation belongeth unto the Lord: thy blessing be upon thy people. (Selah.) The Lord of hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our stronghold. (Selah. ) O Lord of hosts, happy is the man that trusteth in thee. Save, .Lord: may the King answer us on the day when we call. Save thy people, and bless thine inheritance: feed them, and carry them for ever Our soul waiteth for the Lord: he is our help and our shield. For our heart shall rejoice in him, because we have trusted in his holy name. Let thy lovingkindness, O Lord, be upon us, according as we have hoped for thee. Show us thy lovingkindness, O Lord, and grant us thy salvation. Rise up for our help and set

[p. 23]

us free for thy lovingkindness' sake. I am the Lord thy God, who brought thee up out of the land of Egypt: open wide thy mouth and I will fill it. Happy is the people, that is in such a case: happy is the people, whose God is the Lord. And as for me, I have trusted in thy lovingkindness; my heart shall be glad in thy salvation: I will sing unto the Lord, because he hath dealt bountifully with me.

The following Psalm is omitted on Sabbaths, Holydays, the day before Passover, the Intermediate days of Passover, and on the day before the Day of Atonement.

Psalm c.

A Psalm of Thanksgiving. Shout for joy unto the Lord, all ye lands. Serve the Lord with joy: come before him with exulting. Know ye that the Lord he is God: he hath made us, and we are his, his people and the sheep of his pasture. Enter into his gates with thanksgiving, and into his courts with praise: give thanks unto him, bless his name. For the Lord is good; his lovingkindness is everlasting; and his faithfulness from generation to generation.

On Weekdays continue "Let the glory," etc., <page 33>.

On Sabbaths and Holydays, and on Hoshana Rabba, the following Psalms are said:--

Psalm xix.

For the Chief Musician. A Psalm of David. The heavens recount the glory of God, and the firmament declareth his handiwork. Day unto day poureth forth speech, and night unto night proclaimeth knowledge.

[p. 24]

[paragraph continues] There is no speech nor language; their voice cannot be heard. Their sound is gone out through all the earth, and their words to the end of the world; in them hath he set a tent for the sun. And he is as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber, and rejoiceth as a strong man to run his course. His going forth is from the end of the heaven, and his circuit unto the ends of it: and there is nothing hid from his heat.--The law of the Lord is perfect, restoring the soul: the testimony of the Lord is faithful, making wise the simple. The precepts of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart: the commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes. The fear of the Lord is clean, enduring for ever; the judgments of the Lord are truthful, righteous altogether. More to be desired are they than gold, yea, than much fine gold; sweeter also than honey and the droppings of the honeycomb. Moreover by them is thy servant warned: in keeping them there is great reward. Who can discern his errors? Clear thou me from hidden faults. Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins; let them not have dominion over me: then shall I be blameless, and I shall be clear from great transgression. Let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart be acceptable before thee, O Lord, my Rock and my Redeemer.

Psalm xxxiv.

A Psalm of David; when he changed his behavior before Abimelech, who drove him away, and he departed.

I will bless the Lord at all times: his praise shall continually be in my mouth.

[p. 25]

My soul shall make her boast in the Lord: the meek shall hear and rejoice.

O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his name together.

I sought the Lord, and he answered me, and delivered me from all my fears.

They looked unto him. and shone with joy: and their faces shall not be confounded.

This sufferer cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his troubles.

The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivereth them.

O taste and see that the Lord is good: happy is the man that taketh refuge in him.

O fear the Lord, ye his holy ones: for there is no want to them that fear him.

Young lions do lack, and suffer hunger: but they that seek the Lord shall not want any good.

Come, ye children, hearken unto me: I will teach you the fear of the Lord.

What man is he that delighteth in life, and loveth many days that he may see good?

Keep thy tongue from evil and thy lips from speaking guile.

Depart from evil and do good; seek peace and pursue it.

The eyes of the Lord are towards the righteous, and his ears are towards their cry.

The face of the Lord is against them that do evil, to cut off the remembrance of them from the earth.

(The righteous) cry, and the Lord hearkeneth, and delivereth them out of all their troubles.

The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart, and saveth such as are of a contrite spirit.

[p. 26]

Many are the evil fortunes of the righteous: but the Lord delivereth him out of them all.

He keepeth all his bones: not one of them is broken.

Evil shall slay the wicked; and they that hate the righteous shall be condemned.

The Lord setteth free the soul of his servants; and none that take refuge in. him shall be condemned.

Psalm xc.

A Prayer of Moses, the man of God. O Lord, thou hast been a dwelling place unto us in all generations. Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever thou gavest birth to the earth and the world, even from everlasting to everlasting thou art God. Thou turnest man back to dust, and sayest, Return, ye children of men. For a thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday when it is past, and as a watch in the night. Thou carriest them away as with a flood; they are in a sleep: in the morning they are like grass which sprouteth afresh. In the morning it bloometh and sprouteth afresh; in the evening it is cut down, and withereth. For we are consumed by thine anger, and in thy wrath are we confounded. Thou hast set our iniquities before thee, our secret sins in the light of thy countenance. For all our days have passed away in thy wrath, we bring our years to an end like a sound. The days of our years are threescore years and ten, or even by reason of strength fourscore years; yet is their pride but travail and nothingness; for it is soon gone by, and we fly away. Who knoweth the power of thine anger, and thy wrath according to the fear that is due unto thee? So teach us to number our days, that we may get us a heart of wisdom. Return, O Lord; how long?--and repent thee concerning thy

[p. 27]

servants. O satisfy us in the morning with thy lovingkindness; that we may exult and rejoice all our days. Make us rejoice according to the days wherein thou hast afflicted us, the years wherein we have seen evil. Let thy work be made manifest unto thy servants, and thy majesty upon their children.

And let the pleasantness of the Lord our God be upon us; and establish thou the work of our hands upon us; yea, the work of our hands establish thou it.

Psalm xci.

He that dwelleth in the shelter of the Most High abideth under the shadow of the Almighty. I say of the Lord, He is my refuge and my fortress; my God, in whom I trust.--For he shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler, and from the noisome pestilence. He shall cover thee with his pinions, and under his wings shalt thou take refuge: his truth shall be a shield and a buckler. Thou shalt not be afraid of the terror by night, nor of the arrow that flieth by day; of the pestilence that walketh in darkness, nor of the plague that ravageth at noon day. A thousand may fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand; it shall not come nigh unto thee. Only .with thine eyes shalt thou look on, and see the retribution of the wicked.--For thou, O Lord, art my refuge.--Thou hast made the Most High thy dwelling place; there shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any scourge come nigh thy tent. For he shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy . ways. They shall bear thee upon their hands, lest thou strike thy foot against a stone. Thou shalt tread upon the lion and the adder; upon the young lion and the serpent shalt thou trample.--Because he hath set his love upon me,

[p. 28]

therefore will I deliver him: I will set him on high, because he knoweth my name. When he calleth upon me, I will answer him; I will be with him in trouble: I will deliver him and honor him. With length of days will I satisfy him, and will let him see my salvation.

Repeat the last verse.

Psalm cxxxv.

Praise ye the Lord. Praise ye the name of the Lord; praise him, O ye servants of the Lord: ye that stand in the house of the Lord, in the courts of the house of our God. Praise ye the Lord; for the Lord is good: sing praises unto his name; for it is pleasant. For the Lord hath chosen Jacob unto himself, and Israel for his peculiar treasure. For I know that the Lord is great, and that our Lord is above all gods. Whatsoever the Lord pleaseth, that doeth he, in heaven and in earth, in the seas and in all deeps. He causeth vapors to ascend from the ends of the earth; he maketh lightnings for the rain; he bringeth forth the wind out of his treasuries. It is he who smote the firstborn of Egypt, both of man and beast. He sent signs and wonders into the midst of thee, O Egypt, upon Pharaoh, and upon all his servants. It is he who smote great nations, and slew mighty kings; Sihon king of the Amorites, and Og king of Bashan, and all the kingdoms of Canaan: and gave their land for an heritage, an heritage unto Israel his people. Thy name, O Lord, endureth for ever; thy memorial, O Lord, throughout all generations. For the Lord shall judge his people, and repent himself concerning his servants,

[p. 29]

The idols of the nations are silver and gold, the work of men's hands. They have mouths, but they speak. not; eyes have they, but they see not; they have ears, but they hear not; neither is there any breath in their mouths. They that make them shall become like unto them; yea, every one that trusteth in them. O house of Israel, bless ye the Lord: O house of Aaron, bless ye the Lord: O house of Levi, bless ye the Lord: ye that fear the Lord, bless ye the Lord. Blessed be the Lord out of Zion, who dwelleth at Jerusalem. Praise ye the Lord.

Psalm cxxxvi.

O give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good: for his lovingkindness endureth for ever.

O give thanks unto the God of gods: for his lovingkindness endureth for ever.

O give thanks unto the Lord of lords: for his lovingkindness endureth for ever.

To him who alone doeth great marvels: for his lovingkindness endureth for ever.

To him that by understanding made the heavens: for his lovingkindness endureth for ever.

To him that spread forth the earth above the waters: for his lovingkindness endureth for ever.

To him that made great lights: for his loving kindness endureth for ever.

The sun to rule by day: for his lovingkindness endureth for ever.

The moon and stars to rule by night: for his lovingkindness endureth for ever.

To him that smote the Egyptians in their first born: for his lovingkindness endureth for ever.

And brought out Israel from among them: for his lovingkindness endureth for ever.

[p. 30]

With a strong hand, and with a stretched out arm: for his lovingkindness endureth for ever.

To him who parted the Red Sea in sunder: for his lovingkindness endureth for ever.

And made Israel to pass through the midst of it: for his lovingkindness endureth for ever.

But overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the Red Sea: for his lovingkindness endureth for ever.

To him who led his people through the wilderness: for his lovingkindness endureth for ever.

To him who smote great kings; for his lovingkindness endureth for ever.

And slew mighty kings: for his lovingkindness endureth for ever.

Sihon king of the Amorites: for his lovingkindness endureth for ever.

And Og king of Bashan: for his lovingkindness endureth for ever.

And gave their land for an heritage: for his lovingkindness endureth for ever.

Even an heritage under Israel his servant: for his lovingkindness endureth for ever.

Who remembered us in our low estate: for his lovingkindness endureth for ever.

And hath released us from our adversaries: for his lovingkindness endureth for ever.

He giveth food to all flesh: for his lovingkindness endureth for ever.

O give thanks unto the God of heaven: for his lovingkindness endureth for ever.

Psalm xxxiii.

Exult in the Lord, O ye righteous: praise is seemly for the upright. Give thanks unto the Lord with the lyre; sing praises unto him with the harp of ten strings. Sing unto him a new song; play skilfully with shouts of joy. For the word of the Lord is right; and all his work is done in faithfulness. He loveth righteousness

[p. 31]

and justice: the earth is full of the lovingkindness of the Lord. By the word of the Lord the heavens were made; and all the host of them by the breath of his mouth. He gathereth the waters of the sea together as a heap: he layeth up the floods in store-houses. Let all the earth fear the Lord: let all the inhabitants of the world stand in awe of him. For he spake, and it was; he commanded, and it stood fast. The Lord hath frustrated the design of the nations; he hath foiled the thoughts of the peoples. The counsel of the Lord standeth fast for ever, the thoughts of his heart to all generations. Happy is the nation whose god is the Lord; the people whom he hath chosen for his own inheritance. The Lord looketh down from heaven; he beholdeth all the sons of men; from the place of his habitation he gazeth upon all the inhabitants of the earth; he that fashioneth the hearts of them all, that giveth heed to all their works. A king is not saved by greatness of power: a mighty man is not delivered by greatness of strength. A horse is a vain thing for safety: neither shall he rescue any by his great power. Behold the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, upon them that hope for his lovingkindness to deliver their soul from death, and to keep them alive in famine. Our soul waiteth for the Lord: he is our help and our shield. For our heart shall rejoice in him, because we have trusted in his holy name. Let thy lovingkindness, O Lord, be upon us, according as we have hoped for thee.

Psalm xcii.

A Psalm, a Song for the Sabbath Day. It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing praises unto thy name, O Most High: to declare thy lovingkindness

[p. 32]

in the morning, and thy faithfulness every night, with an instrument of ten strings and with a harp, with thoughtful music upon the lyre. For thou, O Lord, hast made me rejoice through thy work: I will exult in the work of thy hands. How great are thy works, O Lord: thy thoughts are very deep. A brutish man knoweth it not, neither doth a fool understand this: when the wicked sprang up as the grass, and all the workers of iniquity flourished, it was that they might be destroyed for ever. But thou, O Lord, art on high for evermore. For, lo, thine enemies, O Lord, for, lo, thine enemies shall perish; all the workers of iniquity shall be scattered. But my horn hast thou exalted, like that of the wild-ox: I am anointed with fresh oil. Mine eye also hath seen my desire on mine enemies; mine ears have heard my desire of them that rose up against me, doers of evil. The righteous shall spring up like a palm-tree; he shall grow tall like a cedar in Lebanon. Planted in the house of the Lord, they shall blossom in the courts of our God. They shall still shoot forth in old age; they shall be full of sap and green: to declare that the Lord is upright: he is my rock, and there is no unrighteousness in him.

Psalm xciii.

The Lord reigneth; he hath robed him in majesty; the Lord hath robed him, yea, he hath girded himself with strength: the world also is set firm, that it cannot be moved. Thy throne is set firm from of old: thou art from everlasting. The streams have lifted up, O Lord, the streams have lifted tip their voice; the streams lift up their roaring. Than the voices of many waters, mighty waters, breakers of the sea, more mighty is the Lord on high.

[p. 33]

[paragraph continues] Thy testimonies are very faithful: holiness becometh thine house, O Lord, for evermore.

On Weekdays continue here from <page 23>.

Let the glory of the Lord endure for ever; let the Lord rejoice in his works. Let the name of the Lord be blessed from this time forth and for evermore. From the rising of the sun unto the going down thereof the Lord's name is to be praised. The Lord is high above all nations, and his glory above the heavens. Thy name, O Lord, endureth for ever; thy memorial, O Lord, throughout all generations. The Lord hath established his throne in the heavens; and his kingdom ruleth over all. Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad; and let them say among the nations, The Lord reigneth. The Lord reigneth; the Lord hath reigned; the Lord shall reign for ever and ever. The Lord is King for ever and ever; the nations are perished out of his land. The Lord hath frustrated the design of the nations; he hath foiled the thoughts of the peoples. Many are the thoughts in a man's heart; but the counsel of the Lord, that shall stand. The counsel of the Lord standeth fast for ever, the thoughts of his heart to all generations. For he spake, and it was; he commanded, and it stood fast. For the Lord hath chosen Zion; he hath desired it for his habitation. For the Lord hath chosen Jacob unto himself, Israel for his peculiar treasure. For the Lord will not cast off his people, neither will he forsake his inheritance. And he, being merciful, forgiveth iniquity, and destroyeth

[p. 34]

not: yea, many a time he turneth his anger away, and doth not stir up all his wrath. Save, Lord: may the King answer us on the day when we call.

Happy are they that dwell in thy house: they will be ever praising thee. (Selah.)

Happy is the people, that is in such a case: happy is the people, whose God is the Lord.

Psalm cxlv. A Psalm of Praise: of David.

I will extol thee, my God, O King; and I will bless thy name for ever and ever.

Every day will I bless thee; and I will praise thy name for ever and ever.

Great is the Lord, and exceedingly to be praised: and his greatness is unsearchable.

One generation shall laud thy works to another, and shall declare thy mighty acts.

On the majestic glory of thy splendor, and on thy marvellous deeds, will I meditate.

And men shall speak of the might of thy awful acts; and I will recount thy greatness.

They shall pour forth the fame of thy great goodness and shall exult in thy righteousness.

The Lord is gracious and merciful; slow to anger and of great lovingkindness.

The Lord is good to all; and his tender mercies are over all his works.

All thy works shall give thanks unto thee, O Lord; and thy loving ones shall bless thee.

They shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom, and talk of thy power.

[p. 35]

To make known to the sons of men his mighty acts, and the majestic glory of his kingdom.

Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion endureth throughout all generations.

The Lord upholdeth all that fall, and raiseth up all those that are bowed down.

The eyes of all wait upon thee; and thou givest them their food in due season.

Thou openest thine hand, and satisfiest every living thing with favor.

The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and loving in all his works.

The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him. to all that call upon him in truth.

He will fulfil the desire of them that fear him; he also will hear their cry and will save them.

The Lord guardeth all them that love him; but all the wicked will he destroy.

My mouth shall speak of the praise of the Lord; and let all flesh bless his holy name for ever and ever.

But we will bless the Lord from this time forth and for evermore. Praise ye the Lord.

Psalm cxlvi.

Praise ye the Lord. Praise the Lord, O my soul: I will praise the Lord, while I live; I will sing praises unto my God while I have my being. Put not your trust

[p. 36]

in princes, in a son of man, in whom there is no help, When his breath goeth forth, he returneth to his earth; in that very day his designs perish. Happy is he that hath the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the Lord, his God: who made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that is therein; who keepeth truth for ever; who executeth judgment for the oppressed; who giveth food to the hungry: the Lord looseth the prisoners; the Lord openeth the eyes of the blind; the Lord raiseth up them that are bowed down; the Lord loveth the righteous; the Lord guardeth the strangers; he upholdeth the fatherless and widow; but the way of the wicked he maketh crooked. The Lord shall reign for ever, thy God, O Zion, unto all generations. Praise ye the Lord.

Psalm cxlvii.

Praise ye the Lord; for it is good to sing praises unto our God; for it is pleasant, and praise is seemly. The Lord doth build up Jerusalem; he gathereth together the outcasts of Israel. He healeth the broken in heart, and bindeth up their wounds. He counteth the number of the stars; he calleth them all by their names. Great is our Lord, and mighty in power; his understanding is infinite. The Lord upholdeth the meek; he abaseth the wicked to the ground. Sing unto the Lord with thanksgiving; sing praises upon the lyre unto our God: who covereth the heaven with clouds, who prepareth rain for the earth, who maketh grass to sprout upon the mountains; who giveth to the beast its food,

[p. 37]

and to the young ravens which cry. He deligheth not in the strength of the horse, he taketh no pleasure in the vigor of a man. The Lord taketh pleasure in them that fear him, in them that hope for his lovingkindness. Extol the Lord, O Jerusalem; praise thy God, O Zion. For he hath strengthened the bars of thy gates; he hath blessed thy children within thee. He maketh peace in thy borders; he satisfieth thee with the fat of wheat. He sendeth out his commandment to the earth; his word runneth very swiftly. He giveth snow like wool; he scattereth hoar frost like ashes. He casteth forth his ice like morsels: who can stand before his cold? He sendeth out his word, and melteth them: he causeth his wind to blow, and the waters flow. He declareth his words unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel. He hath not dealt so with any nation: and as for his judgments, they do not know them. Praise ye the Lord.

Psalm cxlviii

Praise ye the Lord. Praise ye the Lord from the heavens: praise him in the heights. Praise ye him, all his angels; praise ye him, all his host. Praise ye him, sun and moon: praise him, all ye stars of light. Praise him, ye heavens of heavens, and ye waters that are above the heavens. Let them praise the name of the Lord: for he commanded, and they were created. He hath established them for ever and ever: he gave a decree which none shall transgress. Praise the Lord from the earth,

[p. 38]

ye sea-monsters and all deeps: fire and hail, snow and smoke; stormy wind, fulfilling his word: mountains and all hills; fruit trees and all cedars: wild beasts and all cattle; creeping things and winged birds: kings of the earth and all peoples; princes and all judges of the earth: both young men and maidens; old men and children: let them praise the name of the Lord; for his name alone is exalted: his majesty is above the earth and heaven. And he hath lifted up a horn for his people, to the praise of all his loving ones: even of the children of Israel, the people near unto him: praise ye the Lord.

Psalm cxlix.

Praise ye the Lord. Sing unto the Lord a new song; his praise in the assembly of those that love him. Let Israel rejoice in his Maker: let the children of Zion be glad in their King. Let them praise his name with the dance: let them sing praises unto him with the timbrel and lyre. For the Lord taketh pleasure in his people: he adorneth the meek with salvation. Let those that love him triumph in glory: let them exult upon their beds. High praises of God are in their throat, and a two-edged sword in their hand; to execute vengeance upon the nations, and punishments upon the peoples: to bind their kings with chains, and their nobles with fetters of iron; to execute upon them the judgment written: this is an honor for all his loving ones. Praise ye the Lord.

[p. 39]

Psalm cl.

Praise ye the Lord. Praise God in his sanctuary: praise him in the firmament of his power. Praise him for his mighty acts: praise him according to his abundant greatness. Praise him with the blast of the horn: praise him with the harp and the lyre. Praise him with the timbrel and dance: praise him with stringed instruments and the pipe. Praise him with the clear-toned cymbals; praise him with the loud-sounding cymbals. Let everything that hath breath praise the Lord: praise ye the Lord.

The last verse is repeated.

Blessed he the Lord for evermore. Amen, and Amen. Blessed be the Lord out of Zion, who dwelleth in Jerusalem. Praise ye the Lord. Blessed be the Lord God, the God of Israel, who alone doeth wondrous things: and blessed be his glorious name for ever; and let the whole earth be filled with his glory. Amen, and Amen.

The following to "worship thee," <page 40>, is said standing.

1 Chron. xxix. 10-13.

And David blessed the Lord in the presence of all the congregation: and David said, Blessed art thou, O Lord, the God of Israel our father, from everlasting to everlasting. Thine, O Lord, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the victory, and the majesty: for all that is in the heaven and in the earth is thine; thine, O Lord, is the kingdom, and the supremacy as head over all. Riches

[p. 40]

and honor come of thee, and thou rulest over all; and in thine hand are might and power; and in thine hand it is to make great, and to give strength unto all. Now, therefore, our God, we give thanks unto thee, and praise thy glorious name.

Nehemiah ix. 6-11.

Thou art the Lord, even thou alone; thou hast made the heavens, the heaven of heavens, and all their host, the earth and all things that are thereon, the seas and all that is in them, and thou givest life to them all; and the host of heaven worship thee. Thou art the Lord the God, who didst choose Abram, and broughtest him forth out of Ur of the Chaldees, and gavest him the name of Abraham: and foundest his heart faithful before thee:

And thou madest a covenant with him to give the land of the Canaanite, the Hittite, the Amorite, and the Perizzite, and the Jebusite, and the Girgashite, even to give it unto his seed, and hast performed thy words; for thou art righteous. And thou sawest the affliction of our fathers in Egypt, and heardest their cry by the Red Sea; and shewedst signs and wonders upon Pharaoh, and on all his servants, and on all the people of his land; for thou knewest that they dealt arrogantly against them; and didst make thee a name, as it is this day.

[p. 41]

[paragraph continues] And thou didst divide the sea before them, so that they went through the midst of the sea on the dry land; and their pursuers thou didst cast into the depths, as a stone into the mighty waters.

Exod. xiv. 30-xv. 18.

Thus the Lord saved Israel that day out of the hand of the Egyptians; and Israel saw the Egyptians dead upon the sea shore. And Israel saw the great power which the Lord put forth against the Egyptians, and the people feared the Lord: and they believed in the Lord, and in Moses his servant.

Then sang Moses and the children of Israel this song unto the Lord, and spake, saying: I will sing unto the Lord, for he hath been highly exalted: the horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea. The Lord is my strength and song, and he is become my salvation: this is my God, and I will glorify him; my father's God, and I will exalt him. The Lord is a man of war: the Lord is his name. Pharaoh's chariots and his host hath he cast into the sea: and his chosen captains are sunk in the Red Sea. The floods cover them: they went down into the depths like a stone. Thy right hand, O Lord, that is glorious in power, thy right hand, O Lord, dasheth in pieces the enemy. And in the greatness of thy majesty thou overthrowest them that rise up against thee: thou sendest forth thy wrath, it consumeth them as stubble. And with the

[p. 42]

blast of thy nostrils the waters were piled up, the streams stood upright as an heap; the floods were congealed in the heart of the sea. The enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil: my lust shall be satisfied upon them; I will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy them. Thou didst blow with thy wind, the sea covered them: they sank as lead in the mighty waters. Who is like unto thee, O Lord, amongst the mighty ones: who is like unto thee, glorious in holiness, revered in praises, doing marvels? Thou stretchedst out thy right hand, the earth swallowed them. Thou in thy lovingkindness hast led the people which thou hast redeemed: thou has guided them in thy strength to thy holy habitation. The peoples have heard it; they tremble: pangs have taken hold of the inhabitants of Philistia. Then were the dukes of Edom confounded; the mighty men of Moab, trembling taketh hold of them: all the inhabitants of Canaan are melted away. Terror and dread falleth upon them: by the greatness of thine arm they are as still as a stone; till thy people pass over, O Lord, till the people pass over, which thou hast acquired. Thou wilt bring them in, and plan them in the mountain of thine inheritance, the place, O Lord, which thou hast made for thee to dwell in, the sanctuary, O Lord, which thy hands have established. The Lord shall reign for ever and ever. The Lord shall reign for ever and ever.

For the kingdom is the Lord's: and he is ruler over the nations. And saviors shall come up

[p. 43]

on mount Zion to judge the mount of Esau; and the kingdom shall be the Lord's. And the Lord shall be King over all the earth: in that day shall the Lord be One, and his name One. And in thy Law it is written, saying, Hear, O Israel: the Lord our God, the Lord is One.

On Sabbaths and Holydays continue here "The breath," etc., <page 182>.

Praised be thy name for ever, O our King, the great and holy God and King, in heaven and on earth; for unto thee, O Lord our God, and God of our fathers, song and praise are becoming, hymn and psalm, strength and dominion, victory, greatness and might, renown and glory, holiness and sovereignty, blessings and thanksgivings from henceforth even for ever. Blessed art thou, O Lord, God and King, great in praises, God of thanksgivings, Lord of wonders, who makest choice of song and psalm, O King and God, the life of all worlds.

Reader.--Magnified and sanctified be his great name in the world which he hath created according to his will. May he establish his kingdom during

[p. 44]

your life and during your days, and during the life of all the house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

Cong. and Reader.--Let his great name be blessed for ever and to all eternity.

Reader.--Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted, extolled and honored, magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One, blessed be he; though he be high above all the blessings and hymns, praises and consolations, which are uttered in the world; and say ye, Amen.

Congregation in an undertone. Blessed, praised, glorified, exalted and extolled be the name of the supreme King of kings, the Holy One, blessed be he, who is the first and the last, and beside him there is no God. Extol ye him that rideth upon the heavens by his name Jah, and rejoice before him. His name is exalted above all blessing and praise. Blessed be His name, whose glorious kingdom is for ever and ever. Let the name of the Lord be blessed from this time forth and for evermore.

Reader.--Bless ye the Lord who is to be blessed.

Cong. and Reader.--Blessed is the Lord who is to be blessed for ever and ever.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who formest light and createst darkness, who makest peace and createst all things:

[p. 45]

Who in mercy givest light to the earth and to them that dwell thereon and in thy goodness renewest the creation every day continually. How manifold are thy works, O Lord! In wisdom hast thou made them all: the earth is full of thy possessions. O King, who alone wast exalted from aforetime, praised, glorified and extolled from days of old; O everlasting God, in thine abundant mercies, have mercy upon us, Lord of our strength, Rock of our stronghold. Shield of our salvation, thou Stronghold of ours!

The blessed God, great in knowledge, prepared and formed the rays of the sun: it was a boon he produced as a glory to his name: he set the luminaries round about his strength. The chiefs of his hosts are holy beings that exalt the Almighty, and continually declare the glory of God and his holiness. Be thou blessed, O Lord our God, for the excellency of thy handiwork, and for the bright luminaries which thou hast made: they shall glorify thee for ever.

Be thou blessed, O our Rock, our King and Redeemer, Creator of holy beings, praised be thy name for ever, O our King; Creator of ministering spirits, all of whom stand in the heights of the universe, and proclaim with awe in unison aloud the words of the living God and everlasting King. All of them are beloved, pure and mighty; and all of them in dread and awe do the will of their Master; and all of

[p. 46]

them open their mouths in holiness and purity, with song and psalm, while they bless and praise, glorify and reverence, sanctify and ascribe sovereignty to--

The name of the Divine King, the great, mighty and dreaded One, holy is he; and they all take upon themselves the yoke of the kingdom of heaven one from the other, and give sanction to one another to hallow their Creator: in tranquil joy of spirit, with pure speech and holy melody they all respond in unison, and exclaim with awe:

Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts: the whole earth is full of his glory.

And the Ophanim and the holy Chayoth with a noise of great rushing, upraising themselves towards the Seraphim, thus over against them offer praise and say:

Blessed be the glory of the Lord from his place.

To the blessed God they offer pleasant melodies; to the King, the living and ever-enduring God, they utter hymns and make their praises heard; for he alone performeth mighty deeds, and maketh new things; he is the Lord of battles; he soweth righteousness, causeth salvation to spring forth, createth remedies, and is revered in praises. He is the Lord of wonders, who in his goodness reneweth

[p. 47]

the creation every day continually; as it is said, (O give thanks) to him that maketh great lights, for his lovingkindness endureth for ever. O cause a new light to shine upon Zion, and may we all be worthy soon to enjoy its brightness. Blessed art thou, O Lord, Creator of the luminaries.

With abounding love hast thou loved us, O Lord our God, with great and exceeding pity hast thou pitied us. O our Father, our King, for our fathers' sake, who trusted in thee, and whom thou didst teach the statutes of life, be also gracious unto us and teach us. O our Father, merciful Father, ever compassionate, have mercy upon us; O put it into our hearts to understand and to discern, to mark, learn and teach, to heed, to do and to fulfil in love all the words of instruction in thy Law. Enlighten our eyes in thy Law, and let our hearts cleave to thy commandments, and unite our hearts to love and fear thy name, so that we be never put to shame. Because we have trusted in thy holy, great and revered name, we shall rejoice and he glad in thy salvation. O bring us in peace from the four corners of the earth, and make us go upright to our land; for thou art a God who worketh salvation. Thou hast chosen us from all peoples and tongues, and hast brought us near unto thy great name for ever

[p. 48]

in faithfulness, that we might in love give thanks unto thee and proclaim thy unity. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who hast chosen thy people Israel in love.

When prayers are not said with the Congregation, add:--

God, faithful King!

Deut. vi. 4-9.

Hear, O Israel: the Lord our God, the Lord is One.

Blessed be His name, whose glorious kingdom is for ever and ever.

And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might. And these words, which. I command thee this day, shall be upon thine heart: and thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, and shalt talk of them when thou sit-test in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up. And thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be for frontlets between thine eyes. And thou shalt write them upon the door posts of thy house, and upon thy gates.

Deut. xi. 13-21.

And it shall come to pass, if ye shall hearken diligently unto my commandments which I

[p. 49]

command you this day, to love the Lord your God, and to serve him with all your heart and. with all your soul, that I will give the rain of your land in its season, the former rain and the latter rain, that thou mayest gather in thy corn, and thy wine, and thine oil. And I will give grass in thy field for thy cattle, and thou shalt eat and be satisfied. Take heed to yourselves, lest your heart be deceived, and ye turn aside, and serve other gods, and worship them; and the anger of the Lord be kindled against you, and he shut up the heaven, that there be no rain, and that the land yield not her fruit; and ye perish quickly from off the good land which the Lord giveth you. Therefore shall ye lay up these my words in your heart and in your soul; and ye shall bind them for a sign upon your hand, and they shall be for frontlets between your eyes. And ye shall teach them your children, talking of them when thou sittest in

[p. 50]

thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up. And thou shalt write them upon the door posts of thine house, and upon thy gates: that your days may be multiplied, and the days of your children, upon the land which the Lord sware unto your fathers to give them, as the days of the heavens above the earth.

Numbers xv. 37-41.

And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Speak unto the children of Israel, and bid them that they make them a fringe upon the corners of their garments throughout their generations, and that they put upon the fringe of each corner a cord of blue: and it shall be unto you for a fringe, that ye may look upon it, and remember all the commandments of the Lord, and do them; and that ye go not about after your own heart and your own eyes, after which ye use to go astray: that ye may remember and do all my commandments, and be holy unto your God. I am the Lord your God, who

[p. 51]

brought you out of the land of Egypt, to be your God: I am the Lord your God.

True and firm, established and enduring, right and faithful, beloved and precious, desirable and pleasant, revered and mighty, well-ordered and acceptable, good and beautiful is this thy word unto us for ever and ever. It is true, the God of the universe is our King, the Rock of Jacob, the Shield of our salvation: thoughout all generations he endureth and his name endureth; his throne is established, and his kingdom and his faithfulness endure for ever. His words also live and endure; they are faithful and desirable for ever and to all eternity, as for our fathers so also for us, our children, our generations, and for all the generations of the seed of Israel his servants.

For the first and for the last ages thy word is good and endureth for ever and ever; it is true and trustworthy, a statute which shall not pass away. True it is that thou art indeed the Lord our God, and the God of our fathers, our King, our fathers' King, our Redeemer, the Redeemer of our fathers, our Maker, the Rock of our salvation; our Deliverer and Rescuer from everlasting, such is thy name; there is no God beside thee.

[p. 52]

Thou hast been the help of our fathers from of old, a Shield and Saviour to their children after them in every generation: in the heights of the universe is thy habitation, and thy judgments and thy righteousness reach to the furthest ends of the earth. Happy is the man who hearkeneth unto thy commandments, and layeth up thy Law and thy word in his heart. True it is that thou art indeed the Lord of thy people, and a mighty King to plead their cause. True it is that thou art indeed the first and thou art the last, and beside thee we have no King, Redeemer and Saviour. From Egypt thou didst redeem us, O Lord our God, and from the house of bondmen thou didst deliver us; all their first born thou didst slay, but thy first-born thou didst redeem; thou didst divide the Red Sea, and drown the proud; but thou madest the beloved to pass through, while the waters covered their adversaries, not one of whom was left. Wherefore the beloved praised and extolled God, and offered hymns, songs, praises, blessings and thanksgivings to the King and God, who liveth and endureth; who is high and exalted, great and revered; who bringeth low the haughty, and raiseth up the lowly, leadeth forth the prisoners, delivereth the meek, helpeth the poor, and answereth his people when they cry unto him; even praises to the Most High God, blessed is he, and ever to be blessed. Moses and the children of Israel sang a song unto thee with great joy, saying, all of them,

[p. 53]

Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the might ones? Who is like unto thee, glorious in holiness revered in praises, doing marvels?

With a new song the redeemed people offered praise unto thy name at the sea shore: they all gave thanks in unison, and proclaimed thy, sovereignty, and said,

The Lord shall reign for ever and ever.

O Rock of Israel, arise to the help of Israel, and deliver, according to thy promise, Judah and Israel. Our Redeemer, the Lord of hosts is his name, the Holy One of Israel. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who hast redeemed Israel.

The following prayer (Amidah) to "as in ancient years," <page 66> is to be said standing.

O Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall declare thy praise.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, God of Abraham, God of Isaac, and God of Jacob, the great, mighty and revered God, the most high God, who bestowest lovingkindnesses, and possessest all things; who rememberest the pious deeds of the patriarchs, and in love wilt bring a redeemer to their children's children for thy name's sake.

[p. 54]

During the Ten Days of Penitence say:--

Remember us unto life, O King, who delightest in life, and inscribe us in the book of life, for thine own sake, O living God.

O King, Helper, Saviour and Shield. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the Shield of Abraham.

Thou, O Lord, art mighty for ever, thou quickenest the dead, thou art mighty to save,

From the Eighth Day of Solemn Assembly until the First Day of Passover say:--

Thou causest the wind to blow and the rain to fall

Thou sustainest the living with lovingkindness, quickenest the dead with great mercy, supportest the falling, healest the sick, loosest the bound, and keepest thy faith to them that sleep in the dust. Who is like unto thee, Lord of mighty acts, and who resembleth thee, O King, who killest and quickenest, and causest salvation to spring forth?

During the Ten Days of Penitence say:--

Who is like unto thee, Father of mercy, who in mercy rememberest thy creatures unto life?

[p. 55]

Yea, faithful art thou to quicken the dead. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who quickenest the dead. *

Thou art holy, and thy name is holy, and holy beings praise thee daily. (Selah.) Blessed art thou, O Lord, the holy God.

During the Ten Days of Penitence conclude the Blessing thus:--

the holy King.

When the Reader repeats the Amidah, the following is said, to "holy God," <page 56>.

* Reader.--We will sanctify thy name in the world even as they sanctify it in the highest heavens, as it is written by the hand of thy prophet:

And they called one unto the other and said,

Cong.--Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts: the whole earth is full of his glory.

Reader.--Those over against them say, Blessed-

Cong.--Blessed be the glory of the Lord from his place.

Reader.--And in thy Holy Words it is written, saying,

Cong.--The Lord shall reign for ever, thy God, O Zion, unto all generations. Praise ye the Lord.

Reader.--Unto all generations we will declare thy greatness, and to all eternity we will proclaim thy holiness, and thy praise, O our God, shall not depart

[p. 56]

from our mouth for ever, for thou art a great and holy God and King. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the holy God.

During the Ten Days of Penitence conclude the Blessing thus:

the holy King.

Thou favorest man with knowledge, and teachest mortals understanding. O favor us with knowledge, understanding and discernment from thee. Blessed art thou, O Lord, gracious Giver of knowledge.

Cause us to return, O our. Father, unto thy Law; draw us near, O our King, unto thy service, and bring us back in perfect repentance unto thy presence. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who delightest in repentance.

Forgive us, O our Father, for we have sinned; pardon us, O our King, for we have transgressed;

On Fast Days Selichoth are inserted here.

for thou dost pardon and forgive. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who art gracious, and dost abundantly forgive.

Look upon our affliction and plead our cause, and redeem us speedily for thy name's sake; for thou art a mighty Redeemer. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the Redeemer of Israel.

[p. 57]

On Fast Days the Reader here says "Answer us," etc., <page 61>, and concludes thus--

Blessed art thou, O Lord, who answerest in time of trouble.

Heal us, O Lord, and we shall be healed; save us and we shall be saved; for thou art our praise. Vouchsafe a perfect healing to all our wounds; [**] for thou, almighty King, art a faithful and merciful Physician. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who healest the sick of thy people Israel.

Bless this year unto us, O Lord our God, together with every kind of the produce thereof, for our welfare; give a blessing

During the Winter Season [***] substitute for the last sentence:

Give dew and rain for a blessing upon the face of the earth.

upon the face of the earth. O satisfy us with thy goodness, and bless our year like other

[p. 58]

good years. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who blessest the years.

Sound the great horn for our freedom; lift up the ensign to gather our exiles, and gather us from the four corners of the earth. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who gatherest the banished ones of thy people Israel.

Restore our judges as at the first, and our counsellors as at the beginning; remove from us grief and suffering; reign thou over us, O Lord, thou alone, in lovingkindness and tender mercy, and justify us in judgment. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the King who lovest righteousness and judgment.

During the Ten Days of Penitence conclude the Blessing thus:--

the King of Judgment.

And for slanderers let there be no hope, and let all wickedness perish as in a moment; let all thine enemies be speedily cut off, and the dominion of arrogance do thou uproot and crush,

[p. 59]

cast down and humble speedily in our days. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who breakest the enemies and humblest the arrogant.

Towards the righteous and the pious, towards the elders of thy people the house of Israel, towards the remnant of their scribes, towards . the proselytes of righteousness, and towards us also may thy tender mercies be stirred, O Lord our God; grant a good reward unto all who faithfully trust in thy name; set our portion with them for ever, so that we may not be put to shame; for we have trusted in thee. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the stay and trust of the righteous.

And to Jerusalem, thy city, return in mercy, and dwell therein as thou hast spoken; rebuild it soon in our days as an everlasting building, and speedily set up therein the throne of David. [**] Blessed art thou, O Lord, who rebuildest Jerusalem.

[p. 60]

Speedily cause the offspring of David, thy servant, to flourish, and let his horn be exalted by thy salvation, because we wait for thy salvation all the day. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who causest the horn of salvation to flourish.

Hear our voice, O Lord our God; spare us and have mercy upon us, and accept our prayer in mercy and favor; for thou art a God who hearkenest unto prayers and supplications:

[p. 61]

from thy presence, O our King, turn us not empty away; [**] for thou hearkenest in mercy to the prayer of thy people Israel. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who hearkenest unto prayer.

Accept, O Lord our God, thy people Israel and their prayer; restore the service to the oracle of thy house; receive in love and favor both the fire-offerings of Israel and their prayer; and may the service of thy people Israel be ever acceptable unto thee.

On New Moon and the Intermediate Days of Passover and Tabernacles the following is added:--

Our God and God of our fathers! May our remembrance rise, come and be accepted before thee, with the remembrance of our fathers, of Messiah the son

[p. 62]

of David thy servant, of Jerusalem thy holy city, and of all thy people the house of Israel, bringing deliverance and well-being, grace, lovingkindness and mercy, life and peace on this day of

On Passover--

the Feast of Unleavened Bread.

On New Moon say--

the New Moon.

On Tabernacles--

the Feast of Tabernacles.

Remember us, O Lord our God, thereon for our well-being; be mindful of us for blessing, and save us unto life: by thy promise of salvation and mercy, spare us and be gracious unto us; have mercy upon us and save us; for our eyes are bent upon thee, because thou art a gracious and merciful God and King.

And let our eyes behold thy return in mercy to Zion. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who restorest thy divine presence unto Zion.

We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God and the God of our fathers for ever and ever; thou art the Rock of our lives, the Shield of our salvation through every generation. We will give thanks unto thee and declare thy praise for our lives

Congregation in an undertone

We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God and the God of our fathers, the God of all flesh, our Creator and the Creator of all things in the beginning. Blessings and thanksgivings be to thy great and holy name, because thou hast kept us in life and hast preserved us: so mayest thou continue to keep us in life and to preserve us. O gather our exiles

[p. 63]

to thy holy courts to observe thy statutes, to do thy will, and to serve thee with a perfect heart; seeing that we give thanks unto thee. Blessed be the God to whom thanksgivings are due.

which are committed unto thy hand, and for our souls which are in thy charge, and for thy miracles, which are daily with us, and for thy wonders and thy benefits, which are wrought at all times, evening, morn and noon. O thou who art all-good, whose mercies fail not; thou, merciful Being, whose lovingkindnesses never cease, we have ever hoped in thee.

On Chanukah and Purim the following is added:--

We thank thee also for the miracles, for the redemption, for the mighty deeds and saving acts, wrought by thee, as well as for the wars which thou didst wage for our fathers in days of old, at this season.

On Chanukah.

In the days of the Hasmonean, Mattathias son of Johanan, the High Priest, and his sons, when the iniquitous power of Greece rose up against thy people Israel to make them forgetful of thy Law, and to force them to transgress the statutes of thy will, then didst thou in thine abundant mercy rise up for them in the time of their trouble; thou didst plead their cause, thou didst judge their suit, thou didst avenge their wrong; thou deliveredst the strong into the hands of the weak, the many into the hands of the few, the impure into the hands of the pure, the wicked into the hands of the righteous, and the arrogant into the hands of them that occupied themselves with thy Law: for thyself thou didst make a great and holy name

[p. 64]

in thy world, and for thy people Israel thou didst work a great deliverance and redemption as at this day. And thereupon thy children came into the oracle of thy house, cleansed thy temple, purified thy sanctuary, kindled lights in thy holy courts, and appointed these eight days of Chanukah in order to give thanks and praises unto thy great name.

On Purim.

In the days of Mordecai and Esther, in Shushan the capital, when the wicked Haman rose up against them, and sought to destroy, to slay and make to perish all the Jews, both young and old, little children and women, on one day, on the thirteenth day of the twelfth month, which is the month Adar, and to take the spoil of them for a prey,--then didst thou in thine abundant mercy bring his counsel to nought, didst frustrate his design, and return his recompense upon his own head; and they hanged him and his sons upon the gallows.

For all these things thy name, O our King, shall be continually blessed and exalted for ever and ever.

During the Ten Days of Penitence say:--

O inscribe all the children of thy covenant for a happy life.

And everything that liveth shall give thanks unto thee for ever, and shall praise thy name in truth, O God, our salvation and our help. Blessed art thou, O Lord, whose name is All-good, and unto whom it is becoming to give thanks.

[p. 65]

At the repetition of the Amidah by the Reader, the following is introduced:--

Our God and God of our fathers, bless us with the three-fold blessing of thy Law written by the hand of Moses thy servant, which was spoken by Aaron and his sons, the priests, thy holy people, as it is said, The Lord bless thee, and keep thee: the Lord make his face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee: the Lord turn his face unto thee, and give thee peace.

Grant peace, welfare, blessing, grace, loving kindness and mercy unto us and unto all Israel, thy people. Bless us, O our Father, even all of us together, with the light of thy countenance for by the light of thy countenance thou hast given us, O Lord our God, the Law of life, lovingkindness and righteousness, blessing, mercy, life and peace; and may it be good in thy sight to bless thy people Israel at all times and in every hour with thy peace.

During the Ten Days of Penitence say:--

In the book of life, blessing, peace and good sustenance may we be remembered and inscribed before thee, we and all thy people the house of Israel, for a happy life and for peace. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who makest peace.

[p. 66]

Blessed art thou, O Lord, who blessest thy people Israel with peace.

O my God! guard my tongue from evil and my lips from speaking guile; and to such as curse me let my soul be dumb, yea, let my soul. be unto all as the dust. Open my heart to thy Law, and let my soul pursue thy commandments. If any design evil against me, speedily make their counsel of none effect, and frustrate their designs. Do it for the sake of thy name, do it for the sake of thy right hand, do it for the sake of thy holiness, do it for the sake of thy Law. In order that thy beloved ones may be delivered, O save with thy right hand, and answer me. Let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart be acceptable before thee, O Lord, my Rock and my Redeemer. He who maketh peace in his high places, may he make peace for us and for all Israel, and say ye, Amen.

May it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, that the temple be speedily rebuilt in our days, and grant our portion in thy Law. And there we will serve thee with awe, as in the days of old, and as in ancient years. Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in ancient years.

[p. 67]

In illness, or when time is lacking, the following shortened form of the Amidah may be said:--

"O Lord," <page 53>, to "holy God," <page 55>.

Give us understanding, O Lord our God, to know thy ways; circumcise our hearts to fear thee, and forgive us so that we may be redeemed. Keep us far from sorrow; satiate us on the pastures of thy land, and gather our scattered ones from the four corners of the earth. Let them that go astray be judged according to thy will, and wave thy hand over the wicked. Let the righteous rejoice in the rebuilding of thy city, and in the establishment of thy temple, and in the flourishing of the horn of David thy servant, and in the clear-shining light of the son of Jesse, thine anointed. Even before we call, do thou answer. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who hearkenest unto prayer.

Continue--

"Accept," <page 61>, to "ancient years," <page 66>.

On New Moon, the Intermediate Days of Passover and Tabernacles, and on the Feast of Dedication, say "Hanel," <page 313>.

During the Ten Days of Penitence, the Sabbath excepted, the following to "and save us" <page 70>, is said.

Our Father, our King! we have sinned before thee.

Our Father, our King! we have no king but thee.

Our Father, our King! deal with us for the sake of thy name.

Our Father, our King! let a happy year begin for us.

Our Father, our King! nullify all evil decrees against us.

[p. 68]

Our Father, our King! nullify the designs of those that hate us.

Our Father, our King! make the counsel of our enemies of none effect.

Our Father, our King! rid us of every oppressor and adversary.

Our Father, our King! close the mouths of our adversaries and accusers.

Our Father, our King! of pestilence and the sword, of famine, captivity and destruction, rid the children of thy covenant.

Our Father, our King! withhold the plague from thine inheritance.

Our Father, our King! forgive and pardon all our iniquities.

Our Father, our King! blot out our transgressions, and make them pass away from before thine eyes.

Our Father, our King! erase in thine abundant mercies all the records of our guilt.

Our Father, our King! bring us back in perfect repentance unto thee.

Our Father, our King! send a perfect healing to the sick of thy people.

Our Father, our King! rend the evil judgment decreed against us.

Our Father, our King! let thy remembrance of us be for good.

Our Father, our King!  [**]inscribe us in the book of happy life.

Our Father, our King! inscribe us in the book of redemption and salvation.

Our Father, our King! inscribe us in the book of maintenance and sustenance.

[p. 69]

Our Father, our King! inscribe us in the book of merit.

Our Father, our King! inscribe us in the book of forgiveness and pardon.

Our Father, our King! let salvation soon spring forth for us.

Our Father, our King! exalt the horn of Israel, thy people.

Our Father, our King! exalt the horn of thine anointed.

Our Father, our King! fill our hands with thy blessings.

Our Father, our King! fill our storehouses with plenty.

Our Father, our King! hear our voice, spare us, and have mercy upon us.

Our Father, our King! receive our prayer in mercy and in favor.

Our Father, our King! open the gates of heaven unto our prayer.

Our Father, our King! we pray thee, turn us not back empty from thy presence.

Our Father, our King! remember that we are but dust.

Our Father; our King! let this hour be an hour of mercy and a time of favor with thee.

Our Father, our King! have compassion upon us and upon our children and our infants.

Our Father, our King! do this for the sake of them that were slain for thy holy name.

Our Father, our King! do it for the sake of them that were slaughtered for thy Unity.

Our Father, our King! do it for the sake of them that went through fire and water for the sanctification of thy name.

[p. 70]

Our Father, our King! avenge before our eyes thy blood of thy servants that hath been shed.

Our Father, our King! do it for thy sake, if not for ours.

Our Father, our King! do it for thy sake, and save us.

Our Father, our King! do it for the sake of thine abundant mercies.

Our Father, our King! do it for the sake of thy great, mighty and revered name by which we are called.

Our Father, our King! be gracious unto us and answer us, for we have no good works of our own; deal with us in charity and kindness, and save us.

On Mondays and Thursdays the following is said to "the Lord is One," <page 76>. On other Week Days continue, "And David said," etc., <page 76>. Both these Prayers are omitted on New Moon, during the whole month of Nisan, on the thirty-third day of Counting the Omer, from the first day of Sivan until the second day after Pentecost, on the 9th and 15th of Ab, on the day before New Year, from the day before the Fast of Atonement until the second day after Tabernacles, on the Feast of Dedication, on the 15th of Shebat, on the two days of Purim, and on the two days of Purim Katon, the 14th and 15th of Adar Rishon. These prayers are also omitted in the house of a mourner during the week of mourning, and at the celebration of a circumcision.

And he, being merciful, forgiveth iniquity and destroyeth not: yea, many a time he turneth his anger away and cloth not stir up all his wrath. Withhold

[p. 71]

not thou thy tender mercies from us, O Lord: let thy lovingkindness and thy truth continually preserve us. Save us, O Lord our God, and gather us from amongst the nations, to give thanks unto thy holy name, and to triumph in thy praise. If thou shouldst mark iniquities, O Lord, who could stand? But there is forgiveness with thee, that thou mayest be feared. Not according to our sins wilt thou deal with us, nor requite us according to our iniquities. If our iniquities testify against us, work thou, O Lord, for thy name's sake. Remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies and thy lovingkindnesses; for they have been ever of old. May the Lord answer us in the day of trouble, the name of the God of Jacob set us up on high. Save, Lord: may the King answer us on the day when we call. Our Father, our King, be gracious unto us and answer us, for we have no good works of our own; deal with us in charity for thy name's sake. Our Lord, our God, hearken to the voice of our supplications, and remember unto us the covenant of our fathers, and save us for thy name's sake. And now, O Lord our God, that hast brought thy people forth out of the land of Egypt with a mighty hand, and hast made thee a name as at this day; we have sinned, we have done wickedly. O Lord, according to all thy righteous acts, let thine anger and thy fury, I pray thee, be turned away from thy city Jerusalem, thy holy mountain; because for our sins and for the iniquities of our fathers, Jerusalem and thy people are become a reproach to all that are round about us. Now therefore, hearken, O our God, unto the prayer

[p. 72]

of thy servant and to his supplications, and cause thy face to shine upon thy sanctuary that is desolate, for the Lord's sake.

Incline thine ear, O my God, and hear; open thine eyes, and behold our desolations, and the city which is called by thy name: for we do not lay our supplications before thee because of our righteous acts, but because of thine abundant mercies. O Lord, hear; O Lord forgive; O Lord, hearken and do; defer not; for thine own sake, O my God, because thy city and thy people are called by thy name. O our Father, merciful Father, show us a sign for good, and gather our scattered ones from the four corners of the earth. Let all the nations perceive and know that thou art the Lord our God. And now, O Lord, thou art our Father; we are the clay, and thou art our potter, yea, we are all the work of thy hand. Save us for thy name's sake, our Rock, our King, and our Redeemer. Spare thy people, O Lord, and give not thine inheritance over to reproach, that the nations should make a by-word of them. Wherefore should they say among the peoples, Where is their God? We know that we have sinned, and there is none to stand up in our behalf; let thy great name stand for our defence in time of trouble. We know that we have no good works of our own; deal with us in charity for thy name's sake. As a father hath mercy upon his children, so, O Lord, have mercy upon us, and save us for thy name's sake. Have pity upon

[p. 73]

thy people; have mercy upon thine inheritance; spare, we pray thee, according to the abundance of thy tender mercies; be gracious unto us and answer us, for charity is thine, O Lord; thou doest wondrous things at all times.

Look, we beseech thee, and speedily have mercy upon thy people for thy name's sake in thine abundant mercies. O Lord our God, spare and be merciful; save the sheep of thy pasture; let not wrath rule over us, for our eyes are bent upon thee; save us for thy name's sake. Have mercy upon us for the sake of thy covenant; look, and answer us in time of trouble, for salvation is thine, O Lord. Our hope is in thee, O God of forgiveness. We beseech thee, forgive, O good and forgiving God, for thou art a gracious and merciful God and King.

We beseech thee, O gracious and merciful King, remember and give heed to the Covenant between the Pieces (with Abraham), and let the binding (upon the altar) of (Isaac) an only son appear before thee, to the welfare of Israel. Our Father, our King, be gracious unto us and answer us, for we are called by thy great name. Thou who doest wondrous things at all times, deal with us according to thy lovingkindness. O gracious and merciful Being, look, and answer us in time of trouble, for salvation is thine, O Lord. Our Father, our King, our Refuge, deal not with us according to the evil of our doings; remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies and thy lovingkindnesses; save us according to thy abundant goodness, and have pity upon us, we beseech thee, for we have no other God beside thee, our Rock.

[p. 74]

[paragraph continues] Forsake us not, O Lord bur God, be not far from us; for our soul is shrunken by reason of the sword and captivity and pestilence and plague, and of every trouble and sorrow. Deliver us, for we hope in thee; put us not to shame, O Lord our God; make thy countenance to shine upon us; remember unto us the covenant of our fathers, and save us for thy name's sake. Look upon our troubles, and hear the voice of our prayer, for thou hearest the prayer of every mouth.

Merciful and gracious God! Have mercy upon us and upon all thy works, for there is none like unto thee, O Lord our God. We beseech thee, forgive our transgressions, O our Father, our King, our Rock and our Redeemer, O living and everlasting God, mighty in strength, loving and good to all thy works; for thou art the Lord our God. O God, who art slow to anger and full of mercy, deal with us according to the abundance of thy tender mercies, and save us for thy name's sake. Hear our prayer, O our King, and deliver us from the hand of our enemies; hear our prayer, O our King, and deliver us from all trouble and sorrow. Thou art our Father, our King, and we are called by thy name; desert us not. Forsake us not, our Father, and cast us not off, O our Creator, and forget us not, O our Maker, for thou art a gracious and merciful God and King.

[p. 75]

There is none gracious and merciful like thee, O Lord our God; there is none like thee, O God, slow to anger and abounding in lovingkindness and truth. Save us in thine abundant mercies; from fierceness and rage deliver us. Remember thy servants, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; look not unto our stubbornness and our wickedness and our sin. Turn from thy fierce anger, and repent of the evil against thy people. Remove from us the stroke of death, for thou art merciful, for such is thy way--showing lovingkindness freely throughout all generations. Spare thy people, O Lord, and deliver us from thy wrath, and remove from us the stroke of the plague, and harsh decrees, for thou art the Guardian of Israel. Unto thee, O Lord, belongeth righteousness, but unto us confusion of face. How may we complain? What can we say, what can we speak, or how can we justify ourselves? We will search our ways and try them, and turn again to thee; for thy right hand is stretched out to receive the penitent. Save, we beseech thee, O Lord; we beseech thee, O Lord, send prosperity. We beseech thee, O Lord, answer us on the day when we call. For thee, O Lord, we wait; for thee, O Lord, we hope; in thee, O Lord, we trust; be not silent, nor let us be oppressed; for the nations say, Their hope is lost. Let every knee and all that is lofty bow down to thee alone.

O thou, who openest thy hand to repentance, to receive transgressors and sinners--our soul is sore vexed through the greatness of our grief; forget us not for

[p. 76]

ever; arise and save us, for we trust in thee. Our Father, our King, though we be without righteousness and good deeds, remember unto us the covenant of our fathers, and the testimony we bear every day that the Lord is One. Look upon our affliction, for many are our griefs and the sorrows of our heart. Have pity upon us, O Lord, in the land of our captivity, and pour not out thy wrath upon us, for we are thy people, the children of thy covenant. O God, look upon our sunken glory among the nations, and the abomination in which we are held as of utter defilement. How long shall thy strength remain in captivity, and thy glory in the hand of the foe? Arouse thy might and thy zeal against thine enemies, that they may be put to shame and broken down in their might. O let not our travail seem little in thy sight. Let thy tender mercies speedily come to meet us in the day of our trouble; and if not for our sake, do it for thine own sake, and destroy not the remembrance of our remnant; but be gracious unto a people, who in constant love proclaim the unity of thy name twice every day, saying, Hear, O Israel: the Lord our God, the Lord is One.

And David said unto Gad, I am troubled exceedingly; let us fall, I pray thee, into the hand of the Lord, for his mercies are many; but let me not fall into the hand of man.

O thou who art merciful and gracious, I have sinned before thee. O Lord, full of mercy, have mercy upon me and receive my supplications.

[p. 77]

Psalm vi.

O Lord, rebuke me not in thine anger: neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure. Be gracious unto me, O Lord; for I am withered away: O Lord, heal me; for my bones are troubled. My soul also is sore troubled: and thou, O Lord, how long? Return, O Lord, deliver my soul: save me for thy lovingkindness' sake. For in death there is no remembrance of thee: in the grave who shall give thee thanks? I am weary with my groaning; every night I make my bed to swim; I melt away my couch with my tears. Mine eye wasteth away because of grief it waxeth old because of all mine adversaries. Depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity; for the Lord hath heard the voice of my weeping. The Lord hath heard my supplication; the Lord will receive my prayer. All mine enemies shall be ashamed and sore troubled: they shall turn back, they shall be ashamed suddenly.

On Monday and Thursday Mornings the following is added. On other Weekdays, and in the Afternoon Service, continue "O Guardian of Israel," <page 79>.

Reader and Cong.--O Lord God of Israel, turn from thy fierce wrath, and repent of the evil against thy people.

Cong.--Look from heaven and see how we have become a scorn and a derision among the nations;

[p. 78]

we are accounted as sheep brought to the slaughter, to be slain and destroyed, or to be smitten and reproached.

Cong. and Reader.--Yet, despite all this, we have not forgotten thy name: we beseech thee, forget us not.

Cong.--Strangers say, There is no hope or expectancy for you. Be gracious unto a people that trust in thy name. O thou who art most pure, bring our salvation near. We are weary, and no rest is granted us. Let thy tender mercies subdue thine anger from us.

Cong. and Reader.--We beseech thee, turn from thy wrath, and have mercy upon the treasured people whom thou hast chosen.

Cong.--O Lord, spare us in thy tender mercies, and give us not into the hands of the cruel. Wherefore should the nations say, Where now is their God? For thine own sake deal kindly with us, and delay not.

Cong. and Reader.--We beseech thee, turn from thy wrath, and have mercy upon the treasured people whom thou hast chosen.

Cong.--Hear our voice, and be gracious, and forsake us not in the hand of our enemies to blot out our name; remember what thou hast sworn to our fathers, I will multiply your seed as the stars of heaven:--and now we are left a few out of many.

[p. 79]

Cong. and Reader.--Yet, despite all this, we have not forgotten thy name: we beseech thee, forget us not.

Cong.--Help us, O God of our salvation, for the sake of the glory of thy name; and deliver us, and pardon our sins for thy name's sake.

Cong. and Reader.--O Lord God of Israel, turn from thy fierce wrath, and repent of the evil against thy people.

O Guardian of Israel, guard the remnant of Israel, and suffer not Israel to perish, who say, Hear O Israel.

O Guardian of an only nation, guard the remnant of an only nation, and suffer not an only nation to perish, who proclaim the unity of thy name, saying, The Lord our God, the Lord is One.

O Guardian of a holy nation, guard the remnant of a holy nation, and suffer not a holy nation to perish, who thrice repeat the three-fold sanctification unto the Holy One.

O Thou who art propitiated by prayers for mercy, and art conciliated by supplications, be thou propitious and reconciled to an afflicted generation; for there is none that helpeth.

Our Father, our King, be gracious unto us, and answer us, for we have no good works of our own; deal with us in charity and lovingkindness, and save us.

[p. 80]

As for us, we know not what to do; but our eyes are upon thee. Remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies and thy lovingkindnesses; for they have been ever of old. Let thy lovingkindness, O Lord, be upon us, according as we have waited for thee. Remember not against us the iniquities of our ancestors: let thy tender mercies speedily come to meet us; for we are brought very low. Be gracious unto us, O Lord, be gracious unto us; for we are sated to the full with contempt. In wrath remember to be merciful. For he knoweth our frame; he remembereth that we are dust. Help us, O God of our salvation, for the sake of the glory of thy name; and deliver us, and pardon our sins, for thy name's sake.

Reader.--Magnified and sanctified be his great name in the world which he hath created according to his will. May he establish his kingdom during your life and during your days, and during the life of all the house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

Cong. and Reader.--Let his great name be blessed for ever and to all eternity.

Reader.--Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted, extolled and honored, magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One, blessed be he; though he be high above all the blessings and hymns, praises and consolations, which are uttered in the world; and say ye, Amen.

[p. 81]

On Mondays and Thursdays the following two paragraphs are added. They are, however, omitted on the following days:--New Moon, the day before Passover, the Fast of Ab, the day before the Fast of Atonement, during the Feast of Dedication, the two days of Purim, and of Purim Katon, the 14th and 15th of Adar Rishon.

O God, slow to anger and abounding in lovingkindness and truth, rebuke us not in thine anger. Have pity upon thy people, O Lord, and save us from all evil. We have sinned against thee, O Lord: forgive, we beseech thee, according to the abundance of thy tender mercies, O God.

O God, slow to anger and abounding in lovingkindness and truth, hide not thy face from us. Have pity upon Israel, thy people, and deliver us from all evil. We have sinned against thee, O Lord; forgive, we beseech thee, according to the abundance of thy tender mercies, O God.

  

ORDER OF READING THE LAW.

The following to "as of old," <page 87>, forms part of the Service when Prayers are said with a Congregation on Mondays and Thursdays, and also, with the exception of "May it be the will," etc., to "Amen," <page 85>, on Sabbath Afternoons, New Moon, the Intermediate Days of Passover and Tabernacles, and on Fast Days (Mornings and Afternoons).

The Ark is Opened.

Reader and Cong.--And it came to pass, when the ark set forward, that Moses said, Rise

[p. 82]

up, O Lord, and thine enemies shall be scattered, and they that hate thee shall flee before thee. For out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.

Blessed be he who in his holiness gave the Law to his people Israel.

The Reader takes the Scroll of the Law, and says:--

Magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his name together.

Reader and Cong.--Thine, O Lord, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the victory, and the majesty: for all that is in the heaven and in the earth is thine; thine, O Lord, is the kingdom, and the supremacy as head over all. Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship at his footstool: holy is he. Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship at his holy mount; for the Lord our God is holy.

May the Father of mercy have mercy upon a people that have been borne by him. May he remember the covenant with the patriarchs, deliver our souls from evil hours, check the evil inclination in them that have been carried by him, grant us of his grace an everlasting deliverance, and in the attribute of his goodness fulfil our desires by salvation and mercy.

[p. 83]

The Scroll of the Law is placed upon the desk. The Reader unrolls it, and says the following:--

And may his kingdom be soon revealed and made visible unto us, and may he be gracious unto our remnant and unto the remnant of his people, the house of Israel, granting them grace, kindness, mercy and favor; and let us say, Amen. Ascribe, all of you, greatness unto our God, and render honor to the Law.

Here the Reader names the Person who is to be called to the Reading of the Law.

Blessed be he, who in his holiness gave the Law unto his people Israel. The Law of the Lord is perfect, restoring the soul: the testimony of the Lord is faithful, making wise the simple. The precepts of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart: the commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes. The Lord will give strength unto his people: the Lord will bless his people with peace. As for God, his way is perfect: the word of the Lord is tried: he is a shield unto all them that trust in him.

Cong. and Reader.--And ye that cleave unto the Lord your God are alive every one of you this day.

Those who are called to the Reading of the Law say the following Blessing:--

Bless ye the Lord who is to be blessed.

Cong.--Blessed be the Lord, who is to be blessed for ever and ever.

[p. 84]

The Response of the Congregation is repeated and the Blessing continued:--

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast chosen us from all peoples, and hast given us thy Law. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who givest the Law.

After the Reading of a Section of the Law, the following Blessing is said:--

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast given us the Law of truth, and hast planted everlasting life in our midst. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who givest the Law.

Persons who have been in peril of their lives, during journeys by sea or land, in captivity or sickness, upon their deliverance or recovery say the following, after the conclusion of the last Blessing:--

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who vouchsafest benefits unto the undeserving, who hast also vouchsafed all good unto me.

The Congregation respond:--

He who hath vouchsafed all good unto thee, may he vouchsafe all good unto thee for ever.

After the Reading of the Law, the Scroll is held up, and the Congregation say the following:-

And this is the Law which Moses set before the children of Israel, according to the commandment of the Lord by the hand of Moses. It is a tree of life to them that grasp it, and of them that uphold it every one is rendered happy. Its ways are ways of pleasantness, and all its paths are peace.

[p. 85]

[paragraph continues] Length of days is in its right hand; in its left hand are riches and honor. It pleased the Lord, for his righteousness' sake, to magnify the Law and to make it honorable.

On those Mondays and Thursdays when the Prayers, pp. <page 70> to <page 81>, are said, the Reader adds the following, previous to the Scroll of the Law being returned to the Ark:--

May it be the will of our Father who is in heaven to establish the Temple, the house of our life, and to restore his divine presence in our midst, speedily in our days; and let us say, Amen.

May it be the will of our Father who is in heaven to have mercy upon us and upon our remnant, and to keep destruction and the plague from us and from all his people, the house of Israel; and let us say, Amen.

May it be the will of our Father who is in heaven to preserve among us the wise men of Israel; them, their wives, their sons and daughters, their disciples and the disciples of their disciples in all the places of their habitation; and let us say, Amen.

May it be the will of our Father who is in heaven that good tidings of salvation and comfort may be heard and published, and that he may gather our banished ones from the four corners of the earth; and let us say, Amen.

As for our brethren, the whole house of Israel, such of them as are given over to trouble or captivity, whether they abide on the sea or on the dry land,--may the All-present have mercy upon them, and bring them forth from trouble to enlargement, from darkness to light, and from subjection to redemption, now speedily and at a near time; and let us say, Amen.

[p. 86]

On returning the Scroll of the Law to the Ark, the Reader says:--

Let them praise the name of the Lord; for his name alone is exalted:

Congregation.--His majesty is above the earth and heaven; and he hath lifted up a horn for h, people, to the praise of all his loving ones, even of the children of Israel, the people near unto him. Praise ye the Lord.

Psalm xxiv.

A Psalm of David: The earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof; the world, and they that dwell therein. For it is he that hath founded it upon the seas, and established it upon the floods. Who may ascend the mountain of the Lord? And who may stand in his holy place? He that hath clean hands and a pure heart; who hath not set his desire upon vanity, and hath not sworn deceitfully. He shall receive a blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of his salvation. This is the generation of them that seek after him, that seek thy face, (O God of) Jacob! (Selah.) Lift up your heads, O ye gates; and be ye lifted up, ye everlasting doors, that the King of glory may come in. Who, then, is the King of glory? The Lord strong and mighty. the Lord mighty in battle. Lift up your heads, O ye gates; yea, lift them up, ye everlasting doors, that the King of glory may come in. Who, then, is the King of glory? The Lord of hosts, he is the King of glory. (Selah.)

[p. 87]

While the Scroll of the Law is being placed in the Ark, the following to "as of old" is said:--

And when it rested, he said, Return, O Lord, unto the ten thousands of the thousands of Israel. Arise, O Lord, unto thy resting place; thou, and the. ark of thy strength. Let thy priests be clothed with righteousness; and let thy loving ones shout for joy. For the sake of David thy servant, turn not away the face of thine anointed. For I give you good doctrine; forsake ye not my Law. It is a tree of life to them that grasp it, and of them that uphold it every one is rendered happy. Its ways are ways of pleasantness, and all its paths are peace. Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord, and we shall return: renew our days as of old.

Happy are they that dwell in thy house: they will be ever praising thee. (Selah.)

Happy is the people, that is in such a case: happy is the people, whose God is the Lord.

Psalm cxlv. A Psalm of Praise: of David

I will extol thee, my God, O King; and I will bless thy name for ever and ever.

Every day will I bless thee; and I will praise thy name for ever and ever.

Great is the Lord, and exceedingly to be praised: and his greatness is unsearchable.

One generation shall laud thy works to another, and shall declare thy mighty acts.

On the majestic glory of thy grandeur, and on thy marvellous deeds, will I meditate.

[p. 88]

And men shall speak of the might of thy awful acts; and I will recount thy greatness.

They shall pour forth the fame of thy great goodness, and shall exult in thy righteousness.

The Lord is gracious and merciful; slow to anger and of great lovingkindness.

The Lord is good to all; and his tender mercies are over all his works.

All thy works shall give thanks unto thee, O Lord; and thy loving ones shall bless thee.

They shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom, and talk of thy power.

To make known to the sons of men his mighty acts, and the majestic glory of his kingdom.

Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion endureth throughout all generations.

The Lord upholdeth all that fall, and raiseth up all those that are bowed down.

The eyes of all wait upon thee; and thou givest them their food in due season.

Thou openest thine hand, and satisfiest every living thing with favor.

The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and loving. in all his works.

The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him. to all that call upon him in truth.

He will fulfil the desire of them that fear him: he also will hear their cry, and will save them.

[p. 89]

The Lord guardeth all them that love him; but all the wicked will he destroy.

My mouth shall speak of the praise of the Lord; and let all flesh bless his holy name for ever and ever.

But we will bless the Lord from this time forth and for ever more. Praise ye the Lord.

On the following days Psalm xx. is omitted: New Moon, the day before Passover, on the Fast of Ab, the day before the Fast of Atonement, during the Feast of Dedication, on Purim and Purim Katon.

Psalm xx.

For the Chief Musician. A Psalm of David. The Lord answer thee in the day of trouble; the name of the God of Jacob set thee up on high; send thee help from the sanctuary, and uphold thee out of Zion; remember all thy offerings, and accept thy burnt sacrifice (Selah); grant thee thy heart's desire, and fulfil all thy purpose. We will exult in thy salvation, and in the name of our God we will set up our banners: the Lord fulfil all thy petitions. Now know I that the Lord saveth his anointed; he will answer him from his holy heaven with the mighty saving acts of his right hand. Some trust in chariots and some in horses: but we will make mention of the name of the Lord our God. They are bowed down and fallen: but we are risen and stand upright. Save, Lord: may the King answer us on the day when we call.

[p. 90]

And a redeemer shall come to Zion and to them that turn from transgression in Jacob, saith the Lord. And as for me, this is my covenant with them, saith the Lord: my spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seed's seed, saith the Lord, from henceforth and for ever.

But thou art holy, O thou that dwellest amid the praises of Israel. And one cried unto another, and said, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts: the whole earth is full of his glory.  [**]And they receive sanction the one from the other, and say, Holy in the highest heavens, the place of his divine abode; holy upon earth, the work of his might; holy for ever and to all eternity is the Lord of hosts; the whole earth is full of the radiance of his glory. Then a wind lifted me up, and I heard behind me the voice of a great rushing (saying), Blessed be the glory of the Lord from his place.  [**]Then a wind lifted me up, and I heard behind me the voice of a great rushing, of those who uttered praises, and said, Blessed be the glory of the Lord from the region of his divine abode. The Lord shall reign for ever and ever.  [**]The kingdom of the Lord endureth for ever and to all eternity. O Lord, the God of Abraham, of Isaac and of Israel, our fathers, keep this for ever in the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of thy people, and direct their heart unto thee. And he, being merciful, forgiveth iniquity

[p. 91]

and destroyeth not: yea, many a time he turneth his anger away, and doth not stir up all his wrath. For thou, O Lord, art good and forgiving, and abounding in lovingkindness to all them that call upon thee. Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness, and thy Law is truth. Thou wilt show truth to Jacob and lovingkindness to Abraham, according as thou has sworn unto our fathers from the days of old. Blessed be the Lord day b, day; if one burdeneth us, God is our salvation. (Selah.) The Lord of hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our stronghold. (Selah.) O Lord of hosts, happy is the man that trusteth in thee. Save, Lord: may the King answer us on the day when we call. Messed is our God, who hath created us for his glory, and hath separated us from them that go astray, and hath given us the Law of truth and planted everlasting life in our midst. May he open our heart unto his Law, and place his love and fear within our hearts, that we may do his will and serve him with a perfect heart, that we may not labor in vain, nor bring forth for confusion. May it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, that we may keep thy statutes in this world, and be worthy to live to witness and inherit happiness and blessing in the days of the Messiah and in the life of the world to come. To the end that my glory may sing praise unto thee, and not be silent: O Lord my God, I will give thanks unto thee for ever. Blessed is the man that trusteth in the Lord, and whose trust the Lord is. Trust ye in the Lord for ever; for in Jah the Lord is an everlasting rock

[p. 92]

And they that know thy name will put their trust in thee; for thou hast not forsaken them that seek thee, Lord. It pleased the Lord, for his righteousness' sake, to magnify the Law and to make it honorable.

On the days when the Additional Service is said, the Reader here says Half Kaddish, to "in the world; and say ye, Amen"; on other days, the whole Kaddish, as follows:--

And now, I pray thee, let the power of the Lord be great, according as thou hast spoken. Remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies and thy lovingkindness; for they have been ever of old.

Reader.--Magnified and sanctified be his great name in the world which he hath created according to his will. May he establish his kingdom during your life and during your days, and during the life of all the house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

Cong. and Reader.--Let his great name be blessed for ever and to all eternity.

Reader.--Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted, extolled and honored, magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One, blessed be he; though he be high above all the blessings and hymns, praises and consolations, which are uttered in the world; and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--Accept our prayer in mercy and in favor.

[p. 93]

Reader.--May the prayers and supplications of all Israel be accepted by their Father who is in heaven; and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--Let the name of the Lord be blessed from this time forth and for evermore.

Reader.--May there be abundant peace from heaven, and life for us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--My help is from the Lord, who made heaven and earth.

Reader.--He who maketh peace in his high places, may he make peace for us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

It is our duty to praise the Lord of all things, to ascribe greatness to him who formed the world in the beginning, since he hath not made us like the nations of other lands, and hath not placed us like other families of the earth, since he hath not assigned unto us a portion as unto them, nor a lot as unto all their multitude. For we bend the knee and offer worship and thanks before the supreme King of kings, the Holy One, blessed be he, who stretched forth the heavens and laid the foundations of the earth, the seat of whose glory is in the heavens above, and the abode of whose might is in the loftiest heights. He is our God; there is none else an truth he is our King; there is none besides him; as it is written in his Law, And thou shalt know this day, and lay it to thine heart, that the Lord he is God in heaven above and upon the earth beneath: there is none else.

[p. 94]

We therefore hope in thee, O Lord our God, that we may speedily behold the glory of thy might, when thou wilt remove the abominations from the earth, and the idols will be utterly cut off, when the world will be perfected under the kingdom of the Almighty, and all the children of flesh will call upon thy name, when thou wilt turn unto thyself all the wicked of the earth. Let all the inhabitants of the world perceive and know that unto thee every knee must bow, every tongue must swear. Before thee, O Lord our God, let them bow and fall; and unto thy glorious name let them give honor; let them all accept the yoke of thy kingdom, and do thou reign over them speedily, and for ever and ever. For the kingdom is thine, and to all eternity thou wilt reign in glory; as it is written in thy Law, the Lord shall reign for ever and ever. And it is said, And the Lord shall be king over all the earth: in that day shall the Lord be One, and his name One.

Footnotes

^17:* Deut. vi. 4-9; xi. 13-21; Exod. xiii. 1-10; 11-16.

^57:* The following Prayer for a Sick Person may be introduced here:--

May it be thy will, O Lord our God, and God of our fathers, speedily to send a perfect healing from heaven, a healing of soul and body unto the sick . . . among the other sick of Israel.

^57:** From the Fourth of December until the First Day of Passover.

^59:* On the Fast of the Ninth of Ab the following is added at the Afternoon Service:--

Comfort, O Lord our God, the mourners of Zion, and the mourners of Jerusalem, and the city that [p. 60] is in mourning, laid waste, despised and desolate; in mourning for that she is childless, laid waste as to her dwellings, despised in the downfall of her glory, and desolate through the loss of her inhabitants: she sitteth with her head covered like a barren woman who hath not borne. Legions have devoured her; worshippers of strange gods have possessed her: they have put thy people Israel to the sword, and in wilfulness have slain the loving ones of the Most High. Therefore let Zion weep bitterly, and Jerusalem give forth her voice. O my heart, my heart! how it grieveth for the slain! My bowels, my bowels! how they yearn for the slain! For thou, O Lord, didst consume her with fire; and with fire thou wilt in future restore her, as it is said, As for me, I will be unto her, saith the Lord, a wall of fire round about, and I will be a glory in the midst of her. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who comfortest Zion and rebuildest Jerusalem.

"Speedily," etc.

^61:* On Fast Days the Congregation here say the following:--

Answer us, O Lord, answer us on this day of the fast of our humiliation, for we are in great trouble. Turn not to our wickedness; conceal not thy face from us, and hide not thyself from our supplication. Be near, we entreat thee, unto our cry; let thy lovingkindness be a comfort to us; even before we call unto thee answer us, according as it is said, And it shall come to pass that, before they call, I will answer; while they are yet speaking, I will hear; for thou, O Lord, art he who answereth in time of trouble, who delivereth and rescueth in all times of trouble and distress; for thou hearkenest, etc.

^68:* At the Conclusion Service on the Day of Atonement, "seal us" is substituted for "inscribe us" in this and the following sentences.

^90:* The Chaldee paraphrase of the preceding verse.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

The following Kaddish is said by a Mourner.

And now, I pray thee, let the power of the Lord be great, according as thou hast spoken. Remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies and thy lovingkindnesses; for they have been ever of old.

Mourner.--Magnified and sanctified be his great name in the world which he hath created according to his will. May he establish his kingdom during your life and during your days, and during the life of all the house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

[p. 95]

Cong. and Mourner.--Let his great name be blessed for ever and to all eternity.

Mourner.--Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted, extolled and honored, magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One, blessed be he; though he be high above all the blessings and hymns, praises and consolations, which are uttered in the world; and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--Let the name of the Lord be blessed from this time forth and for evermore.

Mourner.--May there be abundant peace from heaven, and life for us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--My help is from the Lord, who made heaven and earth.

Mourner.--He who maketh peace in his high places, may he make peace for us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

Psalm for the First Day of the Week.

This is the First Day of the Week on which the Levites in the Temple used to say:--

Psalm xxiv.

A Psalm of David: The earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof; the world, and they that dwell therein. For it is he that hath founded it upon the seas, and established it upon the floods.

[p. 96]

[paragraph continues] Who may ascend the mountain of the Lord? And who may stand in his holy place? He that hath clean hands and a pure heart; who hath not set his desire upon vanity, and hath not sworn deceitfully. He shall receive a blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of his salvation. This is the generation of them that seek after him, that seek thy face, (O God of) Jacob! (Selah.) Lift up your heads, O ye gates; and be ye lifted up, ye everlasting doors, that the King of glory may come in. Who, then, is the King of glory? The Lord strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in battle. Lift up your heads, O ye gates; yea, lift them up, ye everlasting doors, that the King of glory may come in. Who, then, is the King of glory? The Lord of hosts, he is the King of glory. (Selah.)

Psalm for the Second Day of the Week.

This is the Second Day of the Week on which the Levites in the Temple used to say:--

(Psalm xlviii.)

A Song; a Psalm of the Sons of Korah. Great is the Lord, and highly to be praised, in the city of our God, in his holy mountain. Beautiful in elevation, the joy of the whole earth is mount Zion,--at the sides of the north,--the city of the great king. God hath made himself known in her palaces as a stronghold. For, lo, the kings met each other, they passed on together. They saw it; then were they amazed; they were confounded, they hasted away. Trembling took hold of them there; pangs

[p. 97]

as of a woman in travail. With an east wind thou didst break the ships of Tarshish. As we have heard, so have we seen in the city of the Lord of hosts, in the city of our God: God will establish it for ever. (Selah.) We thought of thy lovingkindness, O God, in the midst of thy temple. As is thy name, O God, so is thy renown unto the ends of the earth; thy right hand is full of righteousness. Let mount Zion rejoice, let the daughters of Judah be glad, because of thy judgments. Compass ye Zion and go round about her: count the towers thereof. Mark ye well her rampart, traverse her palaces; that ye may tell a later generation, that this God is our God for ever and ever: he will be our guide even unto death.

Psalm for the Third Day of the Week.

This is the Third Day of the Week, on which the Levites in the Temple used to say:--

(Psalm lxxxii.)

A Psalm of Asaph. God standeth in the congregation of the mighty; he judgeth among the judges. How long will ye judge unjustly, and respect the persons of the wicked? (Selah.) Judge the lowly and fatherless: do justice to the afflicted and destitute. Rescue the lowly and needy: deliver them out of the hand of the wicked. They know not, neither do they understand; they walk about in darkness: all the foundations of the earth are moved. I said, Ye are gods, and all of you sons

[p. 98]

of the Most High. Nevertheless ye shall die like men, and fall like one of the princes. Arise, O God, judge the earth: for thou shalt possess all the nations.

Psalm for the Fourth Day of the Week.

This is the Fourth Day of the Week, on which the Levites in the Temple used to say:--

(Psalm xciv.)

O God of vengeance, Lord, O God of vengeance, shine forth. Lift up thyself, thou judge of the earth: render to the proud their desert. Lord, how long shall the wicked, how long shall the wicked triumph? They prate, they speak arrogantly: all the workers of iniquity are boastful. They crush thy people, O Lord, and afflict thine heritage. They slay the widow and the stranger, and murder the fatherless. And they say, The Lord will not see, neither will the God of Jacob give heed. Give heed, ye brutish among the people: and ye fools, when will ye be wise? He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? He that formed the eye, shall he not see? He that chasteneth the nations, shall not he punish, even he that teacheth man knowledge? The Lord knoweth the thoughts of men, that they are vanity. Happy is the man whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and teachest out of thy Law; that thou mayest give him rest from the days of evil, until the pit be digged for the wicked. For the Lord will not cast off his people, neither will he forsake his inheritance. For judgment shall return unto righteousness: and all the. upright in heart shall follow it. Who will rise up for me against

[p. 99]

the evil-doers, who will stand up for me against the workers of iniquity? Unless the Lord had been my help, my soul had soon dwelt in silence. When I say, My foot slippeth, thy lovingkindness, O Lord, holdeth me up. In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my soul. Hath the tribunal of destruction fellowship with thee, which frameth mischief by statute? They gather themselves together against the soul of the righteous, and condemn the innocent blood. But the Lord is become my stronghold; and my God the rock of my refuge. And he bringeth back upon them their own iniquity, and for their evil shall cut them off; the Lord our God shall cut them off.

O come, let us exult before the Lord: let us shout for joy to the rock of our salvation.

Psalm for the Fifth Day of the Week.

This is the Fifth Day of the Week, on which the Levites in the Temple used to say:--

(Psalm lxxxi.)

To the Chief Musician. Set to the Gittith. A Psalm of Asaph. Exult aloud unto God our strength: shout for joy unto the God of Jacob. Raise the song, and strike the timbrel, the pleasant lyre with the harp. Blow the horn on the new moon, at the beginning of the month, for our day of festival. For it is a statute of Israel, a decree of the God of Jacob. He appointed it in Joseph for a testimony, when he went forth over the land of Egypt: where I heard a language that I knew not. I removed his shoulder from the burden: his hands were freed from the basket. Thou calledst in

[p. 100]

trouble and I delivered thee; I answered thee in the secret place of thunder, I proved thee at the waters of Meribah. (Selah.) Hear, O my people, and I will testify against thee: O Israel, if thou wilt hearken unto me. There shall be no strange god in thee; neither shalt thou worship any foreign god. I am the Lord thy God, who brought thee out of the land of Egypt: open wide thy mouth, and I will fill it. But my people hearkened not to my voice; and Israel was not willing towards me. So I let them go in the stubbornness of their heart, that they might walk in their own counsels. O that my people would hearken unto me, that Israel would walk in my ways. I would soon subdue their enemies, and turn my hand against their adversaries. The haters of the Lord should submit themselves unto him; so that their time might endure for ever. He would feed them also with the fat of wheat: and with honey out of the rock would I satisfy thee.

Psalm for the Sixth Day of the Week.

This is the Sixth Day of the Week, on which the Levites in the Temple used to say:--

Psalm xciii.

The Lord reigneth; he hath robed him in majesty; the Lord hath robed him, yea, he hath girded himself with strength: the world also is set firm, that it cannot be moved. Thy throne is set firm from of old: thou art from everlasting. The streams have lifted up, O Lord, the streams have lifted up their voice; the streams lift up their roaring. Than the voices of many waters, mighty waters, breakers of the sea, more mighty is the Lord on high. Thy testimonies are very

[p. 101]

faithful: holiness becometh thine house, O Lord, for evermore.

On the days when Tachanun (<page 76> to <page 80>) is said, the following is added after the Psalm of the day:--

Psalm lxxxiii.

A Song: A Psalm of Asaph. O God, keep not thou silence: hold not thy peace, and be not still, O God. For, lo, thine enemies make a tumult: and they that hate thee have lifted up the head. They take crafty counsel against thy people, and consult together against thy hidden ones. They have said, Come and let us cut them off from being a nation; that the name of Israel may be remembered no more. For they have consulted together with one consent; against thee do they make a covenant. The tents of Edom and the Ishmaelites; Moab and the Hagarenes; Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalek; Philistia with the inhabitants of Tyre: Assyria also is joined with them; they have been an arm of help to the children of Lot. (Selah.) Do thou unto them as unto Midian; as to Sisera, as to Jabin, at the brook Kishon. They were destroyed at Endor; they became as dung for the earth. Make their nobles like Oreb and Zeeb; yea, all their princes like Zebah and Zalmunna: who said, Let us take to ourselves in possession the habitations of God. O my God, make them like the whirling dust, as stubble before the wind; as the fire that burneth the forest, and as the flame that setteth the mountains on fire: so pursue them with thy storm, and confound them with thy hurricane. Fill their faces with confusion; that they may seek thy name,

[p. 102]

[paragraph continues] O Lord. Let them be ashamed and confounded tor ever; yea, let them be abashed and perish. That they may know that thou, of whom alone the name is the Lord, art Most High over all the earth

On New Moon, Psalm civ. is read, <page 264>.

From the beginning of the Month of Elul until Hoshana Rabba, the following Psalm is read every Morning and Evening:--

Psalm xxvii.

A Psalm of David. The Lord is my light and my salvation; whom shall I fear? The Lord is the stronghold of my life; of whom shall I be afraid? When evil-doers drew nigh against me to eat up my flesh, even my adversaries and my foes, they stumbled and fell. Though an host should encamp against me, my heart would not fear; though war should rise against me, even then would I be confident. One thing have I asked of the Lord, that will I seek after: that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the pleasantness of the Lord, and to inquire in his temple. For in the day of trouble he will hide me in his pavilion: in the shelter of his tabernacle will be conceal me; he will lift me up upon a rock. And now shall mine head be lifted up above mine enemies round about me; and I will offer in his tabernacle sacrifices of joyful shouting; I will sing, yea, I will sing praises unto the Lord. Hear, O Lord, when I cry with my voice; have pity upon me, and answer me. My heart saith unto thee, (since thou hast said), Seek ye my face, Thy face, Lord will I seek. Hide not thy face from me; thrust not thy servant away in anger: thou hast been my help; cast me not off, neither forsake me, O God of my salvation. For nay father and my mother have forsaken me, but the Lord will take me up. Teach me thy way, O Lord; and lead me on an even path, because of them that lie in wait for me Give me not up to the will of mine

[p. 103]

adversaries: for false witnesses have risen up against me, and such as breathe out violence. (I should despair), unless I believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living. Wait for the Lord; be strong and let thine heart take courage; yea, wait thou for the Lord.

In some Congregations the following Psalm is said daily before "Blessed be he," etc., <page 19>.

Psalm xxx.

A Psalm; a Song at the Dedication of the House; a Psalm of David. I will extol thee, O Lord; for thou hast drawn me up, and hast not made my foes to rejoice over me. O Lord, my God, I cried unto thee, and thou didst heal me. O Lord, thou broughtest up my soul from the grave; thou hast kept me alive, that I should not go down to the pit. Sing praise unto the Lord, O ye his loving ones, and give thanks to his holy name. For his anger is but for a moment; his favor is for a lifetime: weeping may tarry for the night, but joy cometh in the morning. As for me, I said in my prosperity I shall never be moved. Thou, Lord, of thy favor hadst made my mountain to stand strong; thou didst hide thy face; I was confounded. I cried unto thee, O Lord; and unto the Lord I made supplication: What profit is there in my blood if I go down to the pit? Can the dust give thanks to thee? Can it declare thy truth? Hear, O Lord, and be gracious unto me; Lord, be thou my helper. Thou hast turned for me my mourning into dancing; thou hast loosed my sackcloth, and girded me with gladness: to the end that my glory may sing praise to thee, and not be silent: O Lord my God, I will give thanks unto thee for ever.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

Kaddish to be said after reading Lessons from the Works of the Rabbis:--

Reader.--Magnified and sanctified be his great name In the world which he hath created according to his will. May he establish his kingdom during your life and during your days, and during the life of all the house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

[p. 104]

Cong. and Reader.--Let his great name be blessed for ever and to all eternity.

Reader.--Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted, extolled and honored; magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One, blessed be he; though he be high above all the blessings and hymns, praises and consolations, which are uttered in the world; and say ye, Amen.

Unto Israel, and unto the Rabbis, and unto their disciples, and unto all the disciples of their disciples, and unto all who engage in the study of the Law, in this or in any other place, unto them and unto you be abundant peace, grace, lovingkindness, mercy, long life, ample sustenance and salvation from the Father who is in heaven, and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--Let the name of the Lord be blessed from this time forth and for evermore.

Reader.--May there be abundant peace from heaven, and a happy life for us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--My help is from the Lord, who made heaven and earth.

Reader.--He who maketh peace in his high places, may he in his mercy make peace for us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

PRAYER FOR SUSTENANCE.

My help is from the Lord, who made heaven and earth. Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain thee. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright; for the latter end of that man is peace.

[p. 105]

[paragraph continues] Trust in the Lord, and do good; dwell in the land, and feed upon faithfulness. Behold, God is my salvation; I will trust and will not be afraid: for Jah the Lord is my strength and song, and he is become my salvation.--O Sovereign of the universe, in thy holy words it is written, saying, He that trusteth in the Lord, lovingkindness shall compass him, about; and it is written, And thou givest life to them all. O Lord God of truth, vouchsafe blessing and prosperity upon all the work of my hands, for I trust in thee that thou wilt so bless me through my occupation and calling, that I may be enabled to support myself and the members of my household with ease and not with pain, by lawful and not by forbidden means, unto life and peace. In me also let the scripture be fulfilled, Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain thee. Amen!

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE TEN COMMANDMENTS.

Exodus xx. 1-17.

And God spake all these words, saying.

1. I am the Lord thy God, who brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

2. Thou shalt have no other gods before me. Thou shalt not make unto thee a graven image; nor the form of anything that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth; thou shalt not bow down thyself unto them, nor serve them: for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children,

[p. 106]

upon the third and upon the fourth generation, unto them that hate me: and shewing lovingkindness to the thousandth generation, unto them that love me and keep my commandments.

3. Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain.

4. Remember the sabbath day to keep it holy. Six days shalt thou labor, and do all thy work: but the seventh day is a sabbath unto the Lord thy God: in it thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates: for in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea and all that is therein, and rested on the seventh day: wherefore the Lord blessed the sabbath day and hallowed it.

5. Honor thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee.

6. Thou shalt not murder.

7. Thou shalt not commit adultery.

8. Thou shalt not steal.

9. Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

[p. 107]

10. Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor s house, thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's wife, nor his manservant nor his maidservant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbor's.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

THIRTEEN PRINCIPLES OF THE FAITH. [**]

1. I believe with perfect faith that the Creator, blessed be his name, is the Author and Guide of everything that has been created, and that he alone has made, does make, and will make all things.

2. I believe with perfect faith that the Creator, blessed be his name, is a Unity, and that there is no unity in any manner like unto his, and that he alone is our God, who was, is, and will be.

3. I believe with perfect faith that the Creator, blessed be his name, is not a body, and that he is free from all the accidents of matter, and that he has not any form whatsoever.

4. I believe with perfect faith that the Creator, blessed be his name, is the first and the last.

5. I believe with perfect faith that to the Creator, blessed be his name, and to him alone, it is right to pray, and that it is not right to pray to any being besides him.

[p. 108]

6. I believe with perfect faith that all the words of the prophets are true.

7. I believe with perfect faith that the prophecy of Moses our teacher, peace be unto him, was true, and that he was the chief of the prophets, both of those that preceded and of those that followed him.

8. I believe with perfect faith that the whole Law, now in our possession, is the same that was given to Moses our teacher, peace be unto him.

9. I believe with perfect faith that this Law will not be changed, and that there will never be any other law from the Creator, blessed be his name.

10. I believe with perfect faith that the Creator, blessed be his name, knows every deed of the children of men, and all their thoughts, as it is said, It is he that fashioneth the hearts of them all, that giveth heed to all their deeds.

11. I believe with perfect faith that the Creator, blessed be his name, rewards those that keep his commandments, and punishes those that transgress them.

[p. 109]

12. I believe with perfect faith in the coming of the Messiah, and, though he tarry, I will wait daily for his coming.

13. I believe with perfect faith that there will be a resurrection of the dead at the time when it shall please the Creator, blessed be his name, and exalted be the remembrance of him for ever and ever.

For thy salvation I hope, O Lord! I hope, O Lord, for thy salvation! O Lord, for thy salvation I hope!

Footnotes

^107:* These Articles of the Jewish Creed were formulated by Moses Maimonides in the 12th century C.E.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

AFTERNOON SERVICE FOR WEEKDAYS.

Happy are they that dwell in thy house: they will be ever praising thee. (Selah.)

Happy is the people, that is in such a case: happy is the people, whose God is the Lord.

Psalm cxlv. A Psalm of Praise: of David.

I will extol thee, my God, O King; and I will bless thy name for ever and ever.

[p. 110]

Every day will I bless thee; and I will praise thy name for ever and ever.

Great is the Lord, and exceedingly to be praised: and his greatness is unsearchable.

One generation shall laud thy works to another, and shall declare thy mighty acts.

On the majestic glory of thy splendor, and on thy marvellous deeds, will I meditate.

And men shall speak of the might of thy awful acts; and I will recount thy greatness.

They shall pour forth the fame of thy great goodness, and shall exult in thy righteousness.

The Lord is gracious and merciful; slow to anger and of great lovingkindness.

The Lord is good to all; and his tender mercies are over all his works.

All thy works shall give thanks unto thee, O Lord; and thy loving ones shall bless thee.

They shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom, and talk of thy power.

To make known to the sons of men his mighty acts, and the majestic glory of his kingdom.

Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion endureth throughout all generations.

The Lord upholdeth all that fall, and raiseth up all those that are bowed down.

The eyes of all wait upon thee; and thou givest them their food in due season.

Thou openest thine hand, and satisfiest every living thing with favor.

[p. 111]

The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and loving in all his works.

The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him, to all that call upon him in truth.

He will fulfil the desire of them that fear him; he also will hear their cry, and will save them.

The Lord guardeth all them that love him; but all the wicked will he destroy.

My mouth shall speak of the praise of the Lord; and let all flesh bless his holy name for ever and ever.

But we will bless the Lord from this time forth and for evermore. Praise ye the Lord.

Reader.--Magnified and sanctified be his great name in the world which he hath created according to his will. May he establish his kingdom during your life and during your days, and during the life of all the house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

Cong. and Reader.--Let his great name be blessed for ever and to all eternity.

Reader.--Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted, extolled and honored, magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One, blessed be he; though he be high above all the blessings and hymns, praises and consolations, which are uttered in the world; and say ye, Amen.

On Fast Days the Scroll of the Law is taken from the Ark, and the portion of the Law beginning Vy'chal is read.

[p. 112]

The following prayer (Amidah) to "as in ancient years, <page 123>, is to be said standing.

O Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall declare thy praise.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, God of Abraham, God of Isaac, and God of Jacob, the great, mighty and revered God, the most high God, who bestowest lovingkindnesses, and possessest all things; who rememberest the pious deeds of the patriarchs, and in love wilt bring a redeemer to their children's children for thy name's sake.

During the Ten Days of Penitence say:--

Remember us unto life, O King, who delightest in life, and inscribe us in the book of life, for thine own sake, O living God.

O King, Helper, Savior and Shield. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the Shield of Abraham.

Thou, O Lord, art mighty for ever, thou quickenest the dead, thou art mighty to save.

From the Eighth Day of Solemn Assembly until the First Day of Passover say:--

Thou causest the wind to blow and the rain to fall.

Thou sustainest the living with lovingkindness, quickenest the dead with great mercy,

[p. 113]

supportest the falling, healest the sick, loosest the bound, and keepest thy faith to them that sleep in the dust. Who is like unto thee, Lord of mighty acts, and who resembleth thee, O King, who killest and quickenest, and causest salvation to spring forth?

During the Ten Days of Penitence say:--

Who is like unto thee, Father of mercy, who in mercy rememberest thy creatures unto life?

Yea, faithful art thou to quicken the dead. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who quickenest the dead. [**]

Thou art holy, and thy name is holy, and holy beings praise thee daily. (Selah.) Blessed art thou, O Lord, the holy God.

During the Ten Days of Penitence conclude the Blessing thus:--

the holy King.

When the Reader repeats the Amidah, the following is said, to "holy God," <page 114>.

[p. 114]

Reader.--Those over against them say, Blessed--

Cong.--Blessed he the glory of the Lord from his place.

Reader.--And in thy Holy Words it is written, saying,

Cong.--The Lord shall reign for ever, thy God, O Zion, unto all generations. Praise ye the Lord.

Reader.--Unto all generations we will declare thy greatness, and to all eternity we will proclaim thy holiness, and thy praise, O our God, shall not depart from our mouth for ever, for thou art a great and holy God and King. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the holy God.

During the Ten Days of Penitence conclude the Blessing thus:--

the holy King.

Thou favorest man with knowledge, and teachest mortals understanding. O favor us with knowledge, understanding and discernment from thee. Blessed art thou, O Lord, gracious Giver of knowledge.

Cause us to return, O our Father, unto thy Law; draw us near, O our King, unto thy service, and bring us back in perfect repentance unto thy presence. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who delightest in repentance.

Forgive us, O our Father, for we have sinned; pardon us, O our King, for we have transgressed;

(On Fast Days Selichoth are inserted here.)

for thou dost pardon and forgive. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who art gracious, and dost abundantly forgive.

[p. 115]

Look upon our affliction and plead our cause, and redeem us speedily for thy name's sake; for thou art a mighty Redeemer. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the Redeemer of Israel.

On Fast Days the Reader here says "Answer us," etc., <page 51>, and concludes thus:--

Blessed art thou, O Lord, who answerest in time of trouble.

Heal us, O Lord, and we shall be healed; save us and we shall be saved; for thou art our praise. Vouchsafe a perfect healing to all our wounds; [**] for thou, almighty King, art a faithful and merciful Physician. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who healest the sick of thy people Israel.

Bless this year unto us, O Lord our God, together with every kind of the produce thereof, for our welfare; give a blessing

During the Winter Season [***] substitute for the last sentence:

Give dew and rain for a blessing upon the face of the earth.

upon the face of the earth. O satisfy us with thy goodness, and bless our year like

[p. 116]

other good years. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who blessest the years.

Sound the great horn for our freedom; lift up the ensign to gather our exiles, and gather us from the four corners of the earth. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who gatherest the banished ones of thy people Israel.

Restore our judges as at the first, and our counsellors as at the beginning; remove from us grief and suffering; reign thou over us, O Lord, thou alone, in lovingkindness and tender mercy, and justify us in judgment. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the King who lovest righteousness and judgment.

During the Ten Days of Penitence conclude the Blessing thus:--

the King of Judgment.

And for slanderers let there be no hope, and let all wickedness perish as in a moment; let all thine enemies be speedily cut off, and the dominion of arrogance do thou uproot and crush,

[p. 117]

cast down and humble speedily in our days. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who breakest the enemies and humblest the arrogant.

Towards the righteous and the pious, towards the elders of thy people the house of Israel, towards the remnant of their scribes, towards the proselytes of righteousness, and towards us also may thy tender mercies be stirred, O Lord our God; grant a good reward unto all who faithfully trust in thy name; set our portion with them for ever, so that we may not be put to shame; for we have trusted in thee. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the stay and trust of the righteous.

And to Jerusalem, thy city, return in mercy, and dwell therein as thou hast spoken; rebuild it soon in our days as an everlasting building, and speedily set up therein the throne of David. [**] Blessed art thou, O Lord, who rebuildest Jerusalem.

[p. 118]

Speedily cause the offspring of David, thy servant, to flourish, and let his horn be exalted by thy salvation, because we wait for thy salvation all the day. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who causest the horn of salvation to flourish.

Hear our voice, O Lord our God; spare us and have mercy upon us, and accept our prayer tin mercy and favor; for thou art a God who hearkenest unto prayers and supplications: from thy presence, O our King, turn us not

[p. 119]

empty away; [**] for thou hearkenest in mercy to the prayer of thy people Israel. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who hearkenest unto prayer.

Accept, O Lord our God, thy people Israel and their prayer; restore the service to the oracle of thy house; receive in love and favor both the fire-offerings of Israel and their prayer; and may the service of thy people Israel be ever acceptable unto thee.

On New Moon and the Intermediate Days of Passover and Tabernacles the following is added:--

Our God and God of our fathers! May our remembrance rise, come and be accepted before thee, with

[p. 120]

the remembrance of our fathers, of Messiah the son or David thy servant, of Jerusalem thy holy city, and of all thy people the house of Israel, bringing deliverance and well-being, grace, lovingkindness and mercy, life and peace on this day of

On New Moon say--

the New Moon.

On Passover--

the Feast of Unleavened Bread.

On Tabernacles--

the Feast of Tabernacles.

Remember us, O Lord our God, thereon for our wellbeing; be mindful of us for blessing, and save us unto life: by thy promise of salvation and mercy, spare us and be gracious unto us; have mercy upon us and save us; for our eyes are bent upon thee, because thou art a gracious and merciful God and King.

And let our eyes behold thy return in mercy to Zion. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who restorest thy divine presence unto Zion.

Congregation in an undertone:--

We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God and the God of our fathers, the God of all flesh, our Creator and the Creator of all things in the beginning. Blessings and thanksgivings be to thy great and holy name, because thou hast kept us in life and hast preserved us: so mayest thou continue to keep us in life and to preserve us. O gather [p. 121] our exiles to thy holy courts to observe thy statutes, to do thy will, and to serve thee with a perfect heart; seeing that we give thanks unto thee Blessed be the God to whom thanksgivings are due.

We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God and the God of our fathers for ever and ever; thou art the Rock of our lives, the Shield of our salvation through every generation. We will give thanks unto thee and declare thy praise for our lives

[p. 121]

which are committed unto thy hand, and for our souls which are in thy charge, and for thy miracles, which are daily with us, and for thy wonders and thy benefits, which are wrought at all times, evening, morn and noon. O thou who art all-good, whose mercies fail not; thou, merciful Being, whose lovingkindnesses never cease, we have ever hoped in thee.

On Chanukah and Purim say:--

We thank thee, etc., <page 63>

For all these things thy name, O our King, shall be continually blessed and exalted for ever and ever.

During the Ten Days of Penitence say:--

O inscribe all the children of thy covenant for a happy life.

And everything that liveth shall give thanks unto thee for ever, and shall praise thy name in truth, O God, our salvation and our help. Blessed art thou, O Lord, whose name is All-good, and unto whom it is becoming to give thanks.

[p. 122]

Grant abundant peace unto Israel thy people for ever; for thou art the sovereign Lord of all peace; and may it be good in thy sight to bless thy people Israel at all times and in every hour with thy peace

During the Ten Days of Penitence say:--

In the book of life, blessing, peace and good sustenance may we be remembered and inscribed before thee, we and all thy people the house of Israel, for a happy life and for peace. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who makest peace.

Blessed art thou, O Lord, who blessest thy, people Israel with peace.

O my God! guard my tongue from evil and my lips from speaking guile; and to such as curse me let my soul be dumb, yea, let my soul be unto all as the dust. Open my heart to thy Law, and let my soul pursue thy commandments. If any design evil against me, speedily make their counsel of none effect, and frustrate their designs. Do it for the sake of thy name, do it for the sake of thy right hand, do it for the sake of thy holiness do it for the sake of thy Law. In order that thy beloved ones may be delivered, O save with thy right hand, and answer me. Let the words of my mouth and

[p. 123]

the meditation of my heart be acceptable before thee, O Lord, my Rock and my Redeemer. He who maketh peace in his high places, may he make peace for us and for all Israel, and say ye, Amen.

May it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, that the temple be speedily rebuilt in our days, and grant our portion in thy Law. And there we will serve thee with awe, as in the days of old, and as in ancient years. Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in ancient years.

During the Ten Days of Penitence, Friday excepted, say Our Father, Our King, <page 67>. Then say the following; but if Tachanun is omitted, the Reader, immediately after the Amidah, says the whole Kaddish <page 125>.

And David said unto Gad, I am troubled exceedingly; let us fall, I pray thee, into the hand of the Lord, for his mercies are many; but let me not fall into the hand of man.

O thou who art merciful and gracious, I have sinned before thee. O Lord, full of mercy, have mercy upon me and receive my supplications.

Psalm vi.

O Lord, rebuke me not in thine anger: neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure. Be gracious unto me, O Lord; for I am withered away: O Lord, heal me; for my bones are troubled. My soul also is sore troubled: and thou, O Lord, how long? Return, O Lord, deliver my soul: save me for thy lovingkindness'

[p. 124]

sake. For in death there is no remembrance of thee: in the grave who shall give thee thanks? I am weary with my groaning; every night I make my bed to swim; I melt away my couch with my tears. Mine eye wasteth away because of grief; it waxeth old because of all mine adversaries. Depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity; for the Lord hath heard the voice of my weeping. The Lord hath heard my supplication; the Lord will receive my prayer. All mine enemies shall he ashamed and sore troubled: they shall turn back, they shall be ashamed suddenly.

O Guardian of Israel, guard the remnant of Israel, and suffer not Israel to perish, who say, Hear, O Israel.

O Guardian of an only nation, guard the remnant of an only nation, and suffer not an only nation to perish, who proclaim the unity of thy name, saying, The Lord our God, the Lord is One.

O Guardian of a holy nation, guard the remnant of a holy nation, and suffer not a holy nation to perish, who thrice repeat the three-fold sanctification unto the Holy One.

O Thou who art propitiated by prayers for mercy, and art conciliated by supplications, be thou propitious and reconciled to an afflicted generation; for there is none that helpeth.

[p. 125]

Our Father, our King, be gracious unto us and answer us, for we have no good works of our own; deal with us in charity and lovingkindness, and save us.

As for us, we know not what to do; but our eyes. are upon thee. Remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies and thy lovingkindnesses; for they have been ever of old. Let thy lovingkindness, O Lord, be upon us, according as we have waited for thee. Remember not against us the iniquities of our ancestors: let thy tender mercies speedily come to meet us; for we are brought very low. Be gracious unto us, O Lord, be gracious unto us; for we are sated to the full with contempt. In wrath remember to be merciful. For he knoweth our frame; he remembereth that we are dust. Help us, O God of our salvation, for the sake of the glory of thy name; and deliver us, and pardon our sins, for thy name's sake.

Reader.--Magnified and sanctified be his great name in the world which he hath created according to his will. May he establish his kingdom during your life and during your days, and during the life of all the house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

Cong. and Reader.--Let his great name be blessed for ever and to all eternity.

Reader.--Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted, extolled and honored, magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One. blessed be he:

[p. 126]

though he be high above all the blessings and hymns praises and consolations, which are uttered in the world; and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--Accept our prayer in mercy and in favor.

Reader.--May the prayers and supplications of all Israel be accepted by their Father who is in heaven; and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--Let the name of the Lord be blessed from this time forth and for evermore.

Reader.--May there be abundant peace from heaven, and life for us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--My help is from the Lord, who made heaven and earth.

Reader.--He who maketh peace in his high places, may ne make peace for us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

It is our duty to praise the Lord of all things, to ascribe greatness to him who formed the world in the beginning, since he hath not made us like the nations of other lands, and hath not placed us like other families of the earth, since he hath not assigned unto us a portion as unto them, nor a lot as unto all their multitude. For we bend the knee and offer worship and thanks before the supreme King of kings, the Holy One, blessed be he, who stretched forth the heavens and laid the foundations of the earth, the seat of whose glory is in the heavens above, and the abode of whose might is in the loftiest heights. He is our God; there is none else: in truth he is our King; there is none besides him; as it is written in his Law, And thou shalt know this day, and lay it to thine heart,

[p. 127]

that the Lord he is God in heaven above and upon the earth beneath: there is none else.

We therefore hope in thee, O Lord our God, that we may speedily behold the glory of thy might, when thou wilt remove the abominations from the earth, and the idols will be utterly cut off, when the world will be perfected under the kingdom of the Almighty, and all the children of flesh will call upon thy name, when thou wilt turn unto thyself all the wicked of the earth. Let all the inhabitants of the world perceive and know that unto thee every knee must bow, every tongue must swear. Before thee, O Lord our God, let them bow and fall; and unto thy glorious name let them give honor; let them all accept the yoke of thy kingdom, and do thou reign over them speedily, and for ever and ever. For the kingdom is thine, and to all eternity thou wilt reign in glory; as it is written in thy Law, The Lord shall reign for ever and ever. And it is said, And the Lord shall be king over all the earth: in that day shall the Lord be One, and his name One.

The following Kaddish is said by a Mourner.

Mourner.--Magnified and sanctified be his great name in the world which he hath created according to his will. May he establish his kingdom during your life and during your days, and during the life of all the house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

Cong. and Mourner.--Let his great name be blessed for ever and to all eternity.

[p. 128]

Mourner.--Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted, extolled and honored, magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One, blessed be he; though he be high above all the blessings and hymns, praises and consolations, which are uttered in the world; and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--Let the name of the Lord be blessed from this time forth and for evermore.

Mourner.--May there be abundant peace from heaven, and life for us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--My help is from the Lord, who made heaven and earth.

Mourner.--He who maketh peace in his high places, may he make peace for us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

Footnotes

^113:* Reader.--We will sanctify thy name in the world even as they sanctify it in "the highest heavens, as it is written by the hand of thy prophet:

And they called one unto the other and said,

Cong.--Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts: the whole earth is full of his glory.

^115:* The following Prayer for a Sick Person may be introduced here:--

May it be thy will, O Lord our God, and God of our fathers, speedily to send a perfect healing from heaven, a healing of soul and body unto the sick . . . among the other sick of Israel.

^115:** From the Fourth of December until the First Day of Passover.

^117:* On the Fast of the Ninth of Ab the following is added:--

Comfort, O Lord our God, the mourners of Zion, and the mourners of Jerusalem, and the city [p. 118] that is in mourning, laid waste, despised and desolate; in mourning for that she is childless, laid waste as to her dwellings, despised in the downfall of her glory, and desolate through the loss of her inhabitants: she sitteth with her head covered like a barren woman who hath not borne. Legions have devoured her; worshippers of strange gods have possessed her: they have put thy people Israel to the sword, and in wilfulness have slain the loving ones of the Most High. Therefore let Zion weep bitterly, and Jerusalem give forth her voice. O my heart, my heart! how it grieveth for the slain! My bowels, my bowels! how they yearn for the slain! For thou, O Lord, didst consume her with fire; and with fire thou wilt in future restore her, as it is said, As for me, I will be unto her, saith the Lord, a wall of fire round about, and I will be a glory in the midst of her. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who comfortest Zion and rebuildest Jerusalem.

"Speedily," etc.

^119:* On Fast Days the Congregation here say the following:--

Answer us, O Lord, answer us on this day of the fast of our humiliation, for we are in great trouble. Turn not to our wickedness; conceal not thy face from us, and hide not thyself from our supplication. Be near, we entreat thee, unto our cry; let thy lovingkindness be a comfort to us; even before we call unto thee answer us, according as it is said, And it shall come to pass that, before they call, I will answer; while they ###8218###are yet speaking, I will hear; for thou, O Lord, art he who answereth in time of trouble, who delivereth and rescueth in all times of trouble and distress; 

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

EVENING SERVICE FOR WEEKDAYS AND THE TERMINATION OF THE SABBATH

On Weekdays, if the Evening Service is read after nightfall, commence here. At the termination of the Sabbath say Psalms cxliv. and lxvii., p. <page 298>, <page 299>; then continue, "And he being merciful," <page 129>. On Weekdays, if the Evening Service is read before nightfall, commence, "And he being merciful."

Psalm cxxxiv.

A Song of Degrees.--Behold, bless ye the Lord, all ye servants of the Lord, who stand in the house of the Lord in the night seasons. Lift up your hands towards the sanctuary, and bless ye the Lord. The Lord bless thee out of Zion; even he that made heaven and earth.

[p. 129]

The Lord of hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our stronghold. (Selah.)

To be said three times.

O Lord of hosts, happy is the man that trusteth in thee.

To be said three times.

Save, Lord: may the King answer us on the day when we call.

To be said three times.

Reader.--Magnified and sanctified be his great name in the world which he hath created according to his will. May he establish his kingdom during your life and during your days,. and during the life of all the house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

Cong. and Reader.--Let his great name be blessed for ever and to all eternity.

Reader.--Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted, extolled and honored, magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One, blessed be he; though he be high above all the blessings and hymns, praises and consolations, which are uttered in the world; and say ye, Amen.

And he being merciful, forgiveth iniquity, and destroyeth not: yea, many a time he turneth his anger away, and doth not stir up all his wrath. Save, Lord may the King answer us on the day when we cal!.

[p. 130]

Congregation in an undertone.

Blessed, praised, glorified, exalted and extolled be the name of the supreme King of kings, the Holy One, blessed be he, who is the first and the last, and beside him there is no God. Extol ye him that rideth upon the heavens by his name Jah, and rejoice before him. His name is exalted above all blessing and praise. Blessed be His name, whose glorious kingdom is for ever and ever. Let the name of the Lord be blessed from this time forth and for evermore.

Reader.--Bless ye the Lord who is to be blessed.

Cong. and Reader.--Blessed is the Lord who is to be blessed for ever and ever.

Blessed art thou, O. Lord our God, King of the universe, who at thy word bringest on the evening twilight, with wisdom openest the gates of the heavens, and with understanding changest times and variest the seasons, and arrangest the stars in their watches in the sky, according to thy will. Thou createst day and night; thou rollest away the light from before the darkness, and the darkness from before the light; thou makest the day to pass and the night to approach, and dividest the day from the night, the Lord of hosts is thy name; a God living and enduring continually, mayest thou reign over us for ever and ever. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who bringest on the evening twilight.

With everlasting love thou hast loved the house of Israel, thy people; a Law and commandments, statutes and judgments hast thou taught us. Therefore,

[p. 131]

[paragraph continues] O Lord our God, when we lie down and when we rise up we will meditate on thy statutes: yea, we will rejoice in the words of thy Law and in thy commandments for ever; for they are our life and the length of our days, and we will meditate on them day and night. And mayest thou never take away thy love from us. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who lovest thy people Israel.

When Prayers are not said with the Congregation, add:--

God, faithful King!

Deut. vi. 4-9.

Hear, O Israel: the Lord our God, the Lord is One.

Blessed be His name, whose glorious kingdom is for ever and ever.

And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart and with all thy soul, and with all thy might. And these words, which I command thee this day, shall be upon thine heart: and thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up. And thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be for frontlets between thine eyes. And thou shalt write them upon the door posts of thy house, and upon thy gates.

[p. 132]

Deut. xi. 13-21.

And it shall come to pass, if ye shall hearken. diligently unto my commandments, which T command you this day, to love the Lord your God, and to serve him with all your heart and with all your soul, that I will give the rain of your land in its season, the former rain and the latter rain, that thou mayest gather in thy corn, and thy wine, and thine oil. And I will give grass in thy field for thy cattle, and thou shalt eat and be satisfied. Take heed to yourselves, lest your heart be deceived, and ye turn aside, and serve other gods, and worship them; and the anger of the Lord be kindled against you, and he shut up the heaven, that there be no rain, and that the land yield not her fruit; and ye perish quickly from off the good land which the Lord giveth you. Therefore shall ye lay up these my words in your heart and in your soul; and ye shall bind them for a sign upon

[p. 133]

your hand, and they shall be for frontlets between your eyes. And ye shall teach them your children, talking of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up. And thou shalt write them upon the door posts of thine house, and upon thy gates: that your days may be multiplied, and the days of your children, upon the land which the Lord sware unto your fathers to give them, as the days of the heavens above the earth.

Numbers xv. 37-41.

And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Speak unto the children of Israel, and bid theirs that they make them a fringe upon the corners of their garments, throughout their generations, and that they put upon the fringe of each corner a cord of blue: and it shall be unto you for a fringe, that ye may look upon it, and remember all the commandments of the Lord, and do them; and that ye go not about after your own heart and your own eyes, after which ye use to go astray: that ye may remember

[p. 134]

and do all my commandments, and be holy unto your God. I am the Lord your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, to be your God: I am the Lord your God.

True and trustworthy is all this, and it is established with us that he is the Lord our God, and there is none beside him, and that We, Israel, are his people. It is he who redeemed us from the hand of kings, even our King, who delivered us from the grasp of all the terrible ones; the God, who on our behalf dealt out punishment to our adversaries, and requited all the enemies of our soul; who doeth great things past finding out, yea, and wonders without number; who holdeth our soul in life, and hath not suffered our feet to be moved; who made us tread upon the high places of our enemies, and exalted our horn over all them that hated us; who wrought for us miracles and vengeance upon Pharaoh, signs and wonders in the land of the children of Ham; who in his wrath smote all the first-born of Egypt, and brought forth his people Israel from among them to

[p. 135]

everlasting freedom; who made his children pass between the divisions of the Red Sea, hilt sank their pursuers and their enemies in the depths. Then his children beheld his might. they praised and gave thanks unto his name and willingly accepted his sovereignty. Moses and the children of Israel sang a song unto thee with great joy, saying, all of them,

Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the mighty ones? Who is like unto thee, glorious in holiness, revered in praises, doing wonders?

Thy children beheld thy sovereign power, as thou didst cleave the sea before Moses: they exclaimed, This is my God! and said, The Lord shall reign for ever and ever.

And it is said, For the Lord hath delivered Jacob, and redeemed him from the hand of him that was stronger than he. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who hast redeemed Israel.

Cause us, O Lord our God, to lie down in peace, and raise us up, O our King, unto life. Spread over us the tabernacle of thy peace; direct us aright through thine own good counsel; save us for thy name's sake; be thou a shield about us; remove from us every enemy, pestilence, sword, famine and sorrow; remove also the adversary from before us and from behind us. O shelter us beneath the shadow of thy wings;

[p. 136]

for thou, O God, art our Guardian and our Deliverer; yea, thou, O God, art a gracious and merciful King; and guard our going out and our coming in unto life and unto peace from this time forth and for evermore. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who guardest thy people Israel for ever.

Blessed be the Lord for evermore. Amen and Amen. Blessed be the Lord out of Zion, who dwelleth in Jerusalem. Praise ye the Lord. Blessed be the Lord God, the God of Israel, who alone doeth wondrous things: and blessed be his glorious name for ever; and let the whole earth be filled with his glory. Amen and Amen. Let the glory of the Lord endure for ever; let the Lord rejoice in his works. Let the name of the Lord be blessed from this time forth and for evermore. For the Lord will not forsake his people for his great name's sake; because it hath pleased him to make you a people unto himself. And when all the people saw it, they fell on their faces: and they said, The Lord, he is God; the Lord, he is God. And the Lord shall be King over all the earth: in that day shall the Lord be One, and his name

[p. 137]

[paragraph continues] One. Let thy lovingkindness, O Lord, be upon us, according as we have hoped for thee. Save us, O God of our salvation, and gather us and deliver us from the nations, to give thanks unto thy holy name, and to triumph in thy praise. All nations whom thou hast made shall come and worship before thee, O Lord; and they shall glorify thy name: for thou art great and doest marvellous things; thou art God alone. But we are thy people and the sheep of thy pasture; we will give thanks unto thee for ever: we will recount thy praise to all generations.

Blessed be the Lord by day; blessed be the Lord by night; blessed be the Lord when we lie down; blessed be the Lord when we rise up. For in thy hand are the souls of the living and the dead, as it is said, In his hand is the soul of every living thing, and the spirit of all human flesh. Into thy hand I commend my spirit; thou hast redeemed me, O Lord God of truth. Our God who art in heaven, assert the unity of thy name, and establish thy kingdom continually, and reign over us for ever and ever.

May our eyes behold, our hearts rejoice, and our souls be glad in thy true salvation, when it

[p. 138]

shall be said unto Zion, Thy God reigneth. The Lord reigneth; the Lord hath reigned; the Lord shall reign for ever and ever: for the kingdom is thine, and to everlasting thou wilt reign in glory; for we have no king but thee. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the King, who constantly in his glory will reign over us and over all his works for ever and ever.

Reader.--Magnified and sanctified be his great name in the world which he hath created according to his will. May he establish his kingdom during your life and during your days, and during the life of all the house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

Cong. and Reader.--Let his great name be blessed for ever and to all eternity.

Reader.--Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted, extolled and honored, magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One, blessed be he; though he be high above all the blessings and hymns, praises and consolations, which are uttered in the world; and say ye, Amen.

The following prayer (Amidah) to "as in ancient years," <page 148>, is to be said standing.

O Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall declare thy praise.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, God of Abraham, God of Isaac,

[p. 139]

and God of Jacob, the great, mighty and revered God, the most high God, who bestowest lovingkindnesses, and possessest all things; who rememberest the pious deeds of the patriarchs, and in love wilt bring a redeemer to their children's children for thy name's sake.

During the Ten Days of Penitence say:--

Remember us unto life, O King, who delightest in life, and inscribe us in the book of life, for thine own sake, O living God.

O King, Helper, Savior and Shield. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the Shield of Abraham.

Thou, O Lord, art mighty for ever, thou quickenest the dead, thou art mighty to save.

From the Eighth Day of Solemn Assembly until the First Day of Passover say:--

Thou causest the wind to blow and the rain to fall.

Thou sustainest the living with lovingkindness, quickenest the dead with great mercy, supportest the falling, healest the sick, loosest the bound, and keepest thy faith to them that sleep

[p. 140]

in the dust. Who is like unto thee, Lord of mighty acts, and who resembleth thee, O King, who killest and quickenest, and causest salvation to spring forth?

During the Ten Days of Penitence say:--

Who is like unto thee, Father of mercy, who in mercy rememberest thy creatures unto life?

Yea, faithful art thou to quicken the dead. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who quickenest the dead.

Thou art holy, and thy name is holy, and holy beings praise thee daily. (Selah.) Blessed art thou, O Lord, the holy God.

During the Ten Days of Penitence conclude the Blessing thus:--

the holy King.

Thou favorest man with knowledge, and teachest mortals understanding.

At the conclusion of Sabbath or of a Festival say:--

Thou hast favored us with a knowledge of thy Law, and hast taught us to perform the statutes of thy will. Thou hast made a distinction, O Lord our God, between holy and profane, between light and darkness, between Israel and other nations, between the seventh day and the six working days. O our Father, our King, grant that the days which are approaching us may begin for us in peace, and that we may be withheld from all sin and cleansed from all iniquity, and cleave to the fear of thee

[p. 141]

O favor us with knowledge, understanding and discernment from thee. Blessed art thou. O Lord, gracious Giver of knowledge.

Cause us to return, O our Father, unto thy Law; draw us near, O our King, unto thy service, and bring us back in perfect repentance unto thy presence. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who delightest in repentance.

Forgive us, O our Father, for we have sinned; pardon us, O our King, for we have transgressed; for thou dost pardon and forgive. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who art gracious, and dost abundantly forgive.

Look upon our affliction and plead our cause, and redeem us speedily for thy name's sake; for thou art a mighty Redeemer. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the Redeemer of Israel.

Heal us, O Lord, and we shall be healed; save us and we shall be saved; for thou art our praise. Vouchsafe a perfect healing to all our wounds; for thou, almighty King, art a faithful and merciful Physician. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who healest the sick of thy people Israel.

[p. 142]

Bless this year unto us, O Lord our God, together with every kind of the produce thereof, for our welfare; give a blessing

During the Winter Season [**] substitute for the last sentence:--

Give dew and rain for a blessing upon the face of the earth.

upon the face of the earth. O satisfy us with thy goodness, and bless our year like other good years. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who blessest the years.

Sound the great horn for our freedom; lift up the ensign to gather our exiles, and gather us from the four corners of the earth. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who gatherest the banished ones of thy people Israel.

Restore our judges as at the first, and our counsellors as at the beginning; remove from us grief and suffering; reign thou over us, O Lord, thou alone, in lovingkindness and tender mercy,

[p. 143]

and justify us in judgment. Blessed art thou O Lord, the King who lovest righteousness and judgment.

During the Ten Days of Penitence conclude the Blessing thus:--

the King of Judgment.

And for slanderers let there be no hope, and let all wickedness perish as in a moment; let all thine enemies be speedily cut off, and the dominion of arrogance do thou uproot and crush, cast down and humble speedily in our days. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who breakest the enemies and humblest the arrogant.

Towards the righteous and the pious, towards the elders of thy people the house of Israel, towards the remnant of their scribes, towards the proselytes of righteousness, and towards us also may thy tender mercies be stirred, O Lord our God; grant a good reward unto all who faithfully trust in thy name; set our portion with them for ever, so that we may not be put to shame; for we have trusted in thee. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the stay and trust of the righteous.

[p. 144]

And to Jerusalem, thy city, return in mercy, and dwell therein as thou hast spoken; rebuild it soon in our days as an everlasting building, and speedily set up therein the throne of David. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who rebuildest Jerusalem.

Speedily cause the offspring of David, thy servant, to flourish, and let his horn be exalted by thy salvation, because we wait for thy salvation all the day. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who causest the horn of salvation to flourish.

Hear our voice, O Lord our God; spare us and have mercy upon us, and accept our prayer in mercy and favor; for thou art a God who hearkenest unto prayers and supplications: from thy presence, O our King, turn us not empty away; for thou hearkenest in mercy to the prayer of thy people Israel. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who hearkenest unto prayer.

[p. 145]

Accept, O Lord our God, thy people Israel and their prayer; restore the service to the oracle of thy house; receive in love and favor both the fire-offerings of Israel and their prayer; and may the service of thy people Israel be ever acceptable unto thee.

On New Moon and the Intermediate Days of Passover and Tabernacles the following is added:--

Our God and God of our fathers! May our remembrance rise, come and be accepted before thee, with the remembrance of our fathers, of Messiah the son of David thy servant, of Jerusalem thy holy city, and of all thy people the house of Israel, bringing deliverance and well-being, grace, lovingkindness and mercy, life and peace on this day of

On New Moon say--

the New Moon.

On Passover.--

the Feast of Unleavened Bread.

On Tabernacles--

The Feast of Tabernacles.

[paragraph continues] Remember us, O Lord our God, thereon for our wellbeing; be mindful of us for blessing, and save us unto life: by thy promise of salvation and mercy, spare us and be gracious unto us; have mercy upon us and save us; for our eyes are bent upon thee, because thou art a gracious and merciful God and King.

And let our eyes behold thy return in mercy to Zion. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who restorest thy divine presence unto Zion.

[p. 146]

We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God and the God of our fathers for ever and ever; thou art the Rock of our lives, the Shield of our salvation through every generation. We will give thanks unto thee and declare thy praise for our lives which are committed unto thy hand, and for our souls which are in thy charge, and for thy miracles, which are daily with us, and for thy wonders and thy benefits, which are wrought at all times, evening, morn and noon. O thou who art all-good, whose mercies fail not; thou, merciful Being, whose lovingkindnesses never cease, we have ever hoped in thee.

On Chanukah and Purim say:--

We thank thee, etc., <page 63>.

For all these things thy name, O our King, shall be continually blessed and exalted for ever and ever.

During the Ten Days of Penitence say:--

O inscribe all the children of thy covenant for a happy life.

And everything that liveth shall give thanks unto thee for ever, and shall praise thy name in truth, O God, our salvation and our help. Blessed art thou, O Lord, whose name is All-good, and unto whom it is becoming to give thanks.

[p. 147]

Grant abundant peace unto Israel thy people for ever; for thou art the sovereign Lord of all peace; and may it be good in thy sight to bless thy people Israel at all times and in every hour with thy peace

During the Ten Days of Penitence say:--

In the book of life, blessing, peace and good sustenance may we be remembered and inscribed before thee, we and all thy people the house of Israel, for a happy life and for peace. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who makest peace.

Blessed art thou, O Lord, who blessest thy people Israel with peace.

O my God! guard my tongue from evil and my lips from speaking guile; and to such as curse me let my soul be dumb, yea, let my soul be unto all as the dust. Open my heart to thy Law, and let my soul pursue thy commandments. If any design evil against me, speedily make their counsel of none effect, and frustrate their designs. Do it for the sake of thy name, do it for the sake of thy right hand, do it for the sake of thy holiness, do it for the sake of thy Law. In order that thy beloved ones may be delivered, O save with thy right hand, and answer me. Let the words of my mouth and

[p. 148]

the meditation of my heart be acceptable before thee, O Lord, my Rock and my Redeemer. He who maketh peace in his high places, may he make peace for us and for all Israel, and say ye, Amen.

May it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, that the temple be speedily rebuilt in our days, and grant our portion in thy Law. And there we will serve thee with awe, as in the days of old, and as in ancient years. Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in ancient years.

Reader.--Magnified and sanctified be his great name in the world which he hath created according to his will. May he establish his kingdom during your life and during your days, and during the life of all the house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

Cong. and Reader.--Let his great name be blessed for ever and to all eternity.

Reader.--Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted, extolled and honored, magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One, blessed be he; though he be high above all the blessings and hymns, praises and consolations, which are uttered in the world; and say ye. Amen.

Cong.--Accept our prayer in mercy and in favor.

Reader.--May the prayers and supplications of all Israel be accepted by their Father who is in heaven; and say ye, Amen.

[p. 149]

Reader.--May there be abundant peace from heaven, and life for us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--My help is from the Lord, who made heaven and earth.

Reader.--He who maketh peace in his high places, may he make peace for us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

It is our duty to praise the Lord of all things, to ascribe greatness to him who formed the world in the beginning, since he hath not made us like the nations of other lands, and hath not placed us like other families of the earth, since he hath not assigned unto us a portion as unto them, nor a lot as unto all their multitude. For we bend the knee and offer worship and thanks before the supreme King of kings, the Holy One, blessed be he, who stretched forth the heavens and laid the foundations of the earth, the seat of whose glory is in the heavens above, and the abode of whose might is in the loftiest heights. He is our God; there is none else: in truth he is our King; there is none besides him; as it is written in his Law, And thou shalt know this day, and lay it to thine heart, that the Lord he is God in heaven above and upon the earth beneath: there is none else.

We therefore hope in thee, O Lord our God, that we may speedily behold the glory of thy might, when thou wilt remove the abominations from the earth and the idols will be utterly cut off, when the world will be perfected under the kingdom of the Almighty and all the children of flesh will call upon thy name, then thou wilt turn unto thyself all the wicked of le earth. Let all the inhabitants of the world perceive and know

[p. 150]

that unto thee every knee must bow, every tongue must swear. Before thee, O Lord our God, let them bow and fall; and unto thy glorious name let them give honor; let them all accept the yoke of thy kingdom, and do thou reign over them speedily, and for ever and ever. For the kingdom is thine, and to all eternity thou wilt reign in glory; as it is written in thy Law, The Lord shall reign for ever and ever. And it is said, And the Lord shall be king over all the earth: in that day shall the Lord be One, and his name One.

The following Kaddish is said by a Mourner.

Mourner.--Magnified and sanctified be his great name in the world which he hath created according to his will. May he establish his kingdom during your life and during your days, and during the life of all the house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

Cong. and Mourner.--Let his great name be blessed for ever and to all eternity.

Mourner.--Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted, extolled and honored, magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One, blessed be he;, though he be high above all the blessings and hymns, praises and consolations, which are uttered in the world; and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--Let the name of the Lord be blessed from this time forth and for evermore.

Mourner.--May there be abundant peace from heaven, and life for us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--My help is from the Lord, who made heaven and earth.

Mourner.--He who maketh peace in his high places, may he make peace for us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

Footnotes

^142:* From the 4th December until the First Day of Passover.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 151]

  

INAUGURATION OF THE SABBATH.

On Kindling the Sabbath lights say:--

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast sanctified us by thy commandments, and commanded us to kindle the Sabbath light.

Psalm xcv.

O come, let us exult before the Lord: let us shout for joy to the rock of our salvation. Let us come before his presence with thanksgiving: let us shout for joy unto him with psalms. For the Lord is a great God, and a great king above all gods. In his hand are the deep places of the earth; the heights of the mountains are his also. The sea is his, and he made it; and his hands formed the dry land. O come, let us worship and bow down; let us kneel before the Lord our maker. For he is our God, and we are the people of his pasture, and the sheep of his hand. To-day, oh that ye would hearken to his voice! Harden not your hearts as at Meribah, as in the day of Massah in the wilderness: when your fathers tempted me, and proved me, although they had seen my work. Forty years long was I wearied with that generation, and said, It is a people that do err in their heart, and they have not known my ways. Wherefore I sware in my wrath, that they should not enter into my rest.

Psalm xcvi.

O sing unto the Lord a new song: sing unto the Lord, all the earth. Sing unto the Lord, bless his name:

[p. 152]

proclaim his salvation from day to day. Recount his glory among the nations, his wondrous works among all the peoples. For great is the Lord, and exceedingly to be praised: he is to be revered above all gods. For all the gods of the peoples are things of nought: but the Lord made the heavens. Splendor and majesty are before him: strength and beauty are in his sanctuary. Give unto the Lord, ye families of the peoples, give unto the Lord glory and strength. Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name: take an offering, and come into his courts. O worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness; tremble before him, all the earth. Say among the nations, the Lord reigneth: the world also is set firm that it cannot be moved: he shall judge the peoples with equity. Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad; let the sea roar, and the fulness thereof; let the plain triumph and all that is therein; yea, let all the trees of the forest exult before the Lord, for he cometh; for he cometh to judge the earth: he will judge the world with righteousness, and the peoples in his faithfulness.

Psalm xcvii.

The Lord reigneth; let the earth be glad; let the many coast-lands rejoice. Clouds and darkness are round about him: righteousness and justice are the foundation of his throne. A fire goeth before him, and burneth up his adversaries round about. His lightnings illumine the world: the earth seeth and trembleth. The mountains melt like wax before the Lord, before the Lord of the whole earth. The

[p. 153]

heavens declare his righteousness, and all the peoples behold his glory. Ashamed are all they that serve graven images, that make their boast of things of nought: worship him, all ye gods. Zion heareth and rejoiceth, and the daughters of Judah are glad because of thy judgments, O Lord. For thou, Lord, art most high above all the earth: thou art exalted far above all gods. O ye that love the Lord, hate evil: he preserveth the souls of his loving ones; he delivereth them out of the hand of the wicked. Light is sown for the righteous, and joy for the upright in heart. Rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous; and give thanks to his holy name.

Psalm xcviii.

A Psalm. O sing unto the Lord a new song; for he hath done marvellous things: his right hand, and his holy arm, hath wrought salvation for him. The Lord hath made known his salvation: his righteousness hath he revealed in the sight of the nations. He hath remembered his lovingkindness and his faithfulness toward the house of Israel: all the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God. Shout for joy unto the Lord, all the earth; break forth into exultation, and sing praises. Sing praises unto the Lord with the lyre; with the lyre and the sound of song. With trumpets and the sound of the horn shout for joy before the king. the Lord. Let the sea roar, and the fulness thereof, the world, and they that dwell therein. Let the streams clap their hands, let the mountains exult together before the Lord, for he cometh to judge the earth: he will judge the world with righteousness, and the peoples with equity.

[p. 154]

Psalm xcix.

The Lord reigneth; let the peoples tremble: he sitteth above the cherubim; let the earth be moved. The Lord is great in Zion; and he is high above all the peoples. Let them give thanks to thy great and dreaded name; holy is he. And the strength of a king that loveth justice thou didst establish in equity; thou hast wrought justice and righteousness in Jacob. Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship at his footstool: holy is he. Moses and Aaron among his priests, and Samuel among them that call upon his name, called upon the Lord, and he answered them. He spake unto them in the pillar of cloud: they kept his testimonies, and the statute that he gave them. Thou didst answer them, O Lord our God: a forgiving God thou wast unto them, though thou tookest vengeance on their misdeeds. Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship at his holy mount; for the Lord our God is holy.

Psalm xxix.

A Psalm of David. Give unto the Lord, O ye children of the mighty, give unto the Lord glory and strength. Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name; worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness. The voice of the Lord is upon the waters: the God of glory thundereth, even the Lord upon the great waters. The voice of the Lord is powerful; the voice of the Lord is full of majesty. The voice of the Lord breaketh the cedars; yea, the Lord breaketh in pieces the cedars of Lebanon. He maketh them also to skip like a calf; Lebanon and Sirion like a young wild-ox. The voice of the Lord cleaveth flames of fire; the voice of the Lord maketh the

[p. 155]

wilderness to tremble; the Lord maketh tremble the wilderness of Kadesh. The voice of the Lord maketh the hinds to travail, and strippeth the forests bare: and in his temple everything saith, Glory. The Lord sat as king at the flood; yea, the Lord sitteth as king for ever. The Lord will give strength unto his people; the Lord will bless his people with peace.

 [**] Come, my friend, to meet the bride; let us welcome the presence of the Sabbath.

"Observe" and "Remember the Sabbath day," the only God caused us to hear in a single utterance: [*+] the Lord is One, and his name is One to his renown and his glory and his praise. Come, etc.

Come, let us go to meet the Sabbath, for it is a well-spring of blessing; from the beginning, from of old it was ordained,--last in production, first in thought. Come, etc.

O sanctuary of our King, O regal city, arise, go forth from thy overthrow; long enough hast thou dwelt in the valley of weeping; verily He will have compassion upon thee. Come, etc.

Shake thyself from the dust, arise, put on the garments of thy glory, O my people! Through the son of Jesse, the Bethlehemite, draw Thou nigh unto my soul, redeem it. Come, etc.

Arouse thyself, arouse thyself, for thy light is come: arise, shine; awake, awake; give forth a song; the glory of the Lord is revealed upon thee. Come, etc.

[p. 156]

Be not ashamed, neither be confounded. Why art thou cast down, and why art thou disquieted? The poor of my people trust in thee, and the city shall be builded on her own mound. Come, etc.

And they that spoil thee shall be a spoil, and all hat would swallow thee shall be far away: thy God shall rejoice over thee, as a bridegroom rejoiceth over his bride. Come, etc. Thou shalt spread abroad on the right hand and on the left, and thou shalt reverence the Lord. Through the offspring of Perez we also shall rejoice and be glad. Come, etc.

Come in peace, thou crown of thy husband, with rejoicing and with cheerfulness, in the midst of the faithful of the chosen people: come, O bride; come, O bride.

Come, my friend, to meet the bride; let us welcome the presence of the Sabbath.

Psalm xcii.

A Psalm, A Song for the Sabbath Day. It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing praises unto thy name, O Most High: to declare thy lovingkindness in the morning, and thy faithfulness every night, with an instrument of ten strings and with a harp, with thoughtful music upon the lyre. For thou, O Lord, hast made me rejoice through thy work: I will exult in the works of thy hands. How great are thy works, O Lord: thy thoughts are very deep. A brutish man knoweth it not, neither doth a fool understand this: when the wicked sprang up as the grass, and all the workers of iniquity flourished, it was that they might be destroyed for ever. But thou, O Lord, art on high for evermore. For, lo, thine enemies, O Lord, for,

[p. 157]

lo, thine enemies shall perish; all the workers of iniquity shall be scattered. But my horn hast thou exalted, like that of the wild-ox: I am anointed with fresh oil. Mine eye also hath seen my desire on mine enemies; mine ears have heard my desire of them that rose up against me, doers of evil. The righteous shall spring up like a palm-tree; he shall grow tall like a cedar in Lebanon. Planted in the house of the Lord, they shall blossom in the courts of our God. They shall still shoot forth in old age; they shall be full of sap and green: to declare that the Lord is upright; he is my rock, and there is no unrighteousness in him.

Psalm xciii.

The Lord reigneth; he hath robed him in majesty; the Lord hath robed him, yea, he hath girded himself with strength: the world also is set firm, that it cannot be moved. Thy throne is set firm from of old: thou art from everlasting. The streams have lifted up, O Lord, the streams have lifted up their voice; the streams lift up their roaring. Than the voices of many waters, mighty waters, breakers of the sea, more mighty is the Lord on high. Thy testimonies are very faithful: holiness becometh thine house, O Lord, for evermore.

The following Kaddish is said by a Mourner.

Mourner.--Magnified and sanctified be his great name in the world which he hath created according to his will. May he establish his kingdom during your life and during your days, and during the life of all the house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

[p. 158]

Cong. and Mourner.--Let his great name be blessed for ever and to all eternity.

Mourner.--Blessed, praised and glorified, exacted extolled and honored, magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One, blessed be he; though he be high above all the blessings and hymns, praiser and consolations, which are uttered in the world; and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--Let the name of the Lord be blessed from this time forth and for evermore.

Mourner.--May there be abundant peace from heaven, and life for us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--My help is from the Lord, who made heaven and earth.

Mourner.--He who maketh peace in his high places, may he make peace for us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

When a Festival or one of the Intermediate Days of a Festival falls on Sabbath, the Inauguration Service commences with "A Psalm, a Song, etc.," <page 156>.

Footnotes

^155:* In this poem, written in the form of an acrostic on the name of the author, R. Shelomo Halevi (Alkabets), the Sabbath is personified as a bride, whose visit to the faithful of Israel it is desired to honor and welcome.

^155:+ A reference to the Midrashic explanation (see Talmud Shebuoth, 20b) of the discrepancy between the two versions of the Fourth Commandment in Exodus xx. 8 and Deut. v. 12.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 159]

  

EVENING SERVICE FOR SABBATHS AND FESTIVALS

Reader.--Bless ye the Lord who is to be blessed.

Congregation in an undertone:

Blessed, praised, glorified, exalted and extolled be the name of the supreme King of kings, the Holy One, blessed be he, who is the first and the last, and beside him there is no God. Extol ye him that rideth upon the heavens by his name Jah, and rejoice before him. His name is exalted above all blessing and praise. Blessed be His name, whose glorious kingdom is for ever and ever. Let the name of the Lord be blessed from this time forth and for evermore.

Cong. and Reader.--Blessed is the Lord who is to be blessed for ever and ever.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who at thy word bringest on the evening twilight, with wisdom openest the gates of the heavens, and with understanding changest times and variest the seasons, and arrangest the stars in their watches in the sky, according to thy will. Thou createst day and night; thou rollest away the light from before the darkness, and the darkness from before the light; thou makest the day to pass and the night to approach, and dividest the day from the night, the Lord of hosts is thy name; a God living and enduring continually, mayest thou reign over us for ever and ever. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who bringest on the evening twilight.

With everlasting love thou hast loved the house of Israel, thy people; a Law and commandments, statutes and judgments hast thou taught us. Therefore. O Lord

[p. 160]

our God, when we lie down and when we rise up we will meditate on thy statutes: yea, we will rejoice in the words of thy Law and in thy commandments for ever; for they are our life and the length of our days and we will meditate on them day and night. And mayest thou never take away thy love from us. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who lovest thy people Israel.

When Prayers are not said with the Congregation, add:--

God, faithful King!

Deut. vi. 4-9.

Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is One.

Blessed be His name, whose glorious kingdom is for ever and ever.

And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might. And these words, which I command thee this day, shalt be upon thine heart: and thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up. And thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be for frontlets between thine eyes. And thou shalt write them upon the door posts of thy house, and upon thy gates.

[p. 161]

Deut. xi. 13-21.

And it shall come to pass, if ye shall hearken diligently unto my commandments which I command you this day, to love the Lord your God, and to serve him with all your heart and with all your soul, that I will give the rain of your land in its season, the former rain and the latter rain, that thou mayest gather in thy corn, and thy wine, and thine oil. And I will give grass in thy field for thy cattle, and thou shalt eat and be satisfied. Take heed to yourselves, lest your heart be deceived, and ye turn aside, and serve other gods, and worship them; and the anger of the Lord be kindled against you, and he shut up the heaven, that there be no rain, and that the land yield not her fruit; and ye perish quickly from off the good land which the Lord giveth you. Therefore shall ye lay up these my words in your heart and in your soul: and ye shall bind them for a sign upon your

[p. 162]

hand, and they shall be for frontlets between your eyes. And ye shall teach them your children, talking of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up. And thou shalt write them upon the door posts of thine house, and upon thy gates: that your days may be multiplied, and the days of your children, upon the land which the Lord sware unto your fathers to give them, as the days of the heavens above the earth.

Numbers xv. 37-41.

And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Speak unto the children of Israel, and bid them that they make them a fringe upon the corners of their garments throughout their generations, and that they put upon the fringe of each corner a cord of blue: and it shall be unto you for a fringe, that ye may look upon it, and remember all the commandments of the Lord, and do them; and that ye go not about after your own heart and your own eyes, after which ye use to go astray: that ye may remember and do

[p. 163]

all my commandments, and be holy unto your God. I am the Lord your God, who brought you out of the Land of Egypt, to be your God; I am the Lord your God.

True and trustworthy is all this, and it is established with us that he is the Lord our God, and there is none beside him, and that we, Israel, are his people. It is he who redeemed us from the hand of kings, even our King, who delivered us from the grasp of all the terrible ones; the God, who on our behalf dealt out punishment to our adversaries, and requited all the enemies of our soul; who doeth great things past finding out, yea, and wonders without number; who holdeth our soul in life, and hath not suffered our feet to be moved; who made us tread upon the high places of our enemies, and exalted our horn over all them that hated us; who wrought for us miracles and vengeance upon Pharaoh, signs and wonders in the land of the children of Ham; who in his wrath smote all the first-born of Egypt, and brought forth his

[p. 164]

people Israel from among them to everlasting freedom; who made his children pass between the divisions of the Red Sea, but sank their pursuers and their enemies in the depths. Then his children beheld his might; they praised and gave thanks unto his name, and willingly accepted his sovereignty. Moses and the children of Israel sang a song unto thee with great joy, saying, all of them,

Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the mighty ones? Who is like unto thee, glorious in holiness, revered in praises, doing wonders?

Thy children beheld thy sovereign power, as thou didst cleave the sea before Moses: they exclaimed, This is my God! and said,

The Lord shall reign for ever and ever.

And it is said, For the Lord hath delivered Jacob, and redeemed him from the hand of him that was stronger than he. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who hast redeemed Israel.

Cause us, O Lord our God, to lie down in peace, and raise us up, O our King, unto life. Spread over us the tabernacle of thy peace; direct us aright through thine own good counsel; save us for thy name's sake; be thou a shield about us; remove from is every enemy, pestilence, sword, famine and sorrow;

[p. 165]

remove also the adversary from before us and from behind us. O shelter us beneath the shadow of thy wings; for thou, O God, art our Guardian and our Deliverer; yea, thou, O God, art a gracious and merciful King; and guard our going out and our coming in unto life and unto peace from this time forth and for evermore; yea, spread over us the tabernacle of thy peace. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who spreadest the tabernacle of peace over us and over all thy people Israel, and over Jerusalem.

On Sabbaths:--

Exodus xxxi. 16, 17.

And the children of Israel shall keep the Sabbath, to observe the Sabbath throughout their generations, for an everlasting covenant. It is a sign between me and the children of Israel for ever, that in six days the Lord made the heavens and the earth, and on the seventh day he rested, and ceased from his work.

On Passover, Pentecost and Tabernacles, say:--

And Moses declared the set feasts of the Lord unto the children of Israel.

On New Year:--

Blow the horn on the new moon, at the beginning of the month, for our day of festival: for it is a statute for Israel, a decree of the God of Jacob.

On the Day of Atonement:--

For on this day shall atonement be made for you to cleanse you; from all your sins shall ye be clean before the Lord.

[p. 166]

Reader.--Magnified and sanctified be his great -name in the world which he hath created according to his will. May he establish his kingdom during your life and during your days, and during the life of all the house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

Cong. and Reader.--Let his great name be blessed. for ever and to all eternity.

Reader.--Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted, extolled and honored, magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One, blessed be he; though he be high above all the blessings and hymns, praises and consolations, which are uttered in the world; and say ye,. Amen.

On Festivals say the appropriate Amidoth.

O Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall declare thy praise.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, God of Abraham, God of Isaac, and God of Jacob, the great, mighty and revered God, the most high God, who bestowest lovingkindnesses, and possessest all things;: who rememberest the pious deeds of the patriarchs, and in love wilt bring a redeemer to their children's children for thy name's sake.

On the Sabbath of Penitence say:--

Remember us unto life, O King, who delightest in. life, and inscribe us in the book of life, for thine own Bake, O living God.

[p. 167]

O King, Helper, Saviour and Shield. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the Shield of Abraham.

Thou, O Lord, art mighty for ever, thou quickenest the dead, thou art mighty to save.

From the Sabbath after the Eighth Day of Solemn Assembly until the First Day of Passover say:--

Thou causest the wind to blow and the rain to fall.

Thou sustainest the living with lovingkindness, quickenest the dead with great mercy, supportest the falling, healest the sick, loosest the bound, and keepest thy faith to them that sleep in the dust. Who is like unto thee, Lord of mighty acts, and who resembleth thee, O King, who killest and quickenest, and causest salvation to spring forth?

On the Sabbath of Penitence say:--

Who is like unto thee, Father of mercy, who in mercy rememberest thy creatures unto life?

Yea, faithful art thou to quicken the dead. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who quickenest the dead.

[p. 168]

Thou art holy, and thy name is holy, and holy beings praise thee daily. (Selah.) Blessed art thou, O Lord, the holy God.

On the Sabbath of Penitence conclude the Blessing thus:--

the holy King.

Thou didst hallow the seventh day unto thy name, as the end of the creation of heaven and earth; thou didst bless it above all days, and didst hallow it above all seasons; and thus it is written in thy Law:

And the heaven and the earth were finished and all their host. And on the seventh day God had finished his work which he had made; and he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had made. And God blessed the seventh day, and he hallowed it because he rested thereon from all his work which God had created and made.

Our God and God of our fathers, accept our rest; sanctify us by thy commandments, and grant our portion in thy Law;

[p. 169]

satisfy us with thy goodness, and gladden us with thy salvation; purify our hearts to serve thee in truth; and in thy love and favor, O Lord our God, let us inherit thy holy Sabbath; and may Israel, who hallow thy name, rest thereon. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who hallowest the Sabbath.

Accept, O Lord our God, thy people Israel and their prayer; restore the service to the oracle of thy house; receive in love and favor both the fire-offerings of Israel and their prayer; and may the service of thy people Israel be ever acceptable unto thee.

On New Moon and the Intermediate Days of Passover and Tabernacles the following is added:--

Our God and God of our fathers! May our remembrance rise, come and be accepted before thee, with the remembrance of our fathers, of Messiah the son of David thy servant, of Jerusalem thy holy city, and of all thy people the house of Israel, bringing deliverance and well-being, grace, lovingkindness and mercy, life and peace on this day of

On New Moon--

the New Moon.

On Passover--

the Feast of Unleavened Bread.

On Tabernacles say--

the Feast of Tabernacles.

[paragraph continues] Remember us, O Lord our God, thereon for our well-being; be mindful of us for blessing,

[p. 170]

and save us unto life: by thy promise of salvation and mercy, spare us and be gracious unto us; have mercy upon us and save us; for our eyes are bent upon thee, because thou art a gracious and merciful God and King.

And let our eyes behold thy return in mercy to Zion. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who restorest thy divine presence unto Zion.

We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God and the God of our fathers for ever and ever; thou art the Rock of our lives, the Shield of our salvation through every generation. We will give thanks unto thee and declare thy praise for our lives which are committed unto thy hand, and for our souls which are in thy charge, and for thy miracles, which are daily with us, and for thy wonders and thy benefits which are wrought at all times, evening, morn and noon. O thou who art all-good, whose mercies fail not; thou, merciful Being, whose lovingkindnesses never cease, we have ever hoped in thee

On Chanukah say:--

We thank thee, etc., <page 63>.

For all these things thy name, O our King, shall be continually blessed and exalted for ever and ever

[p. 171]

On the Sabbath of Penitence say:--

O inscribe all the children of thy covenant for a happy life.

And everything that liveth shall give thanks unto thee for ever, and shall praise thy name in truth, O God, our salvation and our help. Blessed art thou, O Lord, whose name is All-good, and unto whom it is becoming to give thanks.

Grant abundant peace unto Israel thy people for ever; for thou art the sovereign Lord of all peace; and may it be good in thy sight to bless thy people Israel at all times and at every hour with thy peace.

On the Sabbath of Penitence say:--

In the book of life, blessing, peace and good sustenance may we be remembered and inscribed before thee, we and all the people of the rouse of Israel, for a happy life and for peace. Blessed art thou, O Lord; who makest peace.

Blessed art thou, O Lord, who blessest thy people Israel with peace.

O my God! guard my tongue from evil and my lips from speaking guile; and to such as curse me let my soul be dumb, yea, let my soul be unto all as the dust. Open my heart to thy Law,

[p. 172]

and let my soul pursue thy commandments. If any design evil against me, speedily make their counsel of none effect, and frustrate their designs. Do it for the sake of thy name, do it for the sake of thy right hand, do it for the sake of thy holiness, do it for the sake of thy Law. In order that thy beloved ones may be delivered, O save with thy right hand, and answer me. Let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart be acceptable before thee, O Lord, my Rock and my Redeemer. He who maketh peace in his high places, may he make peace for us and for all Israel, and say ye, Amen.

May it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, that the temple be speedily rebuilt in our days, and grant our portion in thy Law. And there we will serve thee with awe, as in the days of old, and as in ancient years. Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in ancient years.

The Reader and Congregation repeat from "And the heaven" to "and made."

And the heaven and the earth were finished and all their host. And on the seventh day God had finished his work which he had made; and he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had made. And God blessed the seventh day, and he hallowed it, because he rested thereon from all his work which God had created and made.

[p. 173]

The following to "the Sabbath," is omitted when Prayers are not said with the Congregation:--

Reader.--Blessed art thou, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, God of Abraham, God of Isaac and God of Jacob, the great, mighty and revered God, the most high God, Possessor of heaven and earth.

Reader and Cong.--He with his word was a shield to our forefathers, and by his bidding will quicken the dead; the holy God (on the Sabbath of Penitence say, "holy King"), like unto whom there is none; who giveth rest to his people on his holy Sabbath day, because he took pleasure in them to grant them rest. Him we will serve with fear and awe, and daily and constantly we will give thanks unto his name in the fitting forms of Blessings. He is the God to who, thanksgivings are due, the Lord of peace, who halloweth the Sabbath and blesseth the seventh day, and in holiness giveth rest unto a people sated with delights, in remembrance of the creation.

Reader.--Our God and God of our fathers, accept our rest; sanctify us by thy commandments, and grant our portion in thy Law; satisfy us with thy goodness, gladden us with thy salvation; purify our hearts to serve thee in truth; and in thy love and favor, O Lord our God, let us inherit thy holy Sabbath; and may Israel, who hallow thy name, rest thereon. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who hallowest the Sabbath.

[p. 174]

Reader.--Magnified and sanctified be his great name in the world which he hath created according to his will. May he establish his kingdom during your life and during your days, and during the life of all the house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

Cong. and Reader.--Let his great name be blessed for ever and to all eternity.

Reader.--Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted, extolled and honored, magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One, blessed be he; though he be high above all the blessings and hymns, praises and consolations, which are uttered in the world; and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--Accept our prayer in mercy and in favor.

Reader.--May the prayers and supplications of all Israel be accepted by their Father who is in heaven; and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--Let the name of the Lord be blessed from this time forth and for evermore.

Reader.--May there be abundant peace from heaven, and life for us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--My help is from the Lord, who made heaven and earth.

Reader.--He who maketh peace in his high places, may he make peace for us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

The following is not said on Festivals, on the Intermediate Sabbath of a Festival, or on the evening after a Festival:--

Mishnah, Treatise Sabbath, ch. ii.

1. With what materials may the Sabbath lamp be lighted, and with what may it not be lighted? It may not be lighted with cedar-bast, nor with uncombed flax, nor with floss-silk, nor with willow-fibre, nor with nettle fibre, nor with waterweeds

[p. 175]

[paragraph continues] (all these forming imperfect wicks). It may also not be lighted with pitch, nor with liquid wax, nor with oil made from the seeds of the cotton plant, nor with oil which, having been set apart as a heave-offering and having become defiled, is condemned to be destroyed by burning, nor with the fat from the tails of sheep, nor with tallow. Nahum the Mede, says one may use tallow when it has been boiled, but the other sages say, that whether so prepared or not, it may not be used. 2. On a festival one may not use such consecrated oil as has been condemned, after defilement, to be burnt. R. Ishmael says, one may not, from respect to the Sabbath, use tar. The sages permit the use of all kinds of oil; the oil of sesamum, of nuts, of radish seeds, of fish, of colocynth seeds, as well as tar and naphtha. R. Tarphon says, one may use no other than olive oil for lighting the Sabbath lamp. 3. No part of a tree may be used as a wick for lighting, with the exception of flax (spoken of in Joshua ii. 6 as "the flax of a tree"); nor is any part of a tree, if used in the construction of a tent, capable of acquiring pollution according to the law concerning the pollution of tents, except flax. If a slip of cloth has been folded but not singed, R. Eliezer says it may become unclean, and may not be used as a wick for lighting; R. Akiba says it remains clean, and may be used. 4. One may not perforate an egg-shell, fill it with oil, and place it above the opening of the lamp, so that drops of oil may fall therein; he may not even employ an earthenware vessel in this manner; but R. Jehudah permits it. If, however, the potter had originally joined the two parts, then it is allowed, because it is actually only one vessel. A person may not fill a bowl with oil, place it by the side of the lamp, and put the end of the wick into it, so that it may draw the oil to the flame; but R. Jehudah permits it. 5. He who extinguishes the light, because he is in fear of heathens, or robbers, or of en evil spirit. or to enable a sick person to sleep, is absolved;

[p. 176]

if his object is to save the lamp, the oil, or the wick, he is guilty of a breach of the Sabbath law. R. Jose absolves from such guilt in every case except in that of the one whose object is to save the wick, because by thus extinguishing it, he converts it into a coal. 6. For three transgressions women die in childbirth: because they have been negligent in regard to their periods of separation, in respect to the consecration of the first cake of the dough, and in the lighting of the Sabbath lamp. 7. Three things a man must say to his household on Sabbath eve towards dusk: Have ye separated the tithe? Have ye made the Erub? Kindle the Sabbath lamp. If it be doubtful whether it is dark, that which is certainly untithed must not then be tithed, vessels must not be immersed to purify them from their defilement, nor must the Sabbath lamps be lighted; but that which is doubtfully untithed may be tithed, the Erub may be made, and hot victuals may be covered to retain their heat.

Talmud Babli. End of Treatise Berachoth.

R. Eleazar said in the name of R. Chanina, The disciples of the sages increase peace throughout the world, as it is said, And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord; and great shall be the peace of thy children. (Read not here banayich, by children, but bonayich, thy builders.)--Great peace have they who love thy Law; and there is no stumbling for them. Peace be within thy rampart, prosperity within thy palaces. For my brethren and companions' sakes I would fain speak peace concerning thee. For the sake of the house of the Lord our God I would seek thy good. The Lord will give strength unto his people; the Lord will bless his people with peace.

Kiddush is said by the Reader, <page 181>.

It is our duty to praise the Lord of all things, to ascribe greatness to him who formed the world in the beginning, since he hath not made us like the nations of other lands, and hath not placed us

[p. 177]

like other families of the earth, since he hath not assigned unto us a portion as unto them, nor a lot as unto all their multitude. For we bend the knee and offer worship and thanks before the supreme King of kings, the Holy One, blessed be he, who stretched forth the heavens and laid the foundations of the earth, the seat of whose glory is in the heavens above, and the abode of whose might is in the loftiest heights. He is our God; there is none else; in truth he is our King; there is none besides him; as it is written in his Law, And thou shalt know this day, and lay it to thine heart, that the Lord he is God in heaven above and upon the earth beneath: there is none else.

We therefore hope in thee, O Lord our God, that we may speedily behold the glory of thy might, when thou wilt remove the abominations from the earth, and the idols will be utterly cut off, when the world will be perfected under the kingdom of the Almighty, and all the children of flesh will call upon thy name, when thou wilt turn unto thyself all the wicked of the earth. Let all the inhabitants of the world perceive and know that unto thee every knee must bow, every tongue must swear. Before thee, O Lord our God, let them bow and fall; and unto thy glorious name let them give honor; let them all accept the yoke of thy kingdom, and do thou reign over them speedily, and for ever and ever. For the kingdom is thine, and to all eternity thou wilt reign in glory; as it is written in thy Law,

[p. 178]

[paragraph continues] The Lord shall reign for ever and ever. And it is said, And the Lord shall be king over all the earth: in that lay shall the Lord be One, and his name One.

The following Kaddish is said by a Mourner.

Mourner.--Magnified and sanctified be his great name in the world which he hath created according to his will. May he establish his kingdom during your if e and during your days, and during the life of all the house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

Cong. and Mourner.--Let his great name be blessed for ever and to all eternity.

Mourner.--Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted, extolled and honored, magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One, blessed be he; though he be high above all the blessings and hymns, praises and consolations, which are uttered in the world; and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--Let the name of the Lord be blessed from this time forth and for evermore.

Mourner.--May there be abundant peace from heaven, and life for us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--My help is from the Lord, who made heaven and earth.

Mourner.--He who maketh peace in his high places, may he make peace for us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

1. Magnified and praised be the living God: he is, and there is no limit in time unto his being.

2. He is One, and there is no unity like unto his unity; inconceivable is he, and unending is his unity.

[p. 179]

3. He hath neither bodily form nor substance: we can compare nought unto him in his holiness.

4. He was before anything that hath been created--even the first: but his existence had no beginning.

5. Behold he is the Lord of the universe: to every creature he teacheth his greatness and his sovereignty.

6. The rich gift of his prophecy he gave unto the men of his choice, in whom he gloried.

7. There hath never yet arisen in Israel a prophet like unto Moses, one who hath beheld his similitude.

8. The Law of truth God gave unto his people by the hand of his prophet, who was faithful in his house.

9. God will not alter nor change his Law to ever, lasting for any other.

10. He watcheth and knoweth our secret thoughts: he beholdeth the end of a thing before it existeth.

11. He bestoweth lovingkindness upon a man according to his work; he giveth to the wicked evil according to his wickedness.

12. He will send our anointed at the end of days, to redeem them that wait for the end--his salvation.

13. In the abundance of his lovingkindness God will quicken the dead. Blessed for evermore be his glorious name.

On the Eve of Sabbaths and of Holydays it is customary for Parents, either at the conclusion of the Service in Synagogue, or upon reaching their Home, to pronounce the following Benediction upon their Children:--

To Sons say:--

God make thee as Ephraim and Manasseh.

To Daughters say:--

God make thee as Sarah, Rebekah, Rachel and Leah.

To Sons and Daughters:--

The Lord bless thee, and keep thee: the Lord make his face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee: the Lord turn his face unto thee, and give thee peace.

[p. 180]

The following is said in the Home by the Master of the House:--

Proverbs xxxi. 10-31.

A woman of worth who can find? For her price is far above rubies. The heart of her husband trusteth in her; and he shall have no lack of gain. She doeth him good and not evil all the days of her life. She seeketh wool and flax, and worketh willingly with her hands. She is like the merchant-ships; she bringeth her food from afar. She riseth also while it is yet night, and setteth forth provision for her household, and their portion for her maidens. She considereth a field, and buyeth it: with the fruit of her hands she planteth a vineyard. She girdeth her loins with strength, and maketh strong her arms. She perceiveth that her earnings are good: her lamp goeth not out by night. She putteth her hands to the distaff, and her hands hold the spindle. She stretcheth out her hand to the poor; yea, she putteth forth her hands to the needy. She is not afraid of the snow for her household; for all her household are clothed with scarlet. She maketh for herself coverings of tapestry; her clothing is fine linen and purple. Her husband is known in the gates, when he sitteth among the elders of the land. She maketh linen garments and selleth them; and delivereth girdles unto the merchant. Strength and majesty are her clothing; and she laugheth at the time to come. She openeth her mouth with wisdom; and the law of lovingkindness is on her tongue. She looketh well to the ways of her household, and eateth not the bread of idleness. Her children rise up and call her happy; her husband also, and he praiseth her, saying, Many daughters have done worthily, but thou excellest them all. Favor is false, and beauty is vain; but a woman that feareth the Lord, she shall be praised. Give her of the fruit of her hands; and let her works praise her in the gates.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 181]

  

KIDDUSH FOR SABBATH EVENING.

The following is said in the Home by the Master of the House, previous to partaking of the Sabbath Meal:--

And it was evening and it was morning--the sixth day.

And the heaven and the earth were finished and all their host. And on the seventh day God had finished his work which he had made; and he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had made. And God blessed the seventh day, and he hallowed it, because he rested thereon from all his work which God had created and made.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who createst the fruit of the vine.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast sanctified us by thy commandments and hast taken pleasure in us, and in love and favor hast given us thy holy Sabbath as an inheritance, a memorial of the creation--that day being also the first of the holy convocations, in remembrance of the departure from Egypt. For thou hast chosen us and sanctified us above all nations, and in love and favor hast given us thy holy Sabbath as an inheritance. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who hallowest the Sabbath.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who bringest forth bread from the earth.

For Kiddush on Festivals and New Year, see pp. <page 333> and <page 357>.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 182]

  

MORNING SERVICE FOR SABBATHS AND FESTIVALS.

Begin page <page 2> to "the Lord is One," <page 43>. Then continue as follows:--

The breath of every living being shall bless thy name, O Lord our God, and the spirit of all flesh shall continually glorify and exalt thy memorial, O our King; from everlasting to everlasting thou art God; and beside thee we have no King who redeemeth and saveth, setteth free and delivereth, who supporteth and hath mercy in all times of trouble and distress; yea, we have no King but thee.

He is God of the first and of the last, the God of all creatures, the Lord of all generations, who is extolled with many praises, and guideth his world with lovingkindness and his creatures with tender mercies. The Lord slumbereth not, nor sleepeth; he arouseth the sleepers and awakeneth the slumberers; he maketh the dumb to speak, loseth the bound, supporteth .the falling, and raiseth up the bowed.

To thee alone we give thanks. Though our mouths were full of song as the sea, and our tongues of exultation as the multitude of its waves, and our lips of praise as the wide-extended firmament; though our eyes shone with light like the sun and the moon, and our hands were spread forth like the eagles of heaven, and our feet were swift as hinds, we should still be unable to thank thee and to bless thy name, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, for one thousandth or one ten thousandth

[p. 183]

part of the bounties which thou hast bestowed upon our fathers and upon us. Thou didst redeem us from Egypt, O Lord our God, and didst release us from the house of bondage; during famine thou didst feed us, and didst sustain us in plenty; from the sword thou didst rescue us, from pestilence thou didst save us, and from sore and lasting diseases thou didst deliver us. Hitherto thy tender mercies have helped us, and thy lovingkindnesses have not left us: forsake us not, O Lord our God, for ever. Therefore the limbs which thou hast spread forth upon us, and the spirit and breath which thou hast breathed into our nostrils, and the tongue which thou hast set in our mouths, lo, they shall thank, bless, praise, glorify, extol, reverence, hallow and assign kingship to thy name, O Our King. For every mouth shall give thanks unto thee, and every tongue shall swear unto thee; every knee shall bow to thee, and whatsoever is lofty shall prostrate itself before thee; all hearts shall fear thee, and all the inward parts and reins shall sing unto thy name, according to the word that is written, All my bones shall say, Lord, who is like unto thee? Thou deliverest the poor from him that is stronger than he, the poor and the needy from him that robbeth him. Who is like unto thee, who is equal to thee, who can be compared unto thee, O God, great, mighty, and awful, most high God, Possessor of heaven and earth? We will praise,

[p. 184]

laud and glorify thee, and we will bless thy holy name, as it is said, (A Psalm of David,) Bless the Lord, O my soul; and all that is within me, bless his holy name. Thou art God in thy power and might, great in thy glorious name, mighty for ever and awful by thy awful acts, the King who sitteth upon a high and lofty throne.

He who inhabiteth eternity, exalted and holy is his name; and it is written, Exult in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is seemly for the upright.

By the mouth of the upright thou shalt be praised, by the words of the righteous thou shalt be blessed, by the tongue of the loving ones thou shalt be extolled, and in the midst of the holy thou shalt be hallowed.

In the assemblies also of the tens of thousands of thy people, the house of Israel, thy name, O our King, shall be glorified with joyous dies in every generation; for such is the duty of all creatures in thy presence, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, to thank, praise, laud, glorify, extol, honor, bless, exalt and adore thee, even beyond all the words of song and praise of David the son of Jesse, thy servant and anointed.

[p. 185]

Praised be thy name for ever, O our King, the great and holy God and King, in heaven and on earth; for unto thee, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, song and praise are becoming, hymn and psalm, strength and dominion, victory, greatness and might, renown and glory, holiness and sovereignty, blessings and thanksgivings from henceforth even for ever. Blessed art thou, O Lord, God and King, great in praises, God of thanksgivings, Lord of wonders, who makest choice of song and psalm, O King and God, the life of all worlds.

Reader.--Magnified and sanctified be his great name in the world which he hath created according to his will. May he establish his kingdom during your life and during your days, and during the life of all the house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

Cong. and Reader.--Let his great name be blessed for ever and to all eternity.

Reader.--Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted, extolled and honored, magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One, blessed be he; though he be high above all the blessings and hymns, praises and consolations, which are uttered in the world; and say ye. Amen.

[p. 186]

Reader.--Bless ye the Lord who is to be blessed.

Cong. and Reader.--Blessed is the Lord who is to be blessed for ever and ever.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who formest light and createst darkness, who makest peace and createst all things.

Congregation in an undertone.

Blessed, praised, glorified, exalted and extolled be the name of the supreme King of kings, the Holy One, blessed be he, who is the first and the last, and beside him there is no God. Extol ye, him that rideth upon the heavens by his name Jah, and rejoice be, fore him. His name is exalted above all blessing and praise. Blessed be His name, whose glorious kingdom is for ever and ever. Let the name of the Lord be blessed from this time forth and for evermore.

 [**] On Festivals falling, on week-days say, "Who in mercy."

All shall thank thee, and all shall praise thee, and all shall say, There is none holy like the Lord. All shall extol thee for ever, thou Creator of all things, O God who openest every day the doors of the gates of the East, and cleavest the windows of the firmament, bringing forth the sun from his place, and the moon from her dwelling,

[p. 187]

giving light to the whole world and to its inhabitants whom thou createst by thy attribute of mercy. In mercy thou givest light to the earth and to there that dwell thereon, and in thy goodness renewest the creation every day continually; O King, who alone wast exalted from aforetime, praised, glorified and extolled from days of old. O everlasting God, in thine abundant mercies, have mercy upon us, Lord of our strength, Rock of our stronghold, Shield of our salvation, thou Stronghold of ours! There is none to be compared unto thee, neither is there any beside thee; there is none but thee: who is like unto thee? There is none to be compared unto thee, O Lord our God, in this world, neither is there any beside thee, O our King, for the life of the world to come; there is none but thee, O our Redeemer, for the days of the Messiah; neither is there any like unto thee. O our Saviour, for the resurrection of the dead.

God, the Lord over all works, blessed is he, and ever to be blessed by the mouth of everything that hath breath. His greatness and goodness fill the universe; knowledge and understanding surround him: he is exalted above the holy Chayoth and is adorned in glory above the celestial chariot [**]: purity and rectitude are before his throne,

[p. 188]

lovingkindness and tender mercy before his glory. The luminaries are good which our God hath created: he formed them with knowledge, understanding and discernment; he gave them might and power to rule in the midst of the world. They are full of lustre, and they radiate brightness: beautiful is their lustre throughout all the world. They rejoice in their going forth, and are glad in their returning; they perform with awe the will of their Master. Glory and honor they render unto his name, exultation and rejoicing at the remembrance of his sovereignty. He called unto the sun, and it shone forth in light: he looked, and ordained the figure of the moon. All the hosts on high render praise unto him, the Seraphim, the Ophanim and the holy Chayoth ascribing glory and greatness

To the God who rested from all his works, and on the seventh day exalted himself and sat upon the throne of his glory; who robed himself in glory on the day of rest, and called the Sabbath day a delight. This is the praise of the Sabbath day, that God rested thereon from all his work, when the Sabbath day itself offered praise and said, "A Psalm, a song of the Sabbath day, It is good to give thanks into the Lord." [**] Therefore let all his creatures glorify and bless God; let them render praise, honor

[p. 189]

and greatness to the God and King who is Creator of all things, and who, in his holiness, giveth an inheritance of rest to his people Israel on the holy Sabbath day. Thy name, O Lord our God, shall be hallowed, and thy remembrance, O our King, shall be glorified in heaven above and on earth beneath. Be thou blessed, O our Savior, for the excellency of thy handiwork, and for the bright luminaries which thou hast made: they shall glorify thee for ever.

Be thou blessed, O our Rock, our King and Redeemer, Creator of holy beings, praised be thy name for ever, O our King; Creator of ministering spirits, all of whom stand in the heights of the universe, and proclaim with awe in unison aloud the words of the living God and everlasting King. All of them are beloved, pure and mighty, and all of them in dread and awe do the will of their Master: and all of them open their mouths in holiness and purity, with song and psalm, while they bless and praise, glorify and reverence, sanctify and ascribe sovereignty to--

[p. 190]

The name of the Divine King, the great, mighty and dreaded One, holy is he; and they all take upon themselves the yoke of the kingdom of heaven one from the other, and give sanction to one another to hallow their Creator: in tranquil joy of spirit, with pure speech and holy melody they all respond in unison, and exclaim with awe:

Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts: the whole earth is full of his glory.

And the Ophanim and the holy Chayoth with a noise of great rushing, upraising themselves towards the Seraphim, thus over against them offer praise and say:

Blessed be the glory of the Lord from his place.

To the blessed God they offer pleasant melodies; to the King, the living and ever-enduring God, they utter hymns and make their praises heard; for he alone performeth mighty deeds, and maketh new things; he is the Lord of battles; he soweth righteousness, causeth salvation to spring forth, createth remedies, and is revered in praises. He is the Lord of wonders, who in his goodness reneweth the creation every day continually; as it is said, (O give thanks) to him that maketh great lights, for his lovingkindness

[p. 191]

endureth for ever. O cause a new light to shine upon Zion, and may we all be worthy soon to enjoy its brightness. Blessed art thou, O Lord, Creator of the luminaries.

With abounding love hast thou loved us, O Lord our God, with great and exceeding pity hast thou pitied us. O our Father, our King, for our fathers' sake, who trusted in thee, and whom thou didst teach the statutes of life, be also gracious unto us and teach us. O our Father, merciful Father, ever-compassionate, have mercy upon us: O put it into our hearts to understand and to discern, to mark, learn and teach, to heed, to do and to fulfil in love all the words of instruction in thy Law. Enlighten our eyes in thy Law, and let our hearts cleave to thy commandments, and unite our hearts to love and fear thy name, so that we be never put to shame. Because we have trusted in thy holy, great and revered name, we shall rejoice and be glad in thy salvation. O bring us in peace from the four corners of the earth, and make us go upright to our land; for thou art a God who worketh salvation. Thou hast chosen us from all peoples and tongues, and hast brought us near unto thy great name for ever in faithfulness, that we might in love give thanks unto thee and proclaim thy unity. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who hast chosen thy people Israel in love.

[p. 192]

When Prayers are not said with the Congregation, add:--

God, faithful King!

Deut. vi. 4-9.

Hear, O Israel: the Lord our God, the Lord is One.

Blessed be His name, whose glorious kingdom is for ever and ever.

And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might. And these words, which I command thee this day, shall be upon thine heart: and thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up. And thou shalt bind them for a sign -upon thine hand, and they shall be for frontlets between thine eyes. And thou shalt write them upon the door posts of thy house, and upon thy gates.

Deut. xi. 13-21.

And it shall come to pass, if ye shall hearken diligently unto my commandments which I command you this day, to love the Lord your God.

[p. 193]

and to serve him with all your heart and with all your soul, that I will give the rain of your land in its season, the former rain and the latter rain, that thou mayest gather in thy corn, and thy wine, and thine oil. And I will give grass in thy field for thy cattle, and thou shalt eat and be satisfied. Take heed to yourselves, lest your heart be deceived and ye turn aside, and serve other gods, and worship them; and the anger of the Lord be kindled against you, and he shut up the heaven, that there be no rain, and the land yield not her fruit; and ye perish quickly from off the good land which the Lord giveth you. Therefore shall ye lay up these my words in your heart and in your soul; and ye shall bind them for a sign upon your hand, and they shall be for frontlets between your eyes. And ye shall teach them your children, talking of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up. And thou shalt write them upon the door posts of thine house, and upon thy gates: that your

[p. 194]

days may be multiplied, and the days of your children, upon the land which the Lord sware unto your fathers to give them, as the days of the heavens above the earth.

Numbers xv. 37-41.

And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Speak unto the children of Israel,. and bid them that they make them a fringe upon the corners of their garments throughout their generations, and that they put upon the fringe of each corner a cord of blue: and it shall be unto you for a fringe, that ye may look upon it, and remember all the commandments of the Lord, and do them; and that ye go not about after your own heart and your own eyes, after which ye use to go astray: that ye may remember and do all my commandments, and be holy unto your God. I am the Lord your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, to be your God: I am the Lord your God.

[p. 195]

True and firm, established and enduring, right and faithful, beloved and precious, desirable and pleasant, revered and mighty, well-ordered and acceptable, good and beautiful is this thy word unto us for ever and ever. It is true, the God of the universe is our King, the Rock of Jacob, the Shield of our salvation: throughout all generations he endureth and his name endureth; his throne is established, and his kingdom and his faithfulness endure for ever. His words also live and endure; they are faithful and desirable for ever and to all eternity, as for our fathers so also for us, our children, our generations, and for all the generations of the seed of Israel his servants.

For the first and for the last ages thy word is good and endureth for ever and ever; it is true and trust, worthy, a statute which shall not pass away. True it is that thou art indeed the Lord our God and the God of our fathers, our King, our fathers' King, our Redeemer, the Redeemer of our fathers, our Maker, the Rock of our salvation; our Deliverer and Rescuer from everlasting, such is thy name; there is no God beside thee.

Thou hast been the help of our fathers from of old, a Shield and Savior to their children after them in every generation: in the heights of the universe is thy habitation, and thy judgments and thy righteousness reach to the furthest ends of the earth. Happy is the man who hearkeneth unto thy commandments, and layeth up thy Law and thy word in his heart.

[p. 196]

[paragraph continues] True it is that thou art indeed the Lord of thy people, and a mighty King to plead their cause. True it is that thou art indeed the first and thou art the last beside thee we have no King, Redeemer and Savior. From Egypt thou didst redeem us, O Lord our God, and from the house of bondmen thou didst deliver us; all their first-born thou didst slay, but thy first-born thou didst redeem; thou didst divide the Red Sea, and drown the proud; but thou madest the beloved to pass through, while the waters covered their adversaries, not one of whom was left. Wherefore the beloved praised and extolled God, and offered hymns, songs, praises, blessings and thanksgivings to the King and God, who liveth and endureth; who is high and exalted, great and revered; who bringeth low the haughty, and raiseth up the lowly, leadeth forth the prisoners, delivereth the meek, helpeth the poor, and answereth his people when they cry unto him; even praises to the Most High God, blessed is he, and ever to be blessed. Moses and the children of Israel sang a song unto thee with great joy, saying. all of them,

Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the mighty ones? Who is like unto thee, glorious in holiness, revered in praises, doing marvels?

[p. 197]

With a new song the redeemed people offered praise unto thy name at the sea shore; they all gave thanks in unison, and proclaimed thy sovereignty, and said,

The Lord shall reign for ever and ever.

O Rock of Israel, arise to the help of Israel, and deliver, according to thy promise, Judah and Israel. Our Redeemer, the Lord of hosts is his name, the Holy One of Israel. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who hast redeemed Israel.

The following Prayer (Amidah) to "as in ancient years," <page 206>, is to be said standing.

O Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall declare thy praise.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, God of Abraham, God of Isaac, and God of Jacob, the great, mighty and revered God, the most high God, who bestowest lovingkindnesses, and possessest all things; who rememberest the pious deeds of the patriarchs, and in love wilt bring a redeemer to their children's children for thy name's sake.

On the Sabbath of Penitence say:--

Remember us unto life, O King, who delightest in life, and inscribe us in the book of life, for thine own sake, O living God.

O King, Helper, Saviour and Shield. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the Shield of Abraham.

[p. 198]

Thou, O Lord, art mighty for ever, thou quickenest the dead, thou art mighty to save.

From the Sabbath after the Eighth Day of Solemn Assembly until the First Day of Passover, say:--

Thou causest the wind to blow and the rain to fall.

Thou sustainest the living with lovingkindness, quickenest the dead with great mercy, supportest the falling, healest the sick, loosest the bound, and keepest thy faith to them that sleep in the dust. Who is like unto thee, Lord of mighty acts, and who resembleth thee, O King, who killest and quickenest, and causest salvation to spring forth?

On the Sabbath of Penitence say:--

Who is like unto thee, Father of mercy, who in mercy rememberest thy creatures unto life?

Yea, faithful art thou to quicken the dead. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who quickenest the dead. * (See page <page 199>).

Thou art holy, and thy name is holy, and holy beings praise thee daily. (Selah.) Blessed art thou, O Lord, the holy God.

On the Sabbath of Penitence conclude the Blessing thus:--

the Holy King.

[p. 199]

When the Reader repeats the Amidah, the following is said, to "holy God," <page 200>.

* Reader.--We will sanctify thy name in the world even as they sanctify it in the highest heavens, as it is written by the hand of thy prophet: And they called one unto the other and said,

Cong.--Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts: the whole earth is full of his glory.

Reader.--Then with a noise of great rushing, mighty and strong, they make their voices heard, and, upraising themselves toward the Seraphim, they exclaim over against them, Blessed--

Cong.--Blessed be the glory of the Lord from his place.

Reader.--From thy place shine forth, O our King, and reign over us, for we wait for thee. When wilt thou reign in Zion? Speedily, even in our days, do thou dwell there, and for ever. Mayest thou be magnified and sanctified in the midst of Jerusalem thy city throughout all generations and to all eternity. O let our eyes behold thy kingdom, according to the word that was spoken in the songs of thy might by David, thy righteous anointed:

Cong.--The Lord shall reign for ever, thy God, O Zion, unto all generations. Praise ye the Lord.

[p. 200]

Reader.--Unto all generations we will declare thy greatness, and to all eternity we will proclaim thy holiness, and thy praise, O our God, shall not depart from our mouth for ever, for thou art a great and holy God and King. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the holy God.

On the Sabbath of Penitence conclude the Blessing thus:--

the holy King.

Moses rejoiced in the gift of his portion, for thou didst call him a faithful servant: a diadem of glory didst thou place upon his head, when he stood before thee upon Mount Sinai; and in his hand he brought down the two tables of stone, upon which the observance of the Sabbath was prescribed, and. thus it is written in thy Law:

Exodus xxxi. 16, 17.

And the children of Israel shall keep the Sabbath, to observe the Sabbath throughout their generations, for an everlasting covenant. It is a sign between me and the children of Israel for ever, that in six days the Lord made the heavens and the earth, and on the seventh day he rested, and ceased from his work.

[p. 201]

And thou didst not give it, O Lord our God, unto the nations of other lands, nor didst thou, O our King, make it the heritage of worshipers of idols, nor do the uncircumcised dwell in its rest; but unto thy people Israel thou didst give it in love, unto the seed of Jacob whom thou didst choose. The people that hallow the seventh day, even all of them shall be satiated and delighted with thy goodness, seeing that thou didst find pleasure in the seventh day, and didst hallow it; thou didst call it the desirable of days, in remembrance of the creation.

Our God and God of our fathers, accept our rest; sanctify us by thy commandments, and grant our portion in thy Law; satisfy us with thy goodness, and gladden us with thy salvation; purify our hearts to serve thee in truth; and in thy love and favor, O Lord our God, let us inherit thy holy Sabbath; and may Israel, who hallow thy name, rest thereon. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who hallowest the Sabbath,

[p. 202]

Accept, O Lord our God, thy people Israel and their prayer; restore the service to the oracle of thy house; receive in love and favor both the fire-offerings of Israel and their prayer; and may the service of thy people Israel be ever acceptable unto thee.

On New Moon and the Intermediate Days of Passover and Tabernacles say:--

Our God and God of our fathers! May our  rise, come and be accepted before thee, with the remembrance of our fathers, of Messiah the son of David thy servant, of Jerusalem thy holy city, and of all thy people the house of Israel, bringing deliverance and well-being, grace, lovingkindness and mercy, life and peace on this day of

On New Moon say:--

the New Moon.

On Passover--

the Feast of Unleavened Bread.

On Tabernacles--

the Feast of Tabernacles.

Remember us, O Lord our God, thereon for our wellbeing; he mindful of us for blessing and save us unto life: by thy promise of salvation and mercy, spare us and be gracious unto us; have mercy upon us and save Is; for our eyes are bent upon thee, because thou art a gracious and merciful God and King.

And let our eyes behold thy return in mercy to Zion. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who restorest thy divine presence unto Zion,

[p. 203]

Congregation in an undertone--

We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God and the God of our fathers, the God of all flesh, our Creator and the Creator of all things in the beginning. Blessings and thanksgivings be to thy great and holy name, because thou hast kept us in life and hast preserved us; so mayest thou continue to keep us in life and to preserve us. O gather our exiles to thy holy courts to observe thy statutes, to do thy will, and to serve thee with a perfect heart; seeing that we give thanks unto thee. Blessed be the God to whom thanksgivings are due.

We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God and the God of our fathers for ever and ever; thou art the Rock of our lives, the Shield of our salvation through every generation. We will give thanks unto thee and declare thy praise for our lives which are committed into thy hand, and for our souls which are in thy charge, and for thy miracles, which are daily with us, and for thy wonders and thy benefits, which are wrought at all times, evening, morn and noon. O thou who art all-good, whose mercies fail not; thou, merciful Being, whose lovingkindnesses never cease, we have ever hoped in thee.

(On Chanukah say "We thank thee also," etc. <page 63>.)

[p. 204]

For all these things thy name, O our King shall be continually blessed and exalted for ever and ever.

On the Sabbath of Penitence say:--

O inscribe all the children of thy covenant for a happy life.

And everything that liveth shall give thanks unto thee for ever, and shall praise thy name in truth, O God, our salvation and our help. Blessed art thou, O Lord, whose name is All-good, and unto whom it is becoming to give thanks.

At the repetition of the Amidah by the Reader the following is introduced:--

Our God and God of our fathers, bless us with the three-fold blessing of thy Law written by the hand of Moses thy servant, which was spoken by Aaron and his sons, the priests, thy holy people, as it is said, The Lord bless thee, and keep thee: the Lord make his face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee: the Lord turn his face unto thee, and give thee peace.

Grant peace, welfare, blessing, grace, lovingkindness and mercy unto us and unto all Israel, thy people. Bless us, O our Father, even all of us together, with the light of thy countenance; for by the light of thy countenance thou hast given us, O Lord our God, the Law

[p. 205]

of life, lovingkindness and righteousness, blessing, mercy, life and peace; and may it be good in thy sight to bless thy people Israel at all times and in every hour with thy peace.

On the Sabbath of Penitence say:--

In the book of life, blessing, peace and good sustenance may we be remembered and inscribed before thee, we and all thy people the house of Israel, for a happy life and for peace. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who makest peace.

Blessed art thou, O Lord, who blessest thy people Israel with peace.

O my God! guard my tongue from evil and my lips from speaking guile; and to such as curse me let my soul be dumb, yea, let my soul be unto all as the dust. Open my heart to thy Law, and let my soul pursue thy commandments. If any design evil against me, speedily make their counsel of none effect, and frustrate their designs. Do it for the sake of thy name, do it for the sake of thy right hand, do it for the sake of thy holiness, do it for the sake of thy Law. In order that thy beloved ones may be delivered, O save with thy right hand, and answer me. Let the words of my mouth

[p. 206]

and the meditation of my heart be acceptable before thee, O Lord, my Rock and my Redeemer. He who

maketh peace in his high places, may he make peace for us and for all Israel, and say ye, Amen.

May it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, that the temple be speedily rebuilt in our days, and grant our portion in thy Law. And there we will serve thee with awe, as in the days of old, and as in ancient years. Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in ancient years.

On New Moon, Festivals, the Intermediate Days of Festivals and on Chanukah, Hallel, <page 313>, is said after the Amidah

Reader.--Magnified and sanctified be his great name in the world which he hath created according to his will. May he establish his kingdom during your life and during your days, and during the life of all the house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

Cong. and Reader.--Let his great name be blessed for ever and to all eternity.

Reader.--Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted, extolled and honored, magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One, blessed be he; though he be high above all the blessings and hymns, praises and consolations, which are uttered in the world; and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--Accept our prayer in mercy and in favor.

Reader.--May the prayers and supplications of all Israel be accepted by their Father who is in heaven; and say ye, Amen.

[p. 207]

Cong.--Let the name of the Lord be blessed from this time forth and for evermore.

Reader.--May there be abundant peace from heaven and life for us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--My help is from the Lord, who made heaven and earth.

Reader.--He who maketh peace in his high places, may he make peace for us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

Footnotes

^186:* On Festivals falling on Week-days.

Who in mercy givest light to the earth and to them that dwell thereon, and in thy goodness re-newest the creation every day continually. How manifold are thy works, O Lord! In wisdom hast thou made them all: the earth is full of thy possessions. O King, who alone wast exalted [p. 187] from aforetime, praised, glorified and extolled from days of old; O everlasting God, in thine abundant mercies, have mercy upon us, Lord of our strength Rock of our stronghold, Shield of our salvation, thou Stronghold of ours! The blessed God, great in knowledge, prepared and formed the rays of the sun: it was a boon he produced as a glory to his name: he set the luminaries round about his strength. The chiefs of his hosts are holy beings that exalt the Almighty, and continually [p. 189] declare the glory of God and his holiness. Be thou blessed, O Lord our God, for the excellency of thy handiwork, and for the bright luminaries which thou hast made: they shall glorify thee for ever.

Continue "Be thou blessed," see above.

^187:* Cf. Talmud Babli, Tr. Chagigah, 13 b.

^188:* Midrash Tillim.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

ORDER OF READING THE LAW ON SABBATHS AND FESTIVALS.

There is none like unto thee among the gods, O Lord; and there are no works like unto thine. Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion endureth throughout all generations. The Lord reigneth; the Lord hath reigned; the Lord shall reign for ever and ever. The Lord will give strength unto his people; the Lord will bless his people with peace.

Father of mercies, do good in thy favor unto Zion; build thou the walls of Jerusalem. For in thee alone do we trust, O King, high and exalted God, Lord of worlds.

The Ark is Opened.

Reader and Cong.--And it came to pass, when the ark set forward, that Moses said, Rise up, O Lord, and thine enemies shall be scattered, and they that hate thee shall flee before thee. For out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.

[p. 208]

The Reader takes the Scroll of the Law and Says:--

Blessed be he who in his holiness gave the Law to his people Israel.

In some Congregations the following is said:--

Zohar, Parshath Vayakhel.

Blessed be the name of the Sovereign of the universe. Blessed be thy crown and thy abiding-place. Let thy favor rest with thy people Israel for ever: show them the redemption of thy right hand in thy holy temple. Vouchsafe unto us the benign gift of thy light, and in mercy accept our supplications. May it be thy will to prolong our life in well-being. Let me also be numbered among the righteous, so that thou mayest be merciful unto me, and have me in thy keeping, with all that belong to me and to thy people Israel. Thou art he that feedeth and sustaineth all; thou art he that ruleth over all; thou art he that ruleth over kings, for dominion is thine. I am the servant of the Holy One, blessed be he, before whom and before whose glorious Law I prostrate myself at all times: not in man do I put my trust, nor upon any angel do I rely, but upon the God of heaven, who is the God of truth, and whose Law is truth, and whose prophets are prophets of truth, and who aboundeth in deeds of goodness and truth. In him I put my trust, and unto his holy and glorious name I utter praises. May it be thy will to open my heart unto thy Law, and to fulfil the wishes of my heart and of the hearts of all thy people Israel for good, for life, and for peace.

[p. 209]

On Festivals the following is said:--

The Lord, the Lord is a merciful and gracious God, slow to anger and abounding in lovingkindness and truth; keeping lovingkindness for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin. (To be said three times.)

Lord of the universe, fulfil the wishes of my heart for good; grant my desire, give me my request, even unto me, thy servant, -- the son of -- (thy maid servant -- the daughter of --), and make me worthy (together with my wife,) (my husband,) (my children,) to do thy will with a perfect heart; and deliver me from the evil inclination. O grant our portion in thy Law; make us worthy to have thy divine presence abiding with us; vouchsafe unto us the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and fear of the Lord. So also may it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, that I may be fitted to do such deeds as are good in thy sight, and to walk in the way of the upright before thee. Sanctify us by thy commandments, that we may merit the long and blessed life of the world to come: guard us from evil deeds, and also from evil hours that visit and afflict this world. As for him who trusteth in the Lord, let lovingkindness surround him Amen.

Let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart be acceptable before thee, O Lord, my Rock and my Redeemer.

And as for me, may my prayer unto thee, O Lord, be in an acceptable time: O God, in the abundance of thy lovingkindness, answer me in the truth of thy salvation.

(This verse is said three times.)

[p. 210]

The Reader takes the Scroll of the Law, and the following is said:--

Reader and Cong.--Hear, O Israel: the Lord our God, the Lord is One.

Reader and Cong.--One is our God; great is our Lord; holy is his name.

Reader.--Magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his name together.

Reader and Cong.--Thine, O Lord, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the victory, and the majesty: for all that is in the heaven and in the earth is thine; thine, O Lord, is the kingdom, and the supremacy as head over all. Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship at his footstool: holy is he. Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship at his holy mount; for the Lord our God is holy.

Magnified and hallowed, praised and glorified, exalted and extolled above all be the name of the Supreme King of Kings, the Holy One, blessed be he, in the worlds which he hath created,--this world and the world to come,--in accordance with his desire, and with the desire of them that fear him, and of all the house of Israel: the Rock everlasting, the Lord of all creatures, the God of all souls, who dwelleth in the wide-extended heights, who inhabiteth the heaven of heavens of old; whose holiness is above the Chayoth and above the throne of glory. Now, therefore, thy name, O Lord our God, shall be hallowed amongst us

[p. 211]

in the sight of all living. Let us sing a new song be, fore him, as it is written, Sing unto God, sing praises unto his name, extol ye him that rideth upon the heavens by his name Jah, and exult before him. And may we see him, eye to eye, when he returneth to his habitation, as it is written, For they shall see eye to eye, when the Lord returneth unto Zion. And it is said, And the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together; for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it.

May the Father of mercy have mercy upon a people that have been borne by him. May he remember the covenant with the patriarchs, deliver our souls from evil hours, check the evil inclination in them that have been carried by him, grant us of his grace an everlasting deliverance, and in the attribute of his goodness fulfil our desires by salvation and mercy.

The Scroll of the Law is placed upon the desk, and the Reader says the following:--

And may he help, shield and save all who trust in him, and let us say, Amen. Ascribe all of you greatness unto our God, and render honor to the Law.

Here the Reader names the Person who is called to the Reading of the Law.

Blessed be he, who in his holiness gave the Law unto his people Israel. The Law of the Lord is perfect, restoring the soul: the testimony of the Lord is faithful, making wise the simple. The precepts of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart: the commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes. The Lord will give strength unto his people,

[p. 212]

the Lord will bless his people with peace. As for God his way is perfect: the word of the Lord is tried: he is a shield unto all them that trust in him.

Cong. and Reader.--And ye that cleave unto the Lord your God are alive every one of you this day.

Those who are called to the Reading of the Law say the following Blessing:--

Bless ye the Lord who is to be blessed.

Cong.--Blessed be the Lord, who is to be blessed for ever and ever.

The Response of the Congregation is repeated, and the Blessing continued:--

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast chosen us from all peoples, and hast given us thy Law. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who givest the Law.

After the reading of a Section of the Law, the following Blessing is said:--

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who east given us the Law of truth, and hath planted everlasting life in our midst. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who givest the Law.

[p. 213]

Persons who have been in peril of their lives, during journeys by sea or land, in captivity or sickness, upon their deliverance or recovery say the following, after the conclusion of the last Blessing:--

"Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who vouchsafest benefits unto the undeserving, who hast also vouchsafed all good unto me.

The Congregation respond:--

He who hath vouchsafed all good unto thee, may he vouchsafe all good unto thee for ever.

The following is said by the Father of a Bar-Mitzvah, when the latter has concluded the Blessing after having been called to the Reading of the Law.

Blessed be he who hath freed me from the responsibility for this child.

After the Reading of the Law, the Scroll is held up, and the Congregation say the following:--

And this is the Law which Moses set before the children of Israel, according to the commandment of the Lord by the hand of Moses. It is a tree of life to them that grasp it, and of them that uphold it every one is rendered happy. Its ways are ways of pleasantness, and all its paths are peace. Length of days is in its right hand; in its left hand are riches and honor. It pleased the Lord, for his righteousness' sake, to magnify the Law and to make it honorable.

Before the Lesson from the Prophets the following is said:--

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast chosen good prophets, and hast found pleasure in their words which were spoken

[p. 214]

in truth. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who hast chosen the Law, and Moses thy servant, and Israel thy people, and prophets of truth and righteousness.

After the Lesson from the Prophets the following is said:--

 art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, Rock of all worlds, righteous through all generations, O faithful God, who sayest and doest, who speakest and fulfillest, all whose words are truth and righteousness. Faithful art thou, O Lord our God, and faithful are thy words, and not one of thy words shall return void, for thou art a faithful and merciful God and King. Blessed art thou, O Lord, God, who art faithful in all thy words.

Have mercy upon Zion, for it is the home of our life, and save her that is grieved in spirit speedily, even iii our days. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who makest Zion joyful through her children.

Gladden us, O Lord our God, with Elijah the prophet, thy servant, and with the kingdom of the house of David, thine anointed. Soon may he come and rejoice our hearts. Suffer not a stranger to sit upon his throne, nor let others any longer inherit his glory; for by thy holy name thou didst swear unto him, that his right should not be quenched for ever. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the Shield of David.

[p. 215]

On Sabbaths, including the Intermediate Sabbath of Passover, say:--

For the Law, for the divine service, for the prophets, and for this Sabbath day, which thou, O Lord our God, hast given us for holiness and for rest, for honor and for glory.

For all these we thank and bless thee, O Lord our God, blessed be thy name by the mouth of every living being continually and for ever. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who sanctifiest the Sabbath.

On the Three Festivals, as also on the Intermediate Sabbath of Tabernacles, say:--

For the Law, for the divine service, for the prophets; On the Sabbath; for this Sabbath day,

On Passover say--

and for this day of the Feast of Unleavened Bread.

On Pentecost--

and for this day of the Feast of Weeks.

On Tabernacles--

and for this day of the Feast of Tabernacles.

On the Eighth Day of Solemn Assembly: and for this Eighth-day feast of Solemn Assembly, which thou, O Lord our God, hast given us (on Sabbath add, for holiness and for rest,) for joy and gladness, for honor and glory,--f or all these we thank and bless thee, O Lord our God, blessed be thy name by the mouth of every living being continually and for ever. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who sanctifiest (on Sabbath add, the Sabbath) Israel and the Festivals.

[p. 216]

On the New Year say:--

For the Law, for the divine service, for the prophets (on Sabbath add, and for this Sabbath Day), and for this Day of Memorial, which thou, O Lord our God, hast given us (on Sabbath add, for holiness and for rest) for honor and glory--for all these we thank and bless thee, O Lord our God, blessed be thy name by the mouth of every living being continually and for ever thy word is true and endureth for ever. Blessed art thou, O Lord, King over the whole earth, who sanctifiest (on Sabbath add, the Sabbath) Israel and the Day of Memorial.

On the Day of Atonement say:--

For the Law, for the divine service, for the prophets (on Sabbath add, for this Sabbath day), and for this Day of Atonement, which thou, O Lord our God, hast given us (on Sabbath add, for holiness and for rest) for forgiveness, pardon and atonement, for honor and for glory--for all these we thank and bless thee, O Lord our God, blessed be thy name by the mouth of every living being continually and for ever: thy word is true and endureth for ever. Blessed art thou, O Lord, thou King, who pardonest and forgivest our iniquities and the iniquities of thy people, the house of Israel, and makest our trespasses to pass away year by year; King over the whole earth, who sanctifiest (on Sabbath add, the Sabbath) Israel and the Day of Atonement

The following three paragraphs are not said on Festivals occurring on Week-days.

May salvation from heaven, with grace, lovingkindness, mercy, long life, ample sustenance, heavenly aid.

[p. 217]

health of body, a higher enlightenment, and a living and abiding offspring, that will not break with, for neglect any of the words of the Law, be vouchsafed unto the teachers and rabbins of the holy community, who are in the land of Israel, and in the land of Babylon, and in all the lands of our dispersion; unto the heads of the academies, the chiefs of the captivity, the heads of the colleges, and the judges in the gates; unto all their disciples, unto all the disciples of their disciples, and unto all who occupy themselves with the study of the Law. May the King of the universe bless them, prolong their lives, increase their days, and add to their years, and may they be saved and delivered from every trouble and mishap. May the Lord of heaven be their help at all times and seasons; and let us say, Amen.

The following two paragraphs are only said when Service is held with a Congregation.

May salvation from heaven, with grace, lovingkindness, mercy, long life, ample sustenance, heavenly aid, health of body, a higher enlightenment, and a living and abiding offspring, that will not break with nor neglect any of the words of the Law, be vouchsafed

[p. 218]

unto all this holy congregation, great and small, children and women. May the King of the universe bless you, prolong your lives, increase your days and add to your years, and may you be saved and delivered from every trouble and mishap. May the Lord of heaven be your help at all times and seasons; and let us say, Amen.

May he who blessed our fathers, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, bless all this holy congregation, together with all other holy congregations: them, their wives, their sons and daughters, and all that belong to them; those also who unite to form Synagogues for prayer, and those who enter therein to pray; those who give the lamps for lighting, and wine for Kiddush and Habdalah, bread to the wayfarers, and charity to the poor, and all such as occupy themselves in faithfulness with the wants of the congregation. May the Holy One, blessed be he, give them their recompense; may he remove from them all sickness, heal all their body, forgive all their iniquity, and send blessing and prosperity upon all the work of their hands, as well as upon all Israel, their brethren; and let us say, Amen.

[p. 219]

The Reader takes the Scroll of the Law, and says the following Prayer for the Government.

He who giveth salvation unto kings and dominion unto princes, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, who delivered his servant David from the hurtful sword, who maketh a way in the sea and a path in the mighty waters.--may he bless, guard, protect, and help, exalt, magnify, and highly aggrandize

THE CONSTITUTED OFFICERS OF THIS GOVERNMENT.

May the Supreme King of Kings in his mercy preserve them in life and deliver them from all trouble and hurt. May the Supreme King of Kings in his mercy exalt them and raise them on high, and grant them a long and prosperous rule. May the Supreme King of Kings in his mercy inspire them and all their counsellors and officers with benevolence toward us, and all Israel our brethren. In their days and in ours may Judah be saved and Israel dwell securely; and may the redeemer come unto Zion. O that this may be his will, and let us say, Amen.

On the Sabbath preceding New Moon the following is said:--

May it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, to renew unto us this coming month for good and for Blessing.

[p. 220]

O grant us long life, a life of peace, of good, of blessing, of sustenance, of bodily vigor, a life marked by the fear of Heaven and the dread of sin, a life free from shame and reproach, a life of prosperity and honor, a life in which the love of the Law and the fear of Heaven shall cleave to us, a life in which the desires of our heart shall be fulfilled for good. Amen. (Selah.)

Reader.--He who wrought miracles for our fathers, and redeemed them from slavery unto freedom, may he speedily redeem us, and gather our exiles from the four corners of the earth, even all Israel united in fellowship; and let us say, Amen.

The New Moon of (naming the month) will be on (naming the day or days). May it come to us and to all Israel for good.

Cong. and Reader.--May the Holy One, blessed be he, renew it unto us and unto all his people, the house of Israel, for life and peace, for gladness and joy, for salvation and consolation; and let us say, Amen.

[p. 221]

In many Congregations the following is said only on the Sabbaths preceding  and the Fast of the Ninth of Ab:--

May the Father of mercies, who dwelleth on high in his mighty compassion, remember those loving, upright and blameless ones, the holy congregations, who laid down their lives for the sanctification of the divine name, who were lovely and pleasant in their lives, and in their death were not divided; swifter than eagles, stronger than lions to do the will of their Master and the desire of their Rock. May our God remember them for good with the other righteous of the world, and avenge the blood of his servants which hath been shed; as it is written in the Law of Moses, the man of God, Rejoice, O ye nations, with his people, for he will avenge the blood of his servants, and will render vengeance to his adversaries, and will make atonement for his land and for his people. And by the hands of thy servants, the prophets, it is written saying, I will cleanse their blood that I have not yet cleansed: for the Lord dwelleth in Zion. And in the Holy Writings it is said, Wherefore should the nations say, Where is their God? Let there be made known among the nations in our sight the revenging of the blood of thy servants which hath been shed. And it is said, For he that maketh inquisition for blood remembereth them; he forgetteth not the cry of the humble. And it is further said, He judgeth among the nations; the land is full of corpses: he smiteth the head over a wide land. He drinketh of the brook in the way: therefore shall he lift up the head.

Happy are they that dwell in thy house: they will be ever praising thee. (Selah.)

Happy is the people, that is in such a case: happy is the people, whose God is the Lord.

Psalm cxlv. A Psalm of Praise: of David.

I will extol thee, my God, O King; and I will bless thy name for ever and ever.

[p. 222]

Every day will I bless thee; and I will praise thy name for ever and ever.

Great is the Lord, and exceedingly to be praised; and his greatness is unsearchable.

One generation shall laud thy works to another, and shall declare thy mighty acts.

On the majestic glory of thy grandeur, and on thy marvellous deeds, will I meditate.

And men shall speak of the might of thy awful acts; and I will recount thy greatness.

They shall pour forth the fame of thy great goodness, and shall exult in thy righteousness.

The Lord is gracious and merciful; slow to anger and of great lovingkindness.

The Lord is good to all; and his tender mercies are over all his works.

All thy works shall give thanks unto thee, O Lord; and thy loving ones shall bless thee.

They shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom, and talk of thy power.

To make known to the sons of men his mighty acts, and the majestic glory of his kingdom.

Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion endureth throughout all generations.

The Lord upholdeth all that fall, and raiseth up all those that are bowed down.

The eyes of all wait upon thee; and thou givest them their food in due season.

Thou openest thine hand and satisfiest every living thing with favor.

The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and loving in all his works.

[p. 223]

The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon hire to all that call upon him in truth.

He will fulfil the desire of them that fear him; he also will hear their cry, and will save them.

The Lord guardeth all them that love him; but all the wicked will he destroy.

My mouth shall speak of the praise of the Lord; and let all flesh bless his holy name for ever and ever.

But we will bless the Lord from this time forth and for evermore. Praise ye the Lord.

On returning the Scroll of the Law to the Ark the Reader says:--

Let them praise the name of the Lord; for his name alone is exalted:

Congregation.--His grandeur is above the earth and heaven: and he hath lifted up a horn for his people, to the praise of all his loving ones, even of the children of Israel, the people near unto him. Praise ye the Lord.

On Sabbaths and on Festivals occurring on Sabbaths say:--

Psalm xxix.

A Psalm of David. Give unto the Lord, O ye children of the mighty, give unto the Lord glory and strength. Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name; worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness. The voice of the Lord is upon the waters: the God of glory thundereth, even the Lord upon the great waters

[p. 224]

[paragraph continues] The voice of the Lord is powerful; the voice of the Lord is full of majesty. The voice of the Lord breaketh the cedars; yea, the Lord breaketh in pieces the cedars of Lebanon. He maketh them also to skip like a calf; Lebanon and Sirion like a young wild-ox. The voice of the Lord cleaveth flames of fire; the voice of the Lord maketh the wilderness to tremble; the Lord maketh tremble the wilderness of Kadesh. The voice of the Lord maketh the hinds to travail, and strippeth the forests bare: and in his temple everything saith, Glory. The Lord sat as king at the flood; yea, the Lord sitteth as king for ever. The Lord will give strength unto his people; the Lord will bless his people with peace.

On Festivals occurring on Week-days say:--

Psalm xxiv.

A Psalm of David. The earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof; the world, and they that dwell therein. For it is he that hath founded it upon the seas, and established it upon the floods. Who may ascend the mountain of the Lord? And who may stand in his holy place? He that hath clean hands and a pure heart; who hath not set his desire upon vanity, and hath not sworn deceitfully. He shall receive a blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of his salvation. This is the generation of them that seek after him, that seek thy face (O God of) Jacob! (Selah.) Lift up your heads, O ye gates; and be ye lifted up, ye everlasting doors, that the King of glory may come in. Who, then, is the King of glory? The Lord strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in battle. Lift up your

[p. 225]

heads, O ye gates; yea, lift them up, ye everlasting doors, that the King of glory may come in. Who, then, is the King of glory? The Lord of hosts, he is the King of glory. (Selah.)

While the Scroll of the Law is being placed in the Ark, the following to "as of old" is said:--

And when it rested, he said, Return, O Lord, unto the ten thousands of the thousands of Israel. Arise, O Lord, unto thy resting place; thou, and the ark of thy strength. Let thy priests be clothed with righteousness; and let thy loving ones shout for joy. For the sake of David thy servant, turn not away the face of thine anointed. For I give you good doctrine; forsake ye not my Law. It is a tree of life to them that grasp it, and of them that uphold it every one is rendered happy. Its ways are ways of pleasantness, and all its paths are peace. Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord, and we shall return: renew our days as of old.

Reader.--Magnified and sanctified be his great name in the world which he hath created according to his will. May he establish his kingdom during your life and during your days, and during the life of all the house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

Cong. and Reader.--Let his great name be blessed for ever and to all eternity.

Reader.--Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted, extolled and honored, magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One, blessed be he; though he be high above all the blessings and hymns, praises and consolations, which are uttered in the world; and say ye, Amen.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 226]

  

ADDITIONAL SERVICE FOR SABBATHS.

For the Additional Service on the Intermediate Sabbath of a Festival see Service for the Festivals.

The following prayer (Amidah) to "as in ancient years," <page 237>, is said standing.

O Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall declare thy praise.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, God of Abraham, God of Isaac and God of Jacob, the great, mighty and revered God, the most high God, who bestowest lovingkindnesses, and possessest all things; who rememberest the pious deeds of the patriarchs, and in love wilt bring a redeemer to their children's children for thy name's sake.

On the Sabbath of Penitence say:--

Remember us unto life, O King, who delightest in life, and inscribe us in the book of life, for thine own sake, O living God.

O King, Helper, Saviour and Shield. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the Shield of Abraham.

Thou, O Lord, art mighty for ever, thou quickenest the dead, thou art mighty to save.

From the Sabbath after the Eighth Day of Solemn Assembly until the First day of Passover say:--

Thou causest the wind to blow and the rain to fall.

[p. 227]

Thou sustainest the living with lovingkindness, quickenest the dead with great mercy, supportest the falling, healest the sick, loosest the bound, and keepest thy faith to them that sleep in the dust Who is like unto thee, Lord of mighty acts, and who resembleth thee, O King, who killest and quickenest, and causest salvation to spring forth?

On the Sabbath of Penitence say:--

Who is like unto thee, Father of mercy, who in mercy rememberest thy creatures unto life?

Yea, faithful art thou to quicken the dead. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who quickenest the dead. [**]

Thou art holy, and thy name is holy, and holy beings praise thee daily. (Selah.) Blessed art thou, O Lord, the holy God.

On the Sabbath of Penitence, conclude the Blessing thus:--

the holy King.

[p. 228]

Cong.--Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts: the whole earth is full of his glory.

Reader.--His glory filleth the universe: his ministering angels ask one another, Where is the place of his glory? Those over against them say, Blessed--

Cong.--Blessed be the glory of the Lord from his place.

Reader.--From his place may he turn in mercy and be gracious unto a people who, evening and morning, twice every day, proclaim with constancy the unity of his name, saying in love, Hear--

Cong.--Hear, O Israel: the Lord our God, the Lord is One.

Reader.--One is our God; he is our Father; he is our King; he is our Saviour; and he of his mercy will let us hear a second time, in the presence of all living (his promise), "To be to you for a God."

Cong.--"I am the Lord your God."

Reader.--And in thy Holy Words it is written, saying,

Cong.--The Lord shall reign for ever, thy God, O Zion, unto all generations. Praise ye the Lord.

Reader.--Unto all generations we will declare thy greatness, and to all eternity we will proclaim thy holiness, and thy praise, O our God, shall not depart from

[p. 229]

our mouth for ever, for thou art a great and holy God and King. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the holy God.

On the Sabbath of Penitence conclude the last Blessing thus:--

the holy King.

 [**] Thou didst institute the Sabbath, and didst accept its offerings; thou didst command its special obligations with the order of its drink offerings. They that find delight in it shall inherit glory for everlasting; they that taste it are worthy of life; while such as love its teachings have chosen true greatness. Already from Sinai they were commanded concerning it; and thou hast also commanded us, O Lord our God,

[p. 230]

to bring thereon the additional offering of the Sabbath as is meet. May it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, to lead us up in joy unto our land, and to plant us within our borders, where we will prepare unto thee the offerings that are obligatory for us, the continual offerings according to their order, and the additional offerings according to their enactment; and the additional offering of this Sabbath day we will prepare and offer up unto thee in love, according to the precept of thy

[p. 231]

will, as thou hast prescribed for us in thy Law through the hand of Moses thy servant, by the mouth of thy glory, as it is said:

And on the Sabbath day two he-lambs of the first year, without blemish, and two tenth parts of an ephah of fine flour for a meal offering, mingled with oil, and the drink offering thereof: this is the burnt offering of every Sabbath, beside the continual burnt offering and the drink offering thereof.

They that keep the Sabbath and call it a delight shall rejoice in thy kingdom; the people that hallow the seventh day, even all of them

[p. 232]

shall be satiated and delighted with thy goodness, seeing that thou didst find pleasure in the seventh day. and didst hallow it; thou didst call it the desirable of days, in remembrance of the creation.

Our God and God of our fathers, accept our rest; sanctify us by thy commandments, and grant our portion in thy Law; satisfy us with thy goodness, and gladden us with thy salvation; purify our hearts to serve thee in truth; and in thy love and favor, O Lord our God, let

[p. 233]

us inherit thy holy Sabbath; and may Israel, who hallow thy name, rest thereon. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who hallowest the Sabbath.

Accept, O Lord our God, thy people Israel and their prayer; restore the service to the oracle of thy house; receive in love and favor both the fire-offerings of Israel and their prayer; and may the service of thy people Israel be ever acceptable unto thee.

And let our eyes behold thy return in mercy to Zion. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who restorest thy divine presence unto Zion.

[p. 234]

Congregation in an undertone:

We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God and the God of our fathers, the God of all flesh, our Creator and the Creator of all things in the beginning. Blessings and thanksgivings be to thy great and holy name, because thou hast kept us in life and hast preserved us: so mayest thou continue to keep us in life and to preserve us. O gather our exiles to thy holy courts to observe thy statutes, to do thy will, and to serve thee with a perfect heart; seeing that we give thanks unto thee. Blessed be the God to whom thanksgivings are due.

We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God and the God of our fathers for ever and ever; thou art the Rock of our lives, the Shield of our salvation through every generation. We will give thanks unto thee and declare thy praise for our lives which are committed unto thy hand, and for our souls which are in thy charge, and for thy miracles, which are daily with us, and for thy wonders and thy benefits, which are wrought at all times, evening, morn and noon. O thou who art all-good, whose mercies fail not; thou, merciful Being, whose lovingkindnesses never cease, we have ever hoped in thee.

On Chanukah say, "We thank thee also," etc. <page 63>.

[p. 235]

For all these things thy name, O our King, shall be continually blessed and exalted for ever and ever.

On the Sabbath of Penitence say:--

O inscribe all the children of thy covenant for a happy life.

And everything that liveth shall give thanks unto thee for ever, and shall praise thy name in truth, O God, our salvation and our help. Blessed art thou, O Lord, whose name is All-good, and unto whom it is becoming to give thanks.

At the repetition of the Amidah by the Reader, the following is introduced:--

Our God and God of our fathers, bless us with the three-fold blessing of thy Law written by the hand of Moses thy servant, which was spoken by Aaron and his sons, the priests, thy holy people, as it is said, The Lord bless thee, and keep thee: the Lord make his face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee: the Lord turn his face unto thee, and give thee peace.

Grant peace, welfare, blessing, grace, lovingkindness and mercy unto us and unto all Israel, thy people. Bless us, O our Father, even all of us together, with the light of thy countenance; for by the light of thy countenance thou hast given us, O Lord our God, the Law

[p. 236]

of life, lovingkindness and righteousness, blessing, mercy, life and peace; and may it be good in thy sight to bless thy people Israel at all tinges and in every hour with thy peace.

On the Sabbath of Penitence say:--

In the book of life, blessing, peace and good  may we be remembered and inscribed before thee, we and all thy people the house of Israel, for a happy life and for peace. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who makest peace.

Blessed art thou, O Lord, who blessest thy people Israel with peace.

O my God! guard my tongue from evil and my lips from speaking guile; and to such as curse me let my soul be dumb, yea, let my soul be unto all as the dust. Open my heart to thy Law, and let my soul pursue thy commandments. If any design evil against me, speedily make their counsel of none effect, and frustrate their designs. Do it for the sake of thy name, do it for the sake of thy right hand, do it for the sake of thy holiness, do it for the sake of thy Law. In order that thy beloved ones may be delivered, O save with thy right hand, and answer me. Let the words of my mouth

[p. 237]

and the meditation of my heart be acceptable before thee, O Lord, my Rock and my Redeemer. He who maketh peace in his high places, may he make peace for us and for all Israel, and say ye, Amen.

May it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, that the temple be speedily rebuilt in our days, and grant our portion in thy Law. And there we will serve thee with awe, as in the days of old, and as in ancient years. Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in ancient years.

Reader.--Magnified and sanctified be his great name in the world which he hath created according to his will. May he establish his kingdom during your life and during your days, and during the life of all the house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

Cong. and Reader.--Let his great name be blessed for ever and to all eternity.

Reader.--Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted, extolled and honored, magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One, blessed be he; though he be high above all the blessings, praises and consolations, which are uttered in the world; and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--Accept our prayer in mercy and in favor.

Reader.--May the prayers and supplications of all Israel be accepted by their Father who is in heaven; and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--Let the name of the Lord be blessed from this time forth and for evermore.

[p. 238]

Reader.--May there be abundant peace from heaven, and life for us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--My help is from the Lord who made heaven and earth.

Reader.--He who maketh peace in his high places, may be make peace for us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

There is none like our God: none like our Lord.

There is none like our King: none like our Savior.

Who is like our God: who is like our Lord? Who is like our King: who is like our Savior?

We will give thanks unto our God: we will give thanks unto our Lord.

We will give thanks unto our King: we will give thanks unto our Savior?

Blessed be our God: blessed be our Lord. Blessed be our King: blessed be our Savior. Thou art our God: thou art our Lord. Thou art our King: thou art our Savior. Thou art he unto whom our fathers burnt incense of spices.

[p. 239]

Talmud Babli: Treatise Cerithoth 6, a.

The compound forming the incense [**] consisted of balm, onycha, galbanum and frankincense, in quantities weighing seventy manehs each; of myrrh, cassia, spikenard and saffron, each sixteen manehs by weight; of costus twelve, of aromatic bark three, and of cinnamon nine manehs; of lye obtained from a species of leek, nine kabs; of Cyprus wine three seahs and three kabs: though, if Cyprus wine was not procurable, old white wine might be used; of salt of Sodom the fourth part of a kab, and of the herb Maaleh Ashan a minute quantity. R. Nathan says, a minute quantity was also required of the odoriferous herb Cippath, that grew on the banks of the Jordan; if, however, one added honey to the mixture, he rendered the incense unfit for sacred use, while he who, in preparing it, omitted one of its necessary ingredients, was liable to the penalty of death. Rabban Simeon, son of Gamaliel, says, the balm is a resin that exudes from the wood of the balsam tree. The lye obtained from a species of leek was rubbed over the onycha to improve it, while the Cyprus wine was used to steep it in, so that its odor might be more pungent.

Mishnah: End of Treatise Tamid.

These were the Psalms which the Levites used to recite in the Temple--

On the first day of the week they used to recite (Psalm xxiv.), The earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof; the world and they that dwell therein.

On the second day (Psalm xlviii.), Great is the Lord and exceedingly to be praised, in the city of our God, in his holy mountain.

[p. 240]

On the third day (Psalm lxxxii.), God standeth in the congregation of the mighty; he judgeth among the judges.

On the fourth day (Psalm xciv.), God of vengeance, Lord, God of vengeance, shine forth.

On the fifth day (Psalm lxxxi.), Exult aloud unto God our strength; shout for joy unto the God of Jacob.

On the sixth day (Psalm xciii.), The Lord reigneth; he hath robed him in majesty; the Lord hath robed him, yea, he hath girded himself with strength: the world also is set firm, that it cannot be moved.

On the Sabbath (Psalm xcii.), A psalm, a song for the Sabbath Day. It is the psalm and song also for the hereafter, for the day which will be wholly a Sabbath, and will bring rest in life everlasting.

Talmud Babli. End of Treatise Berachoth.

R. Eleazer said in the name of R. Chanina, The disciples of the sages increase peace throughout the world, as it is said, And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord; and great shall be the peace of thy children. Read not here banayich, thy children (or disciples), but bonayich, thy builders.--Great peace have they who love thy Law; and there is no stumbling for them. Peace be within thy rampart, prosperity within thy palaces. For my brethren and companions' sake, I would fain speak peace concerning thee. For the sake of the house of the Lord our God I would seek thy good. The Lord will give strength unto his people; the Lord will bless his people with peace.

It is our duty to praise the Lord of all things, to ascribe greatness to him who formed the world in the beginning, since he hath not made us like the nations of other lands, and hath not placed us

[p. 241]

like other families of the earth, since he hath not assigned unto us a portion as unto them, nor a lot as unto all their multitude. For we bend the knee and offer worship and thanks before the supreme King of kings, the Holy One, blessed be he, who stretched forth the heavens and laid the foundations of the earth, the seat of whose glory is in the heavens above, and the abode of whose might is in the loftiest heights. He is our God; there is none else: in truth he is our King; there is none besides him; as it is written in his Law, And thou shalt know this day, and lay it to thine heart, that the Lord he is God in heaven above and upon the earth beneath: there is none else.

We therefore hope in thee, O Lord our God, that we may speedily behold the glory of thy might, when thou wilt remove the abominations from the earth, and the idols will be utterly cut off, when the world will be perfected under the kingdom of the Almighty, and all the children of flesh will call upon thy name, when thou wilt turn unto thyself all the wicked of the earth. Let all the inhabitants of the world perceive and know that unto thee every knee must bow, every tongue must swear. Before thee, O Lord our God, let them bow and fall; and unto thy glorious name let them give honor; let them all accept the yoke of thy kingdom, and do thou reign over them speedily, and for ever and ever. For the kingdom is thine, and to all eternity thou wilt reign in glom; as it is written in thy Law, The Lord shall reign for ever

[p. 242]

and ever. And it is said, And the Lord shall be King over all the earth: in that day shall the Lord be One, and his name One.

The following Kaddish is said by a Mourner.

And now, I pray thee, let the power of the Lord be great, according as thou hast spoken. Remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies and thy lovingkindnesses; for they have been ever of old.

Mourner.--Magnified and sanctified be his great name in the world which he hath created according to his will. May he establish his kingdom during your life and during your days, and during the life of all the house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

Cong. and Mourner.--Let his great name be blessed for ever and to all eternity.

Mourner.--Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted, extolled and honored, magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One, blessed be he; though he be high above all the blessings and hymns, praises and consolations, which are uttered in the world; and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--Let the name of the Lord be blessed from this time forth and for evermore.

Mourner.--May there be abundant peace from heaven and life for us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--My help is from the Lord, who made heaven and earth.

Mourner.--He who maketh peace in his high place, may he make peace for us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

[p. 243]

He is Lord of the universe, who reigned ere any creature yet was formed:

At the time when all things were made by his desire, then was his name proclaimed King.

And after all things shall have had an end, he alone, the dreaded one, shall reign;

Who was, who is, and who will be in glory. And he is One, and there is no second to compare to him, to consort with him:

Without beginning, without end; to him belong strength and dominion.

And he is my God--my Redeemer liveth--and a rock in my travail in time of distress;

And he is my banner and my refuge, the portion of my cup on the day when I call.

Into his hand I commend my spirit, when I sleep and when I wake;

And with my spirit, my body also: the Lord is with me, and I will not fear.

UNITY HYMN FOR THE SABBATH DAY

In some Congregations the following is said before "Blessed be he who spake," <page 19>.

Of old thou didst rest on the seventh day; thou didst therefore bless the Sabbath.

For every work of thine praise is prepared for thee; thy loving ones bless thee at all times.

Blessed be the Lord, the Maker of them all, the living God and everlasting King.

For from of old there hath rested upon thy servants the abundance of thy mercies and thy loving kindnesses.

But in Egypt thou didst begin to make known that thou art exalted far.

Above all gods, when thou didst execute great judgment: upon the Egyptians and upon their gods.

[p. 244]

When thou didst cleave the Red Sea, thy people saw thy great hand, and they feared.

Thou didst guide thy people, so that thou mightest make unto thyself a name of glory to manifest thy greatness.

Thou spakest also with them from the heavens, when the clouds dropped water.

Thou knewest their wanderings in the wilderness, in a land of drought, where none passed through.

Thou gavest to thy people the corn of heaven, flesh abundant as the dust, and water from the rock.

Thou didst drive out many nations, and they took possession of their land and of the labor of the peoples;

That they might observe thy statutes and laws, the words of the Lord, which are pure words.

And they delighted themselves with fat pastures, and with rivers of oil from the flinty rock.

When they rested, they built thy holy city, and adorned the house of thy sanctuary.

Then thou saidst, Here will I dwell for length of days: I will surely bless her provision.

There they shall sacrifice sacrifices of righteousness; thy priests also shall be clothed with righteousness.

The house of Levi also shall chant pleasant songs; they shall shout for joy and sing unto thee.

The house of Israel and they that fear the Lord shall give glory and thanks unto thy name, O Lord.

Thou hast dealt out exceeding kindness to the earliest ages; deal thus kindly also with the latest.

O Lord, rejoice over us, even as thou didst rejoice over out fathers,

To multiply us and deal kindly with us; and we will for ever give thanks unto thee for thy goodness.

O Lord, rebuild thy city speedily, for it is called by thy name.

And make the horn of David to flourish therein, and dwell in the midst thereof for ever, O Lord.

There we will offer sacrifices of righteousness, and there may our oblation be pleasant as in former days.

[p. 245]

bless thy people with the light of thy countenance; for they desire to do thy will.

And in thy good will fulfil our desire; look, we beseech thee, we are thy people, all of us.

Thou hast chosen us to be unto thee a treasured people: let thy blessing be upon thy people for ever.

And we will continually declare thy praise, and praise thy glorious name.

Of thy blessing let thy people be blessed, for every one whom thou blessest is blessed.

As for me, while I have my being, I will praise my Creator, and I will bless him all the days of my appointed time.

Let the name of the Lord be blessed for ever, from everlasting even to everlasting.

As it is written: Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel, from everlasting even to everlasting. And all the people said, Amen, and praised the Lord. Daniel answered and said, Blessed be the name of God for ever and ever: for wisdom and might are his. And it is said: Then the Levites, Jeshua, Kadmiel, Bani, Hashabneiah, Sherebiah, Hodiah, Shebaniah, and Pethahiah said, Stand up and bless the Lord your God from everlasting to everlasting: and let them bless thy glorious name, that is exalted above all blessing and praise. And it is said: Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel, from everlasting even to everlasting: and let all the people say, Amen: praise ye the Lord. And it is said, And David blessed the Lord in the presence of all the congregation: and David said, blessed art thou, O Lord, the God of Israel our father, from everlasting to everlasting.

Footnotes

^227:* When the Reader repeats the Amidah, the following is added to "holy God," <page 229>.

Reader.--We will reverence and sanctify thee according to the mystic utterance of the holy Seraphim, who hallow thy name in the sanctuary, as it is written by the hand of thy prophet, And they called one unto the other and said, 

^229:* On Sabbath and New Moon.

Thou didst form thy world from of old; thou hadst finished thy work on the seventh day; thou hast loved us and taken pleasure in us, hast exalted us above all tongues, hast sanctified us by thy commandments, hast brought us near, O our King unto thy service, and called us by thy great and holy name. Thou, O Lord our God, also gavest us in love Sabbaths for rest and New Moons for atonement. But because we sinned against thee, both we and our fathers, our city hath been laid waste, our sanctuary is desolate, our splendor hath gone into exile, and the glory hath been removed from the [p. 230] house of our life, so that we are not able to perform our obligations in thy chosen house, in that great and holy house which was called by thy name, because of the hand that hath been stretched out against thy sanctuary. May it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, to lead us up in joy unto our land, and to plant us within our borders, where we will prepare unto thee the offerings that are obligatory for us, the continual offerings according to their order, and the additional offerings according to their enactment; and the additional offerings of this Sabbath day and of this New Moon we will prepare and offer up unto thee in love, according to the precept of thy will, as thou hast [p. 231] prescribed for us in thy Law through the hand of Moses thy servant, by the mouth of thy glory, as it is said: And on the Sabbath day two he-lambs of the first year without blemish, and two tenth parts of an ephah of fine flour for a meal offering, mingled with oil, and the drink offering thereof: this is the burnt offering of every Sabbath, beside the continual burnt offering and the drink offering thereof.

And in the beginnings of your months ye shall offer a burnt offering unto the Lord; two young bullocks and one ram, seven he-lambs of the first year without blemish. And their meal offering and their drink offerings as hath been ordained, three tenth parts of an ephah for each bullock, and two tenth parts for the ram, and one tenth part for each lamb, with wine according to the drink offering thereof, and a he-goat wherewith to make atonement, and the two continual offerings according to their enactment. [p. 232]

They that keep the Sabbath and call it a delight shall rejoice in thy kingdom; the people that hallow the seventh day, even all of them shall be satiated and delighted with thy goodness, seeing that thou didst find pleasure in the seventh day, and didst hallow it; thon didst call it the desirable of days, in remembrance of the creation.

Our God and God of our fathers, accept our rest, and on this Sabbath day renew this New Moon unto us for good and for blessing, for joy and for gladness, for salvation and comfort, for sustenance and maintenance, for life and peace, for pardon of sin and forgiveness of iniquity (during Leap Year:--[p. 233] and for atonement of transgression); for thou hast chosen thy people Israel from among all nations, and hast made thy holy Sabbath known unto them, and hast appointed unto them statutes for the beginnings of the months. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who sanctifiest the Sabbath, Israel and the beginnings of the months.

^239:* Exod. xxx. 31-38.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 246]

  

HYMN OF GLORY.

The Ark is opened and the following Hymn is chanted in alternate verses by the Reader and Congregation.

I will chant sweet hymns and compose songs; for my soul panteth after thee.

My soul hath longed to be beneath the shadow of thy hand, to know all thy secret mysteries.

Even whilst I speak of thy glory, my heart yearneth for thy love.

Therefore will I speak glorious things of thee, and will honor thy name with songs of love.

I will declare thy glory, though I have not seen thee; under images will I describe thee, though I have not known thee.

By the hand of thy prophets, in the mystic utterance of thy servants, thou hast imaged forth the grandeur and the glory of thy majesty.

Thy greatness and thy might they described in accordance with the power made manifest in thy acts.

In images they told of thee, but not according to thine essence; they but likened thee in accordance with thy works.

They figured thee in a multitude of visions; behold thou art One under all images.

They saw in thee both age and youth, [**] the hair of thy head now grey as in old age, now black as in youth.

Age in the day of judgment, and youth in the day of battle; as a man of war he striveth with his hands:

He hath bound a helmet of victory upon his head; his right hand, and his holy arm, hath wrought victory for him:

With dew of light his head is filled, and his locks with drops of the night.

He shall be glorified by me for he delighteth in me; yea, he shall be to me a crown of beauty.

His head is like fine, pure gold; upon his forehead is impressed the glory of his holy name.

[p. 247]

For grace and glory, beauty and splendor his people hath encircled him with a crown.

The plaited hair of his head seemed as in the days of youth, his black locks were flowing in curls.

The abode of righteousness--his glorious beauty--may he prefer it above his chiefest joy.

May his treasured people be a crown in his hand, a royal diadem of glorious beauty.

They were borne by him, he carried them; with a crown he adorned them; for that they were precious in his sight he honored them.

His glory resteth upon me, and mine upon him; and he is nigh unto me, when I cry unto him.

He is bright and ruddy in red apparel, when he cometh front treading the winepress in Edom. [*+]

The symbol of his all-embracing providence he showed to the meek Moses, when the similitude of the Lord was before his eyes.

Taking pleasure in his people, he will glorify the meek; that, dwelling amid praises, he may be glorified by them.

The sum of thy word is truth; O thou, who hast called every generation from the beginning, seek the people that seeketh thee.

Accept, I beseech thee, the multitude of my songs, and let my joyous cry come near unto thee.

Let my praise be a crown unto thy head, and my prayer be set forth before thee as incense.

Let the song of the poor be precious in thy sight as the song that was sung at thy offerings.

May my blessing rise to the bountiful God, who createth and produceth, who is just and mighty.

And when I bless thee, incline thine head unto me, and take what I offer as though it were the choicest spices.

May my meditation be pleasant unto thee, for my soul panteth after thee.

[p. 248]

Psalm xcii.

A Psalm, a Song for the Sabbath Day. It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing praises unto thy name, O Most High: to declare thy lovingkindness in the morning, and thy faithfulness every night, with an instrument of ten strings and with a harp, with thoughtful music upon the lyre. For thou, O Lord, hast made me rejoice through thy work: I will exult in the works of thy hands. How great are thy works, O Lord: the thoughts are very deep. A brutish man knoweth it not, neither doth a fool understand this: when the wicked sprang up as the grass, and all the workers of iniquity flourished, it was that they might be destroyed for ever. But thou, O Lord, art on high for evermore. For, lo, thine enemies, O Lord, for, lo, thine enemies shall perish; all the workers of iniquity shall be scattered. But my horn hast thou exalted, like that of the wild-ox: I am anointed with fresh oil. Mine eye also hath seen my desire on mine enemies; mine ears have heard my desire of them that rose up against me, doers of evil. The righteous shall spring up like a palm-tree; he shall grow tall like a cedar in Lebanon. Planted in the house of the Lord, they shall blossom in the courts of our God. They shall still shoot forth in old age; they shall be full of sap and green: to declare that the Lord is upright; he is my rock, and there is no unrighteousness in him.

The Mourner's Kaddish. <page 242>.

Footnotes

^246:* In regard to these and the following expressions, compare Daniel vii. 9; Exod. xv. 3; Song of Solomon v. 2, 14; Isaiah lix. 17; Psalm xcviii. 1.

^247:+ Compare Isaiah lxiii. 1, 2.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 249]

  

KIDDUSH FOR SABBATH MORNING.

Exodus xxxi. 16, 17.

And the children of Israel shall keep the Sabbath, to observe the Sabbath throughout their generations, for an everlasting covenant. It is a sign between me and the children of Israel for ever, that in six days the Lord made the heavens and the earth, and on the seventh day he rested, and ceased from his work.

Exod. xx. 8-11.

Remember the sabbath day to  it holy. Six days shalt thou labor, and do all thy work: but the seventh day is a sabbath unto the Lord thy God: in it thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy man-servant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates: for in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea and all that is therein, and rested on the seventh day; wherefore the Lord blessed the sabbath day and hallowed it.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who createst the fruit of the vine.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who bringest forth bread from the earth.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 250]

  

AFTERNOON SERVICE FOR SABBATHS.

Happy are they that dwell in thy house: they will be ever praising thee. (Selah.)

Happy is the people, that is in such a case: happy the people, whose God is the Lord.

Psalm cxlv. A Psalm of Praise: of David.

I will extol thee, my God, O King; and I will bless thy name for ever and ever.

Every day will I bless thee; and I will praise thy name for ever and ever.

Great is the Lord, and exceedingly to be praised: and his greatness is unsearchable.

One generation shall laud thy works to another, and shall declare thy mighty acts.

On the majestic glory of thy grandeur, and on thy marvellous deeds, will I meditate.

And men shall speak of the might of thy awful acts; and I will recount thy greatness.

They shall pour forth the fame of thy great goodness, and shall exult in thy righteousness.

The Lord is gracious and merciful; slow to anger and of great lovingkindness.

The Lord is good to all; and his tender mercies are over all his works.

All thy works shall give thanks unto thee, O Lord; and thy loving ones shall bless thee.

They shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom, and talk of thy power.

To make known to the sons of men his mighty acts, and the majestic glory of his kingdom.

[p. 251]

Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion endureth throughout all generations.

The Lord upholdeth all that fall, and raiseth up all those that are bowed down.

The eyes of all wait upon thee; and thou givest then. their food in due season.

Thou openest thine hand, and satisfiest every living thing with favor.

The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and loving in all his works.

The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him, to all that call upon him in truth.

He will fulfil the desire of them that fear him; he also will hear their cry, and will save them.

The Lord guardeth all them that love him; but all the wicked will he destroy.

My mouth shall speak of the praise of the Lord: and let all flesh bless his holy name for ever and ever.

But we will bless the Lord from this time forth and for evermore. Praise ye the Lord.

And a redeemer shall come to Zion and to them that turn from transgression in Jacob, saith the Lord. And as for me, this is my covenant with them, saith the Lord: my spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seed's seed, saith the Lord, from henceforth and for ever.

[p. 252]

But thou art holy, O thou that dwellest amid the praises of Israel. And one cried unto another, and said, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts: the whole earth is full of his glory.  [**]And they receive sanction the one from the other, and say, Holy in the highest heavens, the place of his divine abode; holy upon earth, the work of his might; holy for ever and to all eternity is the Lord of hosts; the whole earth is full of the radiance of his glory. Then a wind lifted me up, and I heard behind me the voice of a great rushing (saying), Blessed be the glory of the Lord from his place.  [**]Then a wind lifted me up, and I heard behind me the voice of a great rushing, of those who uttered praises, and said, Blessed be the glory of the Lord from the region of his divine abode. The Lord shall reign for ever and ever.  [**]The kingdom of the Lord endureth for ever and to all eternity. O Lord, the God of Abraham, of Isaac and of Israel, our fathers, keep this for ever in the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of thy people, and direct their heart unto thee. Arid he, being merciful, forgiveth iniquity and destroyeth not: yea, many a time he turneth his anger away, and doth not stir up all his wrath. For thou, O Lord, art good and forgiving, and abounding in lovingkindness to all them that call upon thee. Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness, and thy Law is truth. Thou wilt show truth to Jacob and loving kindness to Abraham, according as thou hast sworn unto our fathers from the days of old. Blessed be the Lord day by day; if one burdeneth us.

[p. 253]

[paragraph continues] God is our salvation. (Selah.) The Lord of hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our stronghold. (Selah.) O Lord of hosts, happy is the man who trusteth in thee. Save, Lord: may the King answer us on the day when we call. Blessed is our God, who hath created us for his glory, and hath separated us from them that go astray, and hath given us the Law of truth and planted everlasting life in our midst. May he open our heart unto his Law, and place his love and fear within our hearts, that we may do his will and serve him with a perfect heart, that we may not labor in vain, nor bring forth for confusion. May it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, that we may keep thy statutes in this world, and be worthy to live to witness and inherit happiness and blessing in the days of the Messiah and in the life of the world to come. To the end that my glory may sing praise unto thee, and not be silent: O Lord my God, I will give thanks unto thee for ever. Blessed is the man that trusteth in the Lord, and whose trust the Lord is. Trust ye in the Lord for ever; for in Jah the Lord is an everlasting rock. And they that know thy name will put their trust in thee; for thou hast not forsaken them that seek thee, Lord. It pleased the Lord, for his righteousness' sake, to magnify the Law and to make it honorable.

Reader.--Magnified and sanctified be his great name in the world which he hath created according to his will. May he establish his kingdom during your life and during your days, and during the life of all the house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

[p. 254]

Cong. and Reader.--Let his great name be blessed for ever and to all eternity.

Reader.--Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted, extolled and honored, magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One, blessed be he; though he be high above all the blessings and hymns, praises and consolations, which are uttered in the world; and say ye, Amen.

And as for me, may my prayer unto thee, O Lord, be in an acceptable time: O God, in the abundance of thy lovingkindness, answer me in the truth of thy salvation.

The first section of the Lesson from the Pentateuch of the following Sabbath is read.

For Order of Reading the Law see pp. <page 81>-87.

While the vestments are being replaced upon the Scroll, Psalm, xcii., <page 248>, is said.

The following prayer (Amidah) to "as in ancient years," <page 260>, is to be said standing.

O Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall declare thy praise.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, God of Abraham, God of Isaac, and God of Jacob, the great, mighty and revered God, the most high God, who bestowest lovingkindnesses, and possessest all things; who rememberest the pious deeds of the patriarchs, and in love wilt bring a redeemer to their children's children for thy name's sake.

During the Ten Days of Penitence say:

Remember us unto life, O King, who delightest in life, and inscribe us in the book of life, for thine own sake, O living God.

[p. 255]

O King, Helper, Savior and Shield. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the Shield of Abraham.

Thou, O Lord, art mighty for ever, thou quickenest the dead, thou art mighty to save.

From the Sabbath after the Eighth Day of Solemn Assembly until the First Day of Passover say:--

Thou causest the wind to blow and the rain to fall,

Thou sustainest the living with lovingkindness, quickenest the dead with great mercy, supportest the falling, healest the sick, loosest the bound, and keepest thy faith to them that sleep in the dust. Who is like unto thee, Lord of mighty acts, and who resembleth thee, O King, who killest and quickenest and causest salvation to spring forth?

On the Sabbath of Penitence say:

Who is like unto thee, Father of mercy, who in mercy rememberest thy creatures unto life?

Yea, faithful art thou to quicken the dead. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who quickenest the dead. * (See page <page 256>).

Thou art holy, and thy name is holy, and holy beings praise thee daily. (Selah.) Blessed art thou, O Lord, the holy God.

On the Sabbath of Penitence conclude the Blessing thus:

the holy King.

[p. 256]

When the Reader repeats the Amidah, the following is said, to "holy God."

* Reader.--We will sanctify thy name in the world even as they sanctify it in the highest heavens, as it is written by the hand of thy prophet: And they called one unto the other and said,

Cong.--Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts: the whole earth is full of his glory.

Reader.--Those over against them say, Blessed--

Cong.--Blessed be the glory of the Lord from his place.

Reader.--And in thy Holy Words it is written, saying,

Cong.--The Lord shall reign for ever, thy God, Zion, unto all generations. Praise ye the Lord.

Reader.--Unto all generations we will declare thy greatness, and to all eternity we will proclaim thy holiness, and thy praise, O our God, shall not depart from our mouth for ever, for thou art a great and holy God and King. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the holy God.

During the Ten Days of Penitence conclude the Blessing thus:--

the holy King.

Thou art One and thy name is One, and who, is like thy people Israel, an unique nation on the earth? Glorious greatness and a crown of salvation, even the day of rest and holiness, thou hast given unto thy people:--Abraham was glad, Isaac rejoiced, Jacob and his sons rested thereon:--a rest vouchsafed in generous love, a true and faithful rest, a rest in peace and tranquillity,

[p. 257]

in quietude and safety, a perfect rest wherein thou delightest. Let thy children perceive and know that this their rest is from thee, and by their rest may they hallow thy name.

Our God and God of our fathers, accept our rest; sanctify us by thy commandments, and grant our portion in thy Law; satisfy us with thy goodness, and gladden us with thy salvation; purify our hearts to serve thee in truth; and in thy love and favor, O Lord our God, let us inherit thy holy Sabbath; and may Israel, who hallow thy name, rest thereon. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who hallowest the Sabbath.

Accept, O Lord our God, thy people Israel and their prayer; restore the service to the oracle of thy house; receive in love and favor both the fire-offerings of Israel and their prayer; and may the service of thy people Israel be ever acceptable unto thee.

On New Moon and the Intermediate Days of Passover and Tabernacles the following is added:--

Our God and God of our fathers! May our remembrance rise, come and be accepted before thee, with the remembrance of our fathers, of Messiah the son of David thy servant, of Jerusalem thy holy city, and of all thy people the house of Israel, bringing deliverance

[p. 258]

and well-being, grace, lovingkindness and mercy, life and peace on this day of

On New Moon--

the Feast of the New Moon.

On Passover--

the Feast of Unleavened Bread.

On Tabernacles--

Tabernacles.

[paragraph continues] Remember us, O Lord our God, thereon for our wellbeing; be mindful of us for blessing, and save us unto life: by thy promise of salvation and mercy, spare us and be gracious unto us; have mercy upon us and save us; for our eyes are bent upon thee, because thou art a gracious and merciful God and King.

And let our eyes behold thy return in mercy to Zion. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who restorest thy divine presence unto Zion.

We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God and the God of our fathers for ever and ever; thou art the Rock of our lives, the Shield of our salvation through every generation. We will give thanks unto thee and declare thy praise for our lives which are committed unto thy hand, and for our souls which are in thy charge, and for thy miracles, which are daily with us, and for

Congregation in an undertone

We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God and the God of our fathers, the God of all flesh, our Creator and the Creator of all things in the beginning. Blessings and thanksgivings be to thy great and holy name because thou hast kept us in life and hast preserved us: so mayest thou continue to keep us in life and to preserve us. O gather our exiles to thy holy courts to observe thy statutes, to do thy will, and to serve thee with a perfect heart; seeing that we give thanks unto thee. Blessed be the God to whom thanksgivings are due.

[p. 259]

thy wonders and thy benefits, which are wrought at all times, evening, morn and noon. O thou who art all-good, whose mercies fail not; thou, merciful Being, whose lovingkindnesses never cease, we have ever hoped in thee.

On Sabbath of Chanukah say: We thank thee, etc., <page 63>.

For all these things thy name, O our King, shall be continually blessed and exalted for ever and ever.

On the Sabbath of Penitence say:--

O inscribe all the children of thy covenant for a happy life.

And everything that liveth shall give thanks unto thee for ever, and shall praise thy name in truth, O God, our salvation and our help. Blessed art thou, O Lord, whose name is All-good, and unto whom it is becoming to give thanks.

Grant abundant peace unto Israel thy people for ever; for thou art the sovereign Lord of all peace; and may it be good in thy sight to bless thy people Israel at all times and in every hour with thy peace.

On the Sabbath of Penitence say:--

In the book of life, blessing, peace and good sustenance may we be remembered and inscribed before thee, we and all thy people the house of Israel, for a happy life and for peace. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who makest peace.

Blessed art thou, O Lord, who blessest thy people Israel with peace.

[p. 260]

O my God! guard my tongue from evil and my lips from speaking guile; and to such as curse me let my soul be dumb, yea, let my soul be unto all as the dust. Open my heart to thy Law, and let my soul pursue thy commandments. If any design evil against me, speedily make their counsel of none effect, and frustrate their designs. Do it for the sake of thy name, do it for the sake of thy right hand, do it for the sake of thy holiness, do it for the sake of thy Law. In order that thy beloved ones may be delivered, O save with thy right hand, and answer me. Let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart be acceptable before thee, O Lord, my Rock and my Redeemer. He who maketh peace in his high places, may he make peace for us and for all Israel, and say ye, Amen.

May it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, that the temple be speedily rebuilt in our days, and grant our portion in thy Law. And there we will serve thee with awe, as in the days of old, and as in ancient years. Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in ancient years.

The following is omitted on such occasions as those on which Tachanun is omitted on Week-days:--

Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness, and thy Law is truth. Thy righteousness also, O God, is very high; thou who hast done great things, O God,

[p. 261]

who is like unto thee? Thy righteousness is like the mountains of God; thy judgments are a great deep man and beast thou savest, O Lord.

Reader.--Magnified and sanctified be his great name in the world which he hath created according to his will. May he establish his kingdom during your life and during your days, and during the life of all the house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

Cong. and Reader.--Let his great name be blessed for ever and to all eternity.

Reader.--Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted, extolled and honored, magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One, blessed be he; though he be high above all the blessings and hymns, praises and consolations, which are uttered in the world; and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--Accept our prayer in mercy and in favor.

Reader.--May the prayers and supplications of all Israel be accepted by their Father who is in heaven; and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--Let the name of the Lord be blessed from this time forth and for evermore.

Reader.--May there be abundant peace from heaven, and life for us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--My help is from Lord who made heaven and earth.

Reader.--He who maketh peace in his high places. may he make peace for us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

[p. 262]

It is our duty to praise the Lord of all things, to ascribe greatness to him who formed the world in the beginning, since he hath not made us like the nations of other lands, and hath not placed us like other families of the earth, since he hath not assigned unto us a portion as unto them, nor a lot as unto all their multitude. For we bend the knee and offer worship and thanks before the supreme King of kings, the Holy One, blessed be he, who stretched forth the heavens and laid the foundations of the earth, the seat of whose glory is in the heavens above, and the abode of whose might is in the loftiest heights. He is our God; there is none else: in truth he is our King; there is none besides him; as it is written in his Law, And thou shalt know this day, and lay it to thine heart, that the Lord he is God in heaven above and upon the earth beneath: there is none else.

We therefore hope in thee, O Lord our God, that we may speedily behold the glory of thy might, when thou wilt remove the abominations from the earth, and the idols will be utterly cut off, when the world will be perfected under the kingdom of the Almighty, and all the children of flesh will call upon thy name, when thou wilt turn unto thyself all the wicked of the earth. Let all the inhabitants of the world perceive and know that unto thee every knee must bow, every tongue must swear. Before thee, O Lord our God, let them bow and fall; and unto thy glorious name let them give honor; let them all accept the yoke of thy kingdom, and do thou reign over them speedily, and for ever

[p. 263]

and ever. For the kingdom is thine, and to all eternity thou wilt reign in glory; as it is written in thy Law The Lord shall reign for ever and ever. And it is said, And the Lord shall be king over all the earth: in that day shall the Lord be One, and his name One.

The following Kaddish is said by a Mourner

Mourner.--Magnified and sanctified be his great name in the world which he hath created according to his will. May he establish his kingdom during your life and during your days, and during the life of all the house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

Cong. and Mourner.--Let his great name be blessed for ever and to all eternity.

Mourner.--Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted, extolled and honored, magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One, blessed be he; though he be high above all the blessings and hymns, praises and consolations, which are uttered in the world; and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--Let the name of the Lord be blessed from this time forth and for evermore.

Mourner.--May there be abundant peace from heaven, and life for us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--My help is from the Lord, who made heaven and earth.

Mourner.--He who maketh peace in his high places, may he make peace for us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

[p. 264]

From the Sabbath after "the Rejoicing of the Law" until the Sabbath before Passover, the following Psalms are read:--

Psalm civ.

Bless the Lord, O my soul: O Lord my God, thou art very great; thou hast robed thee in splendor and majesty. He covereth himself with light as with a garment; he stretcheth out the heavens like a curtain: he layeth the beams of his upper chambers in the waters; he maketh the clouds his chariot; he walketh upon the wings of the wind. He maketh winds his messengers; his ministers flaming fire: he founded the earth upon its bases, that it might not be moved for ever. Thou didst cover it with the deep as with a vesture; the waters stood above the mountains. At thy rebuke they fled; at the voice of thy thunder they hasted away. The mountains rose, the valleys sank unto the place which thou hadst founded for them. Thou hast set a bound that they may not pass over; that they turn not again to cover the earth. He sendeth forth springs into the valleys; they run among the mountains. They give drink to every beast of the plain; the wild asses quench their thirst. By them the birds of the heaven have their dwelling, they utter their voice from among the branches. He giveth drink to the mountains from his upper chambers: the earth is satisfied with the fruit of thy works. He causeth grass to grow for the cattle, and herbs for the service of man; that he may bring forth bread from the earth; and wine that maketh glad the heart of man, and oil to make his face to shine, and bread that strengtheneth man's heart. The trees of the Lord are satisfied; the cedars of Lebanon which he hath planted; where the birds make their nests: as for the stork, the fir trees are her house. The high mountains are for the wild goats; the rocks are a refuge for the conies. He made the moon for seasons: the sun knoweth its going down. Thou makest darkness, and it is night; wherein all the beasts of the forest do move. The young lions roar after their prey, and seek their food from God. The sun ariseth, they get them

[p. 265]

away, and lay them down in their dens. Man goeth forth unto his work and to his labor until the evening How manifold are thy works, O Lord! In wisdom hast thou made them all: the earth is full of thy possessions. Yonder is the sea, great and of wide extern therein are moving things innumerable, living creatures both small and great. There the ships make their course; there is leviathan whom thou hast formed to sport therein. These all wait upon thee, that thou mayest give them their food in due season. Thou givest unto them, they gather; thou openest thine hand, they are satisfied with good. Thou hidest thy face, they are confounded; thou gatherest in their breath, they die, and return to their dust. Thou sendest forth thy spirit, they are created; and thou renewest the face of the ground. Let the glory of the Lord endure for ever; let the Lord rejoice in his works. He looketh on the earth, and it trembleth; he toucheth the mountains, and they smoke. I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live; I will sing praise to my God while I have my being. May my meditation be sweet unto him: as for me, I will rejoice in the Lord. Sinners shall be consumed out of the earth, and the wicked shall be no more. Bless the Lord, O my soul: praise ye the Lord.

Psalm cxx.

A Song of Degrees. In my distress I cried unto the Lord, and he answered me. Deliver my soul, O Lord, from a lying lip, and from a deceitful tongue. What shall he give unto thee, and what shall he add unto thee, thou deceitful tongue? Sharpened arrows of a mighty man with coals of juniper. Woe is me, that I sojourn in Mesech, that I dwell among the tents of Kedar. My soul hath full long had her dwelling with him that hateth peace. I am all peace; but when I speak, they are for war.

Psalm cxxi.

A Song of Degrees. I lift up mine eyes unto the hills: whence will my help come? My help is

[p. 266]

from the Lord, the maker of heaven and earth. He will not suffer thy foot to slip: he that guardeth thee will not slumber. Behold, he that guardeth Israel will neither slumber nor sleep. The Lord is thy guardian: the Lord is thy shade upon thy right hand. The sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the moon by night. The Lord shall guard thee from all evil; he shall guard thy soul. The Lord shall guard thy going out and thy coming in, from this time forth and for evermore.

Psalm cxxii.

A Song of Degrees; of David. I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go unto the house of the Lord. Our feet stood within thy gates, O Jerusalem; Jerusalem that art built up as a city that is compact together: whither the tribes go up, even the tribes of the Lord, for a testimony unto Israel, to give thanks unto the name of the Lord. For there are set thrones for judgment, the thrones of the house of David. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem; may they prosper that love thee. Peace be within thy rampart, prosperity within thy palaces. For my brethren and companions' sakes I would fain speak peace concerning thee. For the sake of the house of the Lord our God I would seek thy good.

Psalm cxxiii.

A Song of Degrees. Unto thee do I lift up mine eyes, O thou that dwellest in the heavens. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their master, as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her mistress, so our eyes look unto the Lord our God, until he have pity upon us. Have pity upon us, O Lord, have pity upon us: for we are full sated with contempt. Our soul is full sated with the mocking of those that are at ease, with the contempt of the proud.

Psalm cxxiv.

A Song of Degrees; of David. If it had not been the Lord who was on our side, let Israel now say:

[p. 267]

if it had not been the Lord who was on our side, when men rose up against us, then they had swallowed us up alive, when their wrath was kindled against us; then the waters had overwhelmed us, the stream had gone over our soul; then the proud waters had gone over our soul. Blessed be the Lord, who hath not given us a prey to their teeth. Our soul escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowlers: the snare was broken, and we escaped. Our help is in the name of the Lord, who made heaven and earth.

Psalm cxxv.

A Song of Degrees. They that trust in the Lord are as Mount Zion, which cannot be moved, but abideth for ever. The mountains are round about Jerusalem, and the Lord is round about his people, from this time forth and for evermore. For the sceptre of wickedness shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous, that the righteous put not forth their hands unto iniquity. Dc good, O Lord, unto those that are good, and to them that are upright in their hearts. But as for such as turn aside unto their crooked ways, the Lord will destroy them with the workers of iniquity. Peace be upon Israel.

Psalm cxxvi.

A Song of Degrees. When the Lord turned again the captivity of Zion, we were like unto them that dream. Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with exultation: then said they among the nations, The Lord hath done great things for them. The Lord hath done great things for us; whereat we rejoiced. Bring back our captivity, O Lord, as the streams in the south. They that sow, in tears shall reap in joy. Though he goeth on his way weeping, hearing the store of seed, he shall come back with joy, bearing his sheaves.

[p. 268]

Psalm cxxvii.

A Song of Degrees; of Solomon. Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it: except the Lord watch over the city, the watchman waketh but in vain. It is vain for you to rise up early, and so late take rest, and eat the bread of toil: such things he giveth unto his beloved in sleep. Lo, children are an heritage of the Lord: the fruit of the womb is his reward. As arrows in the hand of a mighty man, so are the children of youth. Happy is the man that hath filled his quiver with them: they shall not be ashamed, when they speak with enemies in the gate.

Psalm cxxviii.

A Song of Degrees. Happy is every one that feareth the Lord, that walketh in his ways. When thou shalt eat the labor of thine hands, happy shalt thou be, and it shall be well with thee. Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine, in the recesses of thine house: thy children like olive plants, round about thy table. Behold thus shall the man be blessed that feareth the Lord. May the Lord bless thee out of Zion: mayest thou see the good of Jerusalem all the days of thy life. Yea, mayest thou see thy children's children. Peace be upon Israel.

Psalm cxxix.

A Song of Degrees. To the full have they afflicted me from my youth up, let Israel now say; to the full have they afflicted me from my youth up: yet have they not prevailed against me. The plower; plowed upon my back, they made long their furrows. The Lord is righteous: he hath cut asunder the cords of the wicked. Let them be ashamed and turned backward, all they that hate Zion. Let them be as the grass upon the housetops, which withereth before it shooteth forth: wherewith the mower filleth not his hand, nor he that bindeth sheaves his bosom: neither do

[p. 269]

they which go by say, The blessing of the Lord be upon you; we bless you in the name of the Lord.

Psalm cxxx.

A Song of Degrees. Out of the depths have I cried unto thee, O Lord. Lord, hear my voice: let thine ears be attentive to the voice of my supplications. If thou, Lord, shouldst mark iniquities, O Lord, who could stand? But there is forgiveness with thee, that thou mayest be feared. I wait for the Lord, my soul doth wait, and in his word do I hope. My soul waiteth for the Lord, more than watchmen wait for the morning; yea, more than watchmen for the morning. O let Israel hope in the Lord; for with the Lord there is lovingkindness, and with him is plenteous deliverance. And he shall deliver Israel from all his iniquities.

Psalm cxxxi.

A Song of Degrees; of David. Lord, my heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty, neither do I exercise myself in great matters, or in things too marvellous for me. Surely I have stilled and quieted my soul, like a weaned child with his mother; my soul is with me like a weaned child. O Israel, hope in the Lord from this time forth and for evermore.

Psalm cxxxii.

A Song of Degrees. Lord, remember for David all his affliction; how he sware unto the Lord, and vowed unto the Mighty One of Jacob: Surely I will not come into the tent of my house, nor go up unto the couch of my rest; I will not give sleep to mine eyes, or slumber to mine eyelids; until I find out a place for the Lord, a habitation for the Mighty One of Jacob. Lo, we heard of it in Ephrathah: we found it in the fields of Jaar. Let us go into his habitation; let us worship

[p. 270]

at his footstool. Arise, O Lord, unto thy resting place; thou, and the ark of thy strength. Let thy priests be clothed with righteousness; and let thy loving ones exult. For the sake of David thy servant turn not away the face of thine anointed. The Lord hath sworn unto David in truth--he will not turn from it--: of the fruit of thy body will I set upon thy throne. If thy children will keep my covenant, and my testimonies that I shall teach them, their children also shall sit upon thy throne for evermore. For the Lord hath chosen Zion; he hath desired it for his habitation. This is my resting-place for ever: here will I dwell; for I have desired it. I will abundantly bless her provision: I will satisfy her needy with bread. Her priests also will I clothe with salvation; and her loving ones shall exult aloud. There will I make a horn to spring forth unto David: I have prepared a lamp for mine anointed. His enemies will I clothe with shame; but upon him his crown shall shine.

Psalm cxxxiii.

A Song of Degrees; of David. Behold, how good and pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity! It is like the goodly oil upon the head, that runneth down upon the beard, even Aaron's beard; that runneth down upon the skirt of his garments; like the dew of Hermon, that runneth down upon the mountains of Zion: for there the Lord commandment the blessing, even life for evermore.

Psalm cxxxiv.

A Song of Degrees. Behold, bless ye the Lord, all ye servants of the Lord, who stand in the house of the Lord in the night seasons. Lift up your hands towards the sanctuary, and bless ye the Lord. The Lord bless thee out of Zion; even he that made heaven and earth.

"It is our duty." <page 262>.

Mourner's Kaddish, <page 263>

Footnotes

^252:* The Chaldee paraphrase of the preceding verse.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 271]

  

ETHICS OF THE FATHERS.

One of the following chapters is read on each Sabbath from the Sabbath after Passover until the Sabbath before New Year.

All Israel have a portion in the world to come, as it is said (Isaiah lx, 21), And thy people shall be all righteous; they shall inherit the land for ever, the branch of my planting, the work of my hands, that I may be glorified.

  

CHAPTER I.

(1.) Moses received the Torah [**] on Sinai, and handed it down to Joshua; Joshua to the elders; the elders to the prophets; and the prophets handed it down to the men of the Great Synagogue. They said three things: Be deliberate in judgment; raise up many disciples, and make a fence round the Torah. (2.) Simon the Just was one of the last survivors of the Great Synagogue. He used to say, Upon three things the world is based: upon the Torah, upon the Temple service, and upon the practice of charity. (3.) Antigonos of Socho received the tradition from Simon the Just. He used to say, Be not like servants who minister to their master upon the condition of receiving a reward; but be like servants who minister to their master without the condition of receiving a reward; and let the fear of Heaven be upon you. (4.) Jose, the son of Joezer, of Zeredah, and Jose, the son of Jochanan, of Jerusalem, received the tradition from the preceding. Jose, the son of Joezer, of Zeredah, said, Let thy house be a meeting house for the wise; sit amidst the dust of their feet, and drink their words with thirst. (5.) Jose, the son of Jochanan, of Jerusalem, said, Let thy house be open wide; let the poor be the members of thy household,

[p. 272]

and engage not in much gossip with women. This applies even to one's own wife; how much more then to the wife of one's neighbor. Hence the sages say, Whoso engages in much gossip with women brings evil upon himself, neglects the study of the Torah, and will in the end inherit Gehinnom. (6.) Joshua, the son of Perachyah, and Nittai, the Arbelite, received the tradition from the preceding. Joshua, the son of Perachyah, said, Provide thyself a teacher, and get thee a companion, and judge all men in the scale of merit. (7.) Nittai, the Arbelite, said, Keep thee far from a bad neighbor, associate not with the wicked, and abandon not the belief in retribution. (8.) Judah, the son of Tabbai, and Simeon, the son of Shatach, received the tradition from the preceding. Judah, the son of Tabbai, said, (In the judge's office) act not the counsel's part; when the parties to a suit are standing before thee, let them both be regarded by thee as guilty, but when they are departed from thy presence, regard them both as innocent, the verdict having been acquiesced in by them. (9.) Simeon, the son of Shatach, said, Be very searching in the examination, of witnesses, and be heedful of thy words, lest through them they learn to falsify. (10.) Shemayah and Abtalyon received the tradition from the preceding. Shemayah said, Love work, hate lordship, and seek no intimacy with the ruling power (11.) Abtalyon said, Ye sages, be heedful of your words, lest ye incur the penalty of exile and be exiled to a place of evil waters, and the disciples who come after you drink thereof and die, and the Heavenly Name be profaned. (12.) Hillel and Shammai received the tradition from the preceding. Hillel said, Be of the disciples of Aaron, loving peace and pursuing peace, loving thy fellow-creatures, and drawing them near to the Torah. (13.) He

[p. 273]

used to say, A name made great is a name destroyed; he who does not increase his knowledge decreases it; and he who does not study deserves to die; and he who makes a worldly use of the crown of the Torah shall waste away. (14.) He used to say, If I am not for myself, who will be for me? And being for my own self, what am I? And if not now, when? (15). Shammai said, Fix a period for thy study of the Torah; say little and do much; and receive all men with a cheerful countenance. (16.) Rabban Gamaliel said, Provide thyself a teacher, and be quit of doubt, and accustom not thyself to give tithes by a conjectural estimate. (17.) Simeon, his son, said, All my days I have grown up amongst the wise, and I have found nought of better service than silence; not learning but doing is the chief thing; and whoso is profuse of words causes sin. (18.) Rabban Simeon, the son of Gamaliel, said, By three things is the world preserved: by truth, by judgment, and by peace, as it is said, Judge ye the truth and the judgment of peace in your gates (Zech. viii. 16).

Rabbi Chananya, the son of Akashya, said, The Holy One, blessed be he, was pleased to make Israel worthy; wherefore he gave them a copious Torah and many commandments, as it is said, It pleased the Lord, for his righteousness' sake, to magnify the Torah and make it honorable (Isaiah xlii, 21).

  

CHAPTER II.

All Israel have a portion in the world to come, as it is said (Isaiah lx. 21), And thy people shall be all righteous; they shall inherit the land for ever, the branch of my planting, the work of my hands, that I may be glorified.

(1.) Rabbi said, Which is the right course that a man should choose for himself? That which he feels to be honorable to himself, and which also brings him honor from mankind.

[p. 274]

[paragraph continues] Be heedful of a light precept as of a grave one, for thou knowest not the grant of reward for each precept. Reckon the loss incurred by the fulfilment of a precept against the reward secured by its observance, and the gain gotten by a transgression against the loss it involves. Reflect upon three things, and thou wilt not come within the power of sin; Know what is above thee--a seeing eye, and a hearing ear, and all thy deeds written in a book. (2.) Rabban Gamaliel, the son of Rabbi Judah the Prince, said, An excellent thing is the study of the Torah combined with some worldly occupation, for the labor demanded by them both makes sin to be forgotten. All study of the Torah without work must in the end be futile and become the cause of sin. Let all who are employed with the congregation act with them for Heaven's sake, for then the merit of their fathers sustains them, and their righteousness endures for ever. And as for you, (God will then say,) I account you worthy of great reward, as if you had wrought it all yourselves. (3.) Be on your guard against the ruling power; for they who exercise it draw no man near to them except for their own interests; appearing as friends when it is to their own advantage, they stand not by a man in the hour of his need. (4.) He used to say, Do His will as if it were thy will, that He may do thy will as if it were His will. Nullify thy will before His will, that He may nullify the will of others before thy will. (5) Hillel said, Separate not thyself from the congregation; trust not in thyself until the day of thy death; judge not thy neighbor until thou art come into his place; and say not anything which cannot be understood at once, in the hope that it will be understood in the end; neither say, When I have leisure I will study; perchance thou wilt have no leisure. (6.) He used to say, An empty-headed man cannot be a sinfearing man, nor can an ignorant person be pious, nor can a shamefaced man learn, nor a passionate man teach, nor

[p. 275]

can one who is engaged overmuch in business grow wise. In a place where there are no men, strive to be a man. (7.) Moreover, he saw a skull floating on the surface of the water: he said to it, Because thou drownedst others, they have drowned thee, and at the last they that drowned thee shall themselves be drowned. (8.) He used to say, The more flesh, the more worms; the more property, the more anxiety; the more women, the more witchcraft; the more maid-servants, the more lewdness; the more men-servants, the more robbery;--the more Torah, the more life; the more schooling, the more wisdom; the more counsel, the more understanding; the more charity, the more peace. He who has acquired a good name, has acquired it for himself; he who has acquired for himself words of Torah, has acquired for himself life in the world to come. (9.) Rabban Jochanan, the son of Zacchai. received the tradition from Hillel and Shammai. He used to say, if thou hast learnt much Torah, ascribe not any merit to thyself, for thereunto wast thou created. (10.) Rabban Jochanan, the son of Zacchai, had five disciples, and these are they, Rabbi Eliezer, the son of Hyrcanus, Rabbi Joshua, the son of Chananya, Rabbi Jose, the Priest, Rabbi Simeon, the son of Nathaniel, and Rabbi Eleazar, the son of Arach. (11.) He used thus to recount their praise: Eliezer, the son of Hyrcanus, is a cemented cistern, which loses not a drop; Joshua, the son of Chananya--happy is she that bare him; Jose, the Priest, is a pious man; Simeon, the son of Nathaniel, is a fearer of sin; Eleazar, the son of Arach, is like a spring flowing  ever-sustaining vigor. (12.) He used to say, If all the sages of Israel were in one scale of the balance, and Eliezer, the son of Hyrcanus, in the other, he would outweigh them all. Abba Saul said in his name, If all the sages of

[p. 276]

[paragraph continues] Israel were in one scale of the balance, and Eliezer, the son of Hyrcanus, also with them, and Eleazar, the son of Arach, in the other scale, he would outweigh them all. (13.) He said to them, Go forth and see which is the good way to which a man should cleave. R. Eliezer said, A good eye; R. Joshua said, A good friend; R. Jose said, A good neighbor; R. Simeon said, One who foresees the fruit of an action; R. Eleazar said, A good heart. Thereupon he said to them, I approve the words of Eleazar, the son of Arach, rather than your words, for in his words yours are included. (14.) He said to them, Go forth and see which is the evil way that a man should shun. R. Eliezer said, An evil eye; R. Joshua said, A bad friend; R. Jose said, A bad neighbor; R. Simeon said, One who borrows and does not repay,--it is the same whether one borrows from man or from the all-present God; as it is said, The wicked borroweth, and payeth not again, but the righteous dealeth graciously and giveth (Psalm xxxvii. 21); R. Eleazar said, A bad heart. Thereupon he said to them, I approve the words of Eleazar, the son of Arach, rather than your words, for in his words yours are included. (15.) They each said three things. R. Eliezer said, Let thy friend's honor be as dear to thee as thine own; and be not easily moved to anger; and repent one day before thy death. And (he further said), Warm thyself by the fire of the wise; but beware of their glowing coals, lest thou be burnt, for their bite is the bite of the fox, and their sting is the scorpion's sting, and their hiss is the serpent's hiss, and all their words are like coals of fire. [**] (16.) R. Joshua said, The evil eye, the evil inclination, and hatred of his fellow-creatures put a

[p. 277]

man out of the world. (17.) R. Jose said, Let the property of thy friend be as dear to thee as thine own; qualify thyself for the study of the Torah, since the knowledge of it is not an inheritance of thine, and let all thy deeds be done for the sake of Heaven. (18.) R. Simeon said, Be careful to read the Shema' and to say the Amidah; and when thou prayest, regard not thy prayer as a fixed mechanical task, but as an appeal for mercy and grace before the All-present, as it is said, For he is gracious and full of mercy, slow to anger and abounding in lovingkindness, and repenteth him of the evil (Joel ii. 13); and be not wicked in thine own esteem. (19.) R. Eleazar said, Be watchful in the study of the Torah, and know what answer to give to the unbeliever; know also before whom thou toilest, and who thy Employer is, who will pay thee the reward of thy labor. (20.) Rabbi Tarphon said. The day is short, and the work is great, and the laborers are sluggish, and the reward is much, and the Master of the house is urgent. (21.) He used also to say, It is not thy duty to complete the work, but neither art thou free to desist from it; if thou hast studied much Torah, much reward will be given thee; and faithful is thy Employer to pay thee the reward of thy labor; and know that the grant of reward unto the righteous will be in the time to come.

Rabbi Chananya, the son of Akashya, said, The Holy One, blessed be he, was pleased to make Israel worthy; wherefore he gave them a copious Torah and many commandments, as it is said, It pleased the Lord, for his righteousness' sake, to magnify the Torah and make it honorable (Isaiah xlii. 21).

[p. 278]

  

CHAPTER III.

All Israel have a portion in the world to come, as it is said (Isaiah lx. 21), And thy people shall be all righteous; they shall inherit the land for ever, the branch of my planting, the work of my hands, that I may be glorified.

(1.) Akabya, the son of Mahalalel, said, Reflect upon three things, and thou wilt not come within the power of sin: know whence thou camest, and whither thou art going, and before whom thou wilt in future have to give account and reckoning. Whence thou earnest:--from a putrefying drop; whither thou art going:--to a place of dust, worms and maggots; and before whom thou wilt in future have to give account and reckoning:--before the Supreme King of kings, the Holy One, blessed be he. (2.) R. Chanina, the Vice-High-Priest, said, Pray for the welfare of the government, since but for the year thereof men would swallow each other alive. (3.) R. Chananya, the son of Teradyon, said, If two sit together and interchange no words of Torah, they are a meeting of scorners, concerning whom it is said, The godly man sitteth not in the seat of the scorners (Ps. i. 1); but if two sit together and interchange words of Torah, the Divine Presence abides between them; as it is said, Then they that feared the Lord snake one with the other: and the Lord hearkened and heard, and a book of remembrance was written before him, for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his name (Mal. iii. 16). Now, the Scripture enables me to draw this inference in respect to two persons; whence can it be deduced that if even one person sedulously occupies himself with the Torah, the Holy One, blessed be he, appoints unto him a reward? Because it is said, Though he sit alone, and meditate in stillness, yet he taketh it (the reward) upon him (Lam. iii. 27). [**] (4.) R. Simeon said, If three have eaten at a table and have spoken there no words of Torah, it is as if they had eaten

[p. 279]

of sacrifices to dead idols, of whom it is said, For all their tables are full of vomit and filthiness; the All-present is not (in their thoughts) (Isa. xxviii. 8). But if three have eaten at a table and have spoken there words of Torah, it is as if they had eaten at the table of the All-present, to which the Scripture may be applied, And he said unto me, This is the table that is before the Lord (Ezek. xli. 22). (5.) R. Chanina, the son of Chachinai, said, He who keeps awake at night, and goes on his way alone, while turning his heart to vanity, such a one forfeits his own life. (6.) R. Nechunya, son of Hakkanah, said, Whoso receives upon himself the yoke of the Torah, from him the yoke of the kingdom and the yoke of worldly care will be removed; but whoso breaks off from him the yoke of the Torah, upon him will be laid the yoke of the kingdom and the yoke of worldly care. (7.) R. Chalafta, the son of Dosa, of the village of Chananya, said, When ten people sit together and occupy themselves with the Torah, the Shechinah abides among them, as it is said, God standeth in the congregation [**] of the godly (Psalm lxxxii. 1). And whence can it be shown that the same applies to five? Because it is said, He hath founded his band [*+] upon the earth (Amos ix. 6). And whence can it be shown that the same applies to three? Because it is said, He judgeth among the judges [*++] (Psa. lxxxii. 1). And whence can it be shown that the same applies to two? Because it is said, Then they that feared the Lord spake one with the other; and the Lord hearkened, and heard (Mal. iii. 16). And whence can it be shown that the same applies even to one? Because it is said, In every place where I cause my name to be remembered I will come unto thee and I will bless thee (Exod. xx. 24). (8.) R. Eleazar, of Bertotha, said, Give unto Him of what is His, seeing that thou and what thou hast are His: this is also found expressed by David, who said, For all things come of Thee, and of Thine own we have given Thee (1 Chron. xxix. 14). (9.) R. Jacob said, He who is walking by the way and studying, and breaks off his study and says, How fine is that tree, how fine is that fallow, him the Scripture regards as if he had forfeited his life. (10.) R. Dostai, the son of Jannai, said

[p. 280]

in the name of R. Meir, Whoso forgets one word of his study, him the Scripture regards as if he had forfeited his life, for it is said, Only take heed to thyself, and keep thy soul diligently, lest thou forget the things which thine eyes have seen (Deut. iv. 9). Now, one might suppose that the same result follows even if a man's study has been too hard for him. To guard against such an inference, it is said (ibid.), And lest they depart from thy mouth all the days of thy life. Thus, a person's guilt is not established until he deliberately and of set purpose removes those lessons from his heart. (11.) R. Chanina, the son of Dosa, said, He in whom the fear of sin comes before wisdom, his wisdom shall endure; but he in whom wisdom comes before the fear of sin, his wisdom will not endure. (12.) He used to say, He whose works exceed his wisdom, his wisdom shall endure; but he whose wisdom exceeds his works, his wisdom will not endure. (13.) He used to say, He in whom the spirit of his fellow-creatures takes delight, in him the Spirit of the All-present takes delight; and he in whom the spirit of his fellow-creatures takes not delight, in him the Spirit of the All-present takes not delight. (14.) R. Dosa, the son of Horkinas, said Morning sleep, and midday wine, and children's talk, and attending the houses of assembly of the ignorant put a man out of the world. (15.) R. Eleazar Hammudai said, He who profanes things sacred, and despises the festivals, and puts his fellow-man to shame in public, and makes void the covenant of Abraham our father, and makes the Torah bear a meaning other than the right, such a one, even though knowledge of the Torah and good deeds be his, has no share in the world to come. (16.) R. Ishmael said, Be submissive to a superior, affable to a suppliant, and receive all men with

[p. 281]

cheerfulness. (17.) R. Akiba said, Jesting and levity lead a man on to lewdness. The Massorah [**] is a fence to the Torah. tithes are a fence to riches; vows are a fence to abstinence; a fence to wisdom is silence. (18.) He used to say, Beloved is man, for he was created in the image of God; but it was by a special love that it was made known to him that he was created in the image of God, as it is said, For in the image of God made he man (Gen. ix. 6). Beloved are Israel, for they were called children of the All-present; but it was by a special love that it was made known to them that they were called children of the All-present, as it is said, Ye are children unto the Lord your God (Deut. xiv. 1). Beloved are Israel, for unto them was given the desirable instrument; but it was by a special love that it was made known to them that that desirable instrument was theirs, through which the world was created, as it is said, For I give you good doctrine: forsake ye not my Law (Prov. iv. 2). (19.) Everything is foreseen, yet freedom of choice is given; and the world is judged by grace, yet all is according to the amount of the work. (20.) He used to say, Everything is given on pledge, and a net is spread for all the living: the shop is open; and the dealer gives credit; and the ledger lies open; and the hand writes; and whosoever wishes to borrow may come and borrow; but the collectors regularly make their daily round, and exact payment from man whether he be content or not, and they have that whereon they can rely in their demand, and the judgment is a judgment of truth; and everything is prepared for the feast. (21.) R. Eleazar, the son of Azaryah, said, Where there is no Torah, there are no manners; where there are no manners, there is no Torah: where there is no wisdom, there is no fear of God; where there is no fear of God, there is no wisdom; where there is no knowledge, there is no understanding; where there is no understanding, there is no

[p. 282]

knowledge: where there is no meal, there is no Torah; where there is no Torah, there is no meal. (22.) He used to say, He whose wisdom exceeds his works, to what is he like? To a tree whose branches are many, but whose roots are few; and the wind comes and plucks it up and overturns it upon its face, as it is said, And he shall be like a lonely juniper tree in the desert, and shall not see when good cometh but shall inhabit the parched places in the wilderness, a salt land and not inhabited (Jeremiah xvii. 6). But he whose works exceed his wisdom, to what is he like? To a tree whose branches are few, but whose roots are many, so that even if all the winds in the world come and blow upon it, it cannot be stirred from its place, as it is said, And he shall be as a tree planted by the waters; and that spreadeth out its roots by the river, and shall not perceive when heat cometh, but his leaf shall be green; and shall not be troubled in the year of drought, neither shall cease from yielding fruit (Jeremiah xvii. 8). (23.) R. Eleazar Chisma said, The laws concerning the sacrifices of birds and the purification of women are ordinances of moment; astronomy and geometry are the after-courses of wisdom.

Rabbi Chananya, the son of Akashya, said, The Holy One, blessed be he, was pleased to make Israel worthy; wherefore he gave them a copious Torah and many commandments, as it is said, It pleased the Lord, for his righteousness' sake, to magnify the Torah and make it honorable (Isaiah xlii. 21).

  

CHAPTER IV.

All Israel have a portion in the world to come, as it is said (Isaiah lx. 21), And thy people shall be all righteous; they shall inherit the land for ever, the branch of my planting, the work of my hands, that I may be glorified.

(1.) Ben Zoma said, Who is wise? He who learns from

[p. 283]

all men, as it is said, From all my teachers I have gotten understanding (Psalm cxix. 99). Who is mighty? He who subdues his passions, as it is said, He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty, and he that ruleth over his spirit than he that taketh a city (Prov. xvi. 32). Who is rich? He who rejoices in his portion, as it is said, When thou eatest the labor of thine hands, happy art thou, and it shall be well with thee (Psalm cxxviii. 2); happy art thou in this world, and it shall be well with thee in the world to come. Who is honored? He who honors others, as it is said, For them that honor me I will honor, and they that despise me shall be held in contempt (1 Sam. ii. 30). (2.) Ben Azzai said, Run to do even a slight precept, and flee from transgression; for precept draws precept in its train, and transgression, transgression; for the recompense of a precept is a precept, and the recompense of a transgression, a transgression. (3.) He used to say, Despise not any man, and carp not at any thing; for there is not a man that has not his hour, and there is not a thing that has not its place. (4.) R. Levitas, of Jabneh, said, Be exceedingly lowly of spirit, since the hope of man is but the worm. (5.) R. Jochanan, the son of Berokah, said, Whosoever profanes the Name of Heaven in secret will suffer the penalty for it in public; and this, whether the Heavenly Name be profaned in ignorance or in wilfulness. (6.) R. Ishmael, his son, said, He who learns in order to teach, to him the means will be vouchsafed both to learn and to teach; but he who learns in order to practice, to him the means will be vouchsafed to learn and to teach, to observe and to practice. (7.) R. Zadok said, Separate not thyself from the congregation; (in the judge's office) act not the counsel's part; make not of the Torah a crown wherewith to aggrandise thyself, nor a spade wherewith to dig. So also used Hillel to say, He who makes a worldly use of the crown of the Torah shall waste away. Hence thou mayest infer, that whosoever derives a profit for himself from the words of the Torah is

[p. 284]

helping on his own destruction. (8.) R. Jose said, Whoso honors the Torah will himself be honored by mankind, but whoso dishonors the Torah will himself be dishonored by mankind. (9.) R. Ishmael, his son, said, He who shuns the judicial office rids himself of hatred, robbery and vain swearing; but he who presumptuously lays down  is foolish, wicked and of an arrogant spirit. (10.) He used to say, Judge not alone, for none may judge alone save One; neither say (to thy judicial colleagues), Accept my view, for the choice is theirs (to concur); and it is not for thee (to compel concurrence). (11.) R. Jonathan said, Whoso fulfils the Torah in the midst of poverty shall in the end fulfil it in the midst of wealth; and whoso neglects the Torah in the midst of wealth shall in the end neglect it in the midst of poverty. (12.) R. Meir said, Lessen thy toil for worldly goods, and be busy in the Torah; be humble of spirit before all men; if thou neglectest the Torah, many causes for neglecting it will present themselves to thee, but if thou laborest in the Torah, He has abundant recompense to give thee. (13.) R. Eliezer, the son of Jacob, said, He who does one precept has gotten himself one advocate; and he who commits one transgression has gotten himself one accuser. Repentance and good deeds are as a shield against punishment. (14.) R. Jochanan, the sandal maker, said, Every assembly which is in the Name of Heaven will in the end be established, but that which is not in the Name of Heaven will not in the end be established. (15.) R. Eleazar, the son of Shammua, said, Let the honor of thy disciple be as dear to thee as thine own, and the honor of thine associate be like the fear of thy master, and the fear of thy master like the fear of Heaven. (16.) Judah said, Be cautious in study, for an error in study may

[p. 285]

amount to presumptuous sin. (17.) R. Simeon said, There are three crowns: the crown of Torah, the crown of priesthood, and the crown of kingdom; but the crown of a good name excels them all. (18.) R. Nehorai said, Wander forth to a home of the Torah, and say not that the Torah will come after thee; for there thy associates will establish thee in the possession of it; and lean not upon thine own understanding. (19.) R. Jannai said, It is not in our power to explain either the prosperity of the wicked or the afflictions of the righteous. (20.) R. Mattithyah, the son of Cheresh, said, Be beforehand in the salutation of peace to all men; and be rather a tail to lions than a head to foxes. (21.) R. Jacob said, This world is like a vestibule before the world to come; prepare thyself in the vestibule, that thou mayest enter into the hall. (22.) He used to say, Better is one hour of repentance and good deeds in this world than the whole life of the world to come; and better is one hour of blissfulness of spirit in the world to come than the whole life of this world (23.) R. Simeon, the son of Eleazar, said, Do not appease thy fellow in the hour of his anger, and comfort him not in the hour when his dead lies before him, and question him not in the hour of his vow, and strive not to see him in the hour of his disgrace. (24.) Samuel the younger used to quote, Rejoice not when thine enemy falleth, and let not thine heart be glad when he stumbleth: lest the Lord see it and it displease him, and he turn away his wrath from him (Prov. xxiv. 17, 18). (25.) Elisha, the son of Abuyah, said, If one learns as a child, what is it like? Like ink written on clean paper. If one learns as an old man, what is it like? Like ink written on blotted paper.

[p. 286]

[paragraph continues] (26.) R. Jose, the son of Judah, of Chephar Babli, said, He who learns from the young, to what is he like? To one who eats unripe grapes, and drinks wine from his vat. And he who learns from the old, to what is he like? To one who eats ripe grapes, and drinks old wine. (27.) R. Meir said, Look not at the flask, but at what it contains: there may be a new flask full of old wine, and an old flask that has not even new wine in it. (28.) R. Eleazar Hakkappar said, Envy, cupidity and ambition take a man from the world. (29.)He used to say, They that are born are destined to die; and the dead to be brought to life again; and the living to be judged, to know, to make known, and to be made conscious that he is God, he the Maker, he the Creator, he the Discerner, he the Judge, he the Witness, he the Complainant; he it is that will in future judge, blessed be he, with whom there is no unrighteousness, nor forgetfulness, nor respect of persons, nor taking of bribes: know also that everything is according to the reckoning: and let not thy imagination give thee hope that the grave will be a place of refuge for thee; for perforce thou wast formed, and perforce thou wast born, and thou livest perforce, and perforce thou wilt die, and perforce thou wilt in the future have to give account and reckoning before the Supreme King of kings, the Holy One, blessed be he.

Rabbi Chananya, the son of Akashya, said, The Holy One blessed be he, was pleased to make Israel worthy; wherefore he gave them a copious Torah and many commandments, as it is said, It pleased the Lord, for his righteousness' sake, to magnify the Torah and make it honorable (Isaiah xlii. 21).

[p. 287]

  

CHAPTER V.

All Israel have a portion in the world to come, as it is said (Isaiah lx. 21), And thy people shall be all righteous; they shall inherit the land for ever, the branch of my planting, the work of my hands, that I may be glorified.

(1) With ten Sayings [**] the world was created. What does this teach us? Could it not have been created with one Saying? It is to make known the punishment that will befall the wicked who destroy the world that was created with ten Sayings, as well as the goodly reward that will be bestowed upon the just who preserve the world that was created with ten sayings. (2.) There were ten generations from Adam to Noah, to make known how longsuffering God is, seeing that all those generations continued provoking him, until he brought upon them the waters of the flood. (3.) There were ten generations from Noah to Abraham, to make known how longsuffering God is, seeing that all those generations continued provoking him, until Abraham our father came, and received the reward they should all have earned. (4.) With ten trials our father Abraham was tried, and he stood firm in them all, to make known how great was the love of our father Abraham. (5.) Ten miracles were wrought for our fathers in Egypt, and ten at the Sea. (6.) Ten plagues did the Holy One, blessed be he, bring upon the Egyptians in Egypt, and ten at the Sea. (7.) With ten temptations did our fathers tempt the Holy One, blessed be he, in the wilderness, as it is said, And they have tempted me these ten times, and have not hearkened to my voice (Numb. xiv. 22). (8.) Ten miracles were wrought for our fathers in the Temple: no woman miscarried from the scent of the holy flesh; the holy flesh never became putrid; no fly was seen in the slaughter house: no unclean accident ever befell the high priest on the Day of

[p. 288]

[paragraph continues] Atonement; the rain never quenched the fire of the wood-pile on the altar; neither did the wind overcome the column of smoke that arose therefrom; nor was there ever found any disqualifying defect in the omer (of new barley, offered on the second day of Passover), or in the two loaves (the first fruits of the wheat-harvest, offered on Pentecost), or in the shewbread; though the people stood closely pressed together, they found ample space to prostrate themselves; never did serpent or scorpion injure any one in Jerusalem; nor did any man ever say to his fellow, The place is too strait for me to lodge over night in Jerusalem. (9.) Ten things were created on the eve of Sabbath in the twilight: [**] the mouth of the earth (Numb. xvi. 32); the mouth of the well (Ibid. xxi. 16); the mouth of the ass (Ibid. xxii. 28); the rainbow; the manna; the rod (Exod. iv. 17); the Shamir; [*+] the shape of the written characters; the writing, and the tables of stone: some say the destroying spirits also, and the sepulchre of Moses, and the ram of Abraham our father; and others say, tongs also made with tongs [*++]. (10.) There are seven marks of an uncultured, and seven of a wise man. The wise man does not speak before him who is greater than he in wisdom; and does not break in upon the speech of his fellow; he is not hasty to answer; he questions according to the subject matter, and answers to the point; he speaks upon the first thing first, and upon the last last; regarding that which he has not understood he says, I do not understand it, and he acknowledges the truth. The reverse of all this is to be found in an uncultured man. (11.) Seven kinds of punishment come into the world for seven important transgressions. If some give their tithes and others do not, a dearth ensues from drought, and some suffer hunger while others are full. If they all determine to give no tithes, a dearth ensues from tumult and drought. If they further resolve

[p. 289]

not to give the dough-cake (Numb. xv. 20), an exterminating dearth ensues. Pestilence comes into the world to fulfil those death penalties threatened in the Torah, the execution of which, however, is not within the function of a human tribunal, and for the violation of the law regarding the fruits of the seventh year (Levit. xxv. 1-7). The sword comes into the world for the delay of justice, and for the perversion of justice, and on account of the offence of those who interpret the Torah not according to its true sense. Noxious beasts come into the world for vain swearing, and for the profanation of the Divine Name. Captivity comes into the world on account of idolatry, immorality, bloodshed, and the neglect of the year of rest for the soil. (12.) At four periods pestilence grows apace: in the fourth year, in the seventh, at the conclusion of the seventh year, and at the conclusion of the Feast of Tabernacles in each year: in the fourth year, for default of giving the tithe to the poor in the third year (Deut. xiv. 28, 29); in the seventh year, for default of giving the tithe to the poor in the sixth year; at the conclusion of the seventh year, for the violation of the law regarding the fruits of the seventh year, and at the conclusion of the Feast of Tabernacles in each year, for robbing the poor of the grants legally assigned to them. [**] (13.) There are four characters among men: he who says, What is mine is mine and what is thine is thine, his is a neutral character:--some say, this is a character like that of Sodom; he who says, What is mine is thine and what is thine is mine, is a boor; he who says, What is mine is thine and what is thine is thine, is a saint; he who says, What is thine is mine and what is mine is mine, is a wicked man. (14.) There are four kinds of tempers: he whom it is easy to provoke and easy to pacify, his loss disappears in his gain; he whom it is hard to provoke and hard to pacify, his gain disappears in his loss; he whom it is hard to provoke and easy to pacify is a saint; he whom it is easy to provoke and hard to pacify is a wicked man. (15.) There are four qualities in disciples: he who quickly understands and quickly forgets, his gain disappears in his loss; he who understands with difficulty and forgets with difficulty, his loss disappears

[p. 290]

in his gain; he who understands quickly and forgets with difficulty, his is a good portion; he who understands with difficulty and forgets quickly, his is an evil portion. (16.) As to almsgiving there are four dispositions: he who desires to give, but that others should not give, his eye is evil towards what appertains to others (since almsgiving brings blessing to the giver); he who desires that others should give, but will not give himself, his eye is evil against what is his own; he who gives and wishes others to give is a saint; he who will not give and does not wish others to give is a wicked man. (17.) There are four characters suggested by those who attend the house of study: he who goes and does not practise secures the reward for going; he who practises but does not go secures the reward for practising; he who goes and practises is a saint; he who neither goes nor practises is a wicked man. (18.) There are four qualities among those that sit before the wise: they are like a sponge, a funnel, a strainer, or a sieve: a sponge, which sucks up everything; a funnel, which lets in at one end and out at the other; a strainer, which lets the wine pass out and retains the lees; a sieve, which lets out the bran and retains the fine flour. (19.) Whenever love depends upon some material cause, with the passing away of that cause, the love too passes away; but if it be not dependent upon such a cause, it will not pass away for ever. Which love was that which depended upon a material cause? Such was the love of Amnon and Tamar. And that which depended upon no such cause? Such was the love of David and Jonathan. (20.) Every controversy that is in the Name of Heaven shall in the end lead to a permanent result, but every controversy that is not in the Name of Heaven shall not lead to a permanent result. Which controversy was that which was in the Name of Heaven? Such was the controversy of Hillel and Shammai. And that which was not in the Name of Heaven? Such was the controversy of Korah and all his company. (21.) Whosoever causes the multitude to be righteous, through him no sin shall be brought about: but he who causes the multitude to sin

[p. 291]

shall not have the means to repent (the sins of others being beyond the remedial action of his repentance). Moses was righteous and made the multitude righteous; the righteousness of the multitude was laid upon him, as it is said, He executed the justice of the Lord and his judgments with Israel (Deut. xxxiii. 21). Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, sinned and caused the multitude to sin: the sin of the multitude was laid upon him, as it is said, For the sins of Jeroboam which he sinned and which he made Israel to sin (1 Kings xv. 30). (22.) Whosoever has these three attributes is of the disciples of Abraham our father, but whosoever has three other attributes is of the disciples of Balaam the wicked. A good eye, a humble mind and a lowly spirit (are the tokens) of the disciples of Abraham our father; an evil eye, a haughty mind and a proud spirit (are the signs) of the disciples of Balaam the wicked. What is the difference between the disciples of Abraham our father and those of Balaam the wicked? The disciples of Abraham our father enjoy this world and inherit the world to come, as it is said, That I may cause those that love me to inherit substance, and may fill all their treasuries (Prov. viii. 21); the disciples of Balaam the wicked inherit Gehinnom and descend into the pit of destruction, as it is said, But thou, O God, wilt bring them down into the pit of destruction: bloodthirsty and deceitful men shall not live out half their days; but I will trust in thee (Psalm lv. 24). (23.) Judah, the son of Tema, said, Be strong as a leopard, light as an eagle, fleet as a hart, and strong as a lion, to do the will of thy Father who is in heaven. He used to say, The bold-faced are for Gehinnom, the shame-faced for the Garden of Eden. (He said further) May it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, that the Temple be speedily rebuilt in our days, and grant our portion in thy Law. (24.) He used to say, At five years the age is reached for the study of the Scripture, at ten for the study of the Mishnah, at thirteen for the

[p. 292]

fulfilment of the commandments, at fifteen for the study of the Talmud, at eighteen for marriage, at twenty for seeking a livelihood, at thirty for entering into one's full strength, at forty for understanding, at fifty for counsel, at sixty a man attains old age, at seventy the hoary head, at eighty the gift of special strength (Psalm xc. 10), at ninety he bends beneath the weight of years, at a hundred he is as if he were already dead and had passed away from the world. (25.) Ben Bag Bag said, Turn it (the Torah) and turn it over again, for everything is in it, and contemplate it, and wax gray and old over it, and stir not from it, for thou canst have no better rule than this. (26.) Ben He He said, According to the labor is the reward.

Rabbi Chananya, the son of Akashya, said, The Holy One, blessed be he, was pleased to make Israel worthy; wherefore he gave them a copious Torah and many commandments, as it is said, It pleased the Lord, for his righteousness' sake, to magnify the Torah and make it honorable (Isaiah xlii. 21).

  

CHAPTER VI [**]

All Israel have a portion in the world to come, as it is said (Isaiah lx. 21), And thy people shall be all righteous; they shall inherit the land for ever, the branch of my planting, the work of my hands, that I may be glorified.

The sages taught the following in the style of the Mishnah,--Blessed be he that made choice of them and their Mishnah. (1.) R. Meir said. Whosoever labors in the Torah for its own sake merits many things; and not only so, but the whole world is indebted to him: he is called friend, beloved, a lover of the All-present, a lover of mankind: it clothes him

[p. 293]

in meekness and reverence; it fits him to become just, pious, upright and faithful; it keeps him far from sin, and brings him near to virtue: through him the world enjoys counsel and sound knowledge, understanding and strength, as it is said, Counsel is mine, and sound knowledge; I am understanding; I have strength (Prov. viii. 14 [**]): and it gives him sovereignty and dominion and discerning judgment; to him the secrets of the Torah are revealed; he is made like a never-failing fountain, and like a river that flows on with ever-sustained vigor he becomes modest, longsuffering, and forgiving of insults; and it magnifies and exalts him above all things. (2.) R. Joshua, the son of Levi, said, Every day a Bath-kol (a heavenly voice) goes forth from Mount Sinai, proclaiming these words, Woe to mankind for contempt of the Torah, for whoever does not labor in the Torah is said to be under the divine censure, as it is said, As a ring of gold in a swine's snout, so is a fair woman who turneth aside from discretion (Prov. xi. 22); and it says, And the tables were the work of God, and the writing was the writing of God, graven upon the tables. Read not charuth (graven), but cheruth (freedom), for no man is free but he who labors in the Torah. But whosoever labors in the Torah, behold he shall be exalted, as it is said, And from Mattanah to Nachaliel, and from Nachaliel to Bamoth [*++] (Numb. xxi. 19). (3.) He who learns from his fellow a single chapter, a single rule, a single verse, a single expression, or even a single letter, ought to pay him honor, for so we find with David, King of Israel, who learnt only two things from Ahitophel, [* section] and yet regarded him as his master, His guide and his familiar friend, as it is said, But it was thou, a man, mine equal, my guide, and my familiar friend (Psalm 1v. 14). Now, is it not an argument from minor to major? Ii David, the King of Israel, who learned only two things from Ahitophel, regarded him as his master, guide and familiar

[p. 294]

friend, how much more ought one who learns from his fellow a chapter, rule, verse, expression, or even a single letter, to pay him honor? And honor is nothing but Torah, as it is said, The wise shall inherit honor (Prov. iii. 35); and the perfect shall inherit good (Ibid. xxviii. 10). And good is nothing but Torah, as it is said, For I give you good doctrine, forsake ye not my Torah (Ibid. iv. 2). (4.) This is the way that is becoming for the study of the Torah: a morsel of bread with salt thou must eat, and water by measure thou must drink, thou must sleep upon the ground, and live a life of trouble the while thou toilest in the Torah. If thou doest this, Happy shalt thou be and it shall be well with thee (Psalm cxxviii. 2); happy shalt thou be in this world, and it shall be well with thee in the world to come. (5.) Seek not greatness for thyself, and court not honor; let thy works exceed thy learning; and crave not after the table of kings; for thy table is greater than theirs, and thy crown is greater than theirs, and thy Employer is faithful to pay thee the reward of thy work. (6.) The Torah is greater than the priesthood and than royalty, seeing that royalty demands thirty qualifications, [**] the priesthood twenty-four, [*+] while the Torah is acquired by forty-eight. And these are they: By audible study; by distinct pronunciation; by understanding and discernment of the heart; by awe, reverence, meekness, cheerfulness; by ministering to the sages, by attaching oneself to colleagues, by discussion with disciples; by sedateness; by knowledge of the Scripture and of the Mishnah; by moderation in business, in intercourse with the world, in pleasure, in sleep, in conversation, in laughter; by longsuffering; by a good heart; by faith in the wise; by resignation

[p. 295]

under chastisement; by recognizing one's place, rejoicing in one's portion, putting a fence to one's words, claiming no merit for oneself; by being beloved, loving the All-present, loving mankind, loving just courses, rectitude and reproof; by keeping oneself far from honor, not boasting of one's learning, nor delighting in giving decisions; by bearing the yoke with one's fellow, judging him favorably, and leading him to truth and peace; by being composed in one's study; by asking and answering, hearing and adding thereto (by one's own reflection); by learning with the object of teaching, and by learning with the object of practising; by making one's master wiser, fixing attention upon his discourse, and reporting a thing in the name of him who said it. So thou hast learnt, Whosoever reports a thing in the name of him who said it brings deliverance into the world, as it is said, And Esther told the king in the name of Mordecai (Esther ii. 22). (7.) Great is the Torah which gives life to those that practise it in this world and in the world to come, as it is said, For they are life unto those that find them, and health to all their flesh (Prov. iv. 22); and it says, It shall be health to thy navel, and marrow to thy bones (Ibid. iii. 8); and it says, It is a tree of life to them that grasp it, and of them that uphold it every one is rendered happy (Ibid. iii. 18); and it says, For they shall be a chaplet of grace unto thy head, and chains about thy neck (Ibid. i. 9); and it says, It shall give to thine head a chaplet of grace: a crown of glory it shall deliver to thee (Ibid. iv. 9); and it says, For by me thy days shall be multiplied, and the years of thy life shall be increased (Ibid. ix. 11); and it says, Length of days is in its right hand; in its left hand are riches and honor (Ibid. iii. 16); and it says, For length of days, and years of life, and peace shall they add to thee (Ibid. iii. 2). (8.) R. Simeon, the son of Judah, in the name of R. Simeon, the son of Jochai, said, Beauty, strength, riches, honor, wisdom, old age and a hoary head and children are comely to the righteous and comely to the world, as it is said, The hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be found

[p. 296]

in the way of righteousness (Ibid. xvi. 31); and it says, The glory of young men is their strength, and the adornment of old men is the hoary head (Ibid. xx. 29); and it says, A crown unto the wise is their riches (Ibid. xiv. 24); and it says, Children's children are the crown of old men, and the adornment of children are their fathers (Ibid. xvii. 6); and it is said, Then the moon shall be confounded and the sun ashamed; for the Lord of hosts shall reign in Mount Zion and in Jerusalem, and before his elders shall be glory (Isaiah xxiv. 23). R. Simeon, the son of Menasya, said, These seven qualifications which the sages enumerated as becoming to the righteous were all realized in Rabbi Judah the Prince, and in his sons. (9.) R. Jose, the son of Kisma, said, I was once walking by the way, when a man met me and saluted me, and I returned the salutation. He said to me, Rabbi, from what place art thou? I said to him, I come from a great city of sages and scribes. He said to me, If thou art willing to dwell with us in our place, I will give thee a thousand thousand golden dinars and precious stones and pearls. I said to him, Wert thou to give me all the silver and gold and precious stones and pearls in the world, I would not dwell anywhere but in a home of the Torah; and thus it is written in the book of Psalms by the hands of David, King of Israel, The law of thy mouth is better unto me than thousands of gold and silver (Psalm cxix. 72); and not only so, but in the hour of man's departure neither silver nor gold nor precious stones nor pearls accompany him, but only Torah and good works, as it is said, When thou walkest it shall lead thee; when thou liest down it shall watch over thee; and when thou awakest it shall talk with thee (Prov. vi. 22):--when thou walkest it shall lead thee--in this world; when thou liest down it shall watch over thee--in the grave; and when thou awakest it shall talk with thee--in the world to come. And it says, The silver is mine, and the gold is

[p. 297]

mine, saith the Lord of hosts (Haggai ii. 8). (10.) Five pos. sessions the Holy One, blessed be he, made especially his own in his world, and these are they, The Torah, heaven and earth, Abraham, Israel, and the house of the sanctuary. Whence know we this of the Torah? Because it is written, The Lord possessed me as the beginning of his way, before his works, from of old (Prov. viii. 22). Whence of heaven and earth? Because it is written, Thus saith the Lord, The heaven is my throne, and the earth is my footstool: what manner of house will ye build unto me? and what manner of place for my rest? (Isaiah lxvi. 1); and it says, How manifold are thy works, O Lord! In wisdom hast thou made them all: the earth is full of thy possessions (Psalm civ. 24). Whence of Abraham? Because it is written, And he blessed him, and said, Blessed be Abram of the Most High God, possessor of heaven and earth (Genesis xiv. 19). Whence of Israel? Because it is written, Till thy people pass over, O Lord, till the people pass over which thou hast acquired (Exod. xv. 16); and it says, As for the saints that are in the earth, they are noble ones in whom is all my delight (Psalm xvi. 3). Whence of the house of the sanctuary? Because it is written, The place, O Lord, which thou hast made for thee to dwell in, the sanctuary, O Lord, which thy hands have prepared (Exod. xv. 17); and it says, And he brought them to the border of his sanctuary, to this mountain which his right hand had acquired (Psalm lxxviii. 54). (11). Whatsoever the Holy One, blessed be he, created, in his world he created but for his glory, as it is said, Everything that is called by my name, it is for my glory I have created it, I have formed it, yea, I have made it (Isaiah xliii. 7); and it says, The Lord shall reign for ever and ever (Exod. xv. 18).

Rabbi Chananya, the son of Akashya, said, The Holy One, blessed be he, was pleased to make Israel worthy; wherefore he gave them a copious Torah and many commandments, as it is said, It pleased the Lord, for his righteousness' sake, to magnify the Torah and make it honorable (Isaiah xlii. 21).

"It is our duty," etc., <page 262>. Mourner's Kaddish, <page 263>.

Footnotes

^271:* The word Torah is left untranslated. It is variously used for the Pentateuch, the Scriptures, the Oral Law, as well as for the whole body of religious truth, study and practice.

^276:* The highest gifts, if abused, may prove a source of suffering to those whom they are designed to benefit.

^278:* Where biblical verses are employed not in a strictly literal sense, it is to be observed that the Rabbis, like other preachers, made use of such passages for homiletical purposes, as illustrations of their meaning rather than as logical foundations for their teaching. It was felt that additional weight would attach to any opinion with which some point of contact could he found in the Scriptures.

^279:* Ten are the minimum to form a "congregation" (Edah).

^279:+ Five, the minimum to constitute a "band" (Aguddah).

^279:++ The smallest judicial tribunal was composed of three judges.

^281:* The oral tradition, in accordance with which the text of the Scriptures is determined and interpreted.

^287:* In Genesis i. the sentence, "And God said," occurs nine times. Verse 1, "In the beginning God created heaven and earth," is taken as another "Saying" in accordance with Psalm xxxiii. 6. "By the word of the Lord were the heavens made."

^288:* All phenomena that seemed to partake at once of the natural and the supernatural, were conceived as having had their origin in the interval between the close of the work of creation and the commencement of the Sabbath.

^288:+ A worm, spoken of in the legendary history of Solomon (See Gittin, 68a, Sotah, 48b). It is said to have had the power of splitting the hardest stone upon which it was placed, and was therefore used by Solomon in building the Temple, in the construction of which no iron tool was to be employed.

^288:++ A type of the various means and instruments which, tending in their descent and distribution to the benefit of mankind, have their origin with God.

^289:* The gleanings, the forgotten sheaves, and the corners of the field. See Levit. xix. 9; Deut. xxiv. 19.

^292:* This chapter, called Chapter on the Acquisition of the Torah, or Boraitha of R. Meir, is not a part of the Mishnah, but of the collection of rabbinical dicta next in authority to it, and known as Boraithoth, or "External Teachings."

^293:* Wisdom, of which the Torah is the embodiment, speaks these words.

^293:++ A play upon the words of the text: Mattanah = "gift"; Nachaliel = "the heritage of God"; Bamoth = "high places."

^293: section In the two matters referred to in Psalm lv. 15, "We took sweet counsel together," and "We walked into the house of God with the throng," David is said to have followed the teaching of Ahitophel.

^294:* See Sanhedrin ch. ii.

^294:+ See Baba Kama, 110b, and Mid. Tanchuma, section Bamidbar.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 298]

  

SERVICE FOR THE CONCLUSION OF THE SABBATH

Psalm cxliv.

A Psalm of David. Blessed be the Lord my rock, who teacheth my hands to war, and my fingers to fight: my lovingkindness, and my fortress, my stronghold, and my deliverer; my shield, and he in whom I take refuge: who subdueth my people under me. Lord, what is man, that thou regardest him? or the son of man, that thou takest account of him? Man is like to vanity: his days are as a shadow that passeth away. Bow thy heavens, O Lord, and come down: touch the mountains, and they shall smoke. Flash forth lightning, and scatter them: send out thine arrows, and discomfit them. Stretch forth thine hands from above; rescue me, and deliver me out of great waters, out of the hand of strangers; whose mouth speaketh vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of falsehood. I will sing a new song unto thee, O God: upon a harp of ten strings will I sing praises unto thee. It is he that giveth salvation unto kings: who rescueth David his servant from the hurtful sword. Rescue me, and deliver me out of the hand of strangers, whose mouth speaketh vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of falsehood.--When our sons shall be as plants grown tall in their youth, and our daughters as corner-stones hewn after the fashion of a palace; when our garners are full, affording all manner of store, and our sheep bring forth by thousands; yea, are multiplied by tens of thousands in our fields; when our oxen are well laden; when there is no breach and no surrender; and no

[p. 299]

lamentation in our streets; happy is the people, that is in such a case: yea, happy is the people, whose God is the Lord.

Psalm lxvii.

For the Chief Musician; on Neginoth. A Psalm, A Song. May God be gracious unto us, and bless us; may he cause his face to shine upon us. (Selah.) That thy way may be known upon the earth, thy salvation among all nations. Let the peoples give thanks unto thee, O God; let all the peoples give thanks unto thee. O let the nations rejoice and exult: for thou wilt judge the peoples with equity, and lead the nations upon the earth. (Selah.) Let the peoples give thanks unto thee, O God; let all the peoples give thanks unto thee. The earth hath yielded her increase: God, even our God, shall bless us. God shall bless us; and all the ends of the earth shall fear him.

For Evening Service, Amidah and Kaddish to "And say ye Amen," see pp. <page 128>-<page 149>. Then say the following:

And let the pleasantness of the Lord our God be upon us: and establish thou the work of our hands upon us; yea, the work of our hands establish thou it.

Psalm xci.

He that dwelleth in the shelter of the Most High abideth under the shadow of the Almighty. I say of the Lord, He is my refuge and my fortress; my God in whom I trust.--For he shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler, and from the noisome pestilence.

[p. 300]

[paragraph continues] He shall cover thee with his pinions, and under his wings shalt thou take refuge: his truth shall be a shield and a buckler. Thou shalt not be afraid of the terror by night, nor of the arrow that flieth by day; of the pestilence that walketh in darkness, nor of the plague that ravageth at noon day. A thousand may fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand; it shall not come nigh unto thee. Only with thine eyes shalt thou look on, and see the retribution of the wicked. For thou, O Lord, art my refuge.--Thou hast made the Most High thy dwelling place; there shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any scourge come nigh thy tent. For he shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. They shall bear thee upon their hands, lest thou strike thy foot against a stone. Thou shalt tread upon the lion and the adder: upon the young lion and the serpent shalt thou trample.--Because he hath set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him: I will set him on high, because he knoweth my name. When he calleth upon me, I will answer him; I will be with him in trouble: I will deliver him and honor him. With length of days will I satisfy him, and will let him see my salvation. Repeat the last verse.

But thou art holy, O thou that dwellest amid the praises of Israel And one cried unto another, and said, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts: the whole earth is full of his glory.  [**]And they receive sanction the one from the other, and say, Holy in the highest heavens, the place of his divine abode; holy upon earth, the work of his might; holy for ever and to all eternity is the Lord of hosts; the whole earth is full of the radiance

[p. 301]

of his glory. Then a wind lifted me up, and I heard behind me the voice of a great rushing (saying), Blessed be the glory of the Lord from his place.  [**]Then a wind lifted me up, and I heard behind me the voice of a great rushing, of those who uttered praises, and said, Blessed be the glory of the Lord from the region of his divine abode. The Lord shall reign for ever and ever.  [**]The kingdom of the Lord endureth for ever and to all eternity. O Lord, the God of Abraham, of Isaac and of Israel, our fathers, keep this for ever in the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of thy people, and direct their heart unto thee. And he, being merciful, forgiveth iniquity and destroyeth not: yea, many a time he turneth his anger away, and doth not stir up all his wrath. For thou, O Lord, art good and forgiving, and abounding in lovingkindness to all them that call upon thee. Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness, and thy Law is truth. Thou wilt show truth to Jacob and lovingkindness to Abraham, according as thou hast sworn unto our fathers from the days of old. Blessed be the Lord day by day; if one burdeneth us, God is our salvation. (Selah). The Lord of hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our stronghold. (Selah.) O Lord of hosts, happy is the man who trusteth in thee. Save, Lord: may the King answer us on the day when we call. Blessed is our God, who hath created us for his glory, and hath separated us from them that go astray, and hath given us the Law of truth and planted everlasting life in our midst. May he open our heart unto his Law, and place his love and fear within our hearts, that we

[p. 302]

may do his will and serve him with a perfect heart, that we may not labor in vain, nor bring forth for confusion. May it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, that we may keep thy statutes in this world, and be worthy to live to witness and inherit happiness and blessing in the days of the Messiah and in the life of the world to come. To the end that my glory may sing praise unto thee, and not be silent: O Lord my God, I will give thanks unto thee for ever. Blessed is the man that trusteth in the Lord, and whose trust the Lord is. Trust ye in the Lord for ever; for in Jah the Lord is an everlasting rock. And they that know thy name will put their trust in thee; for thou hast not forsaken them that seek thee, Lord. It pleased the Lord, for his righteousness' sake, to magnify the Law and to make it honorable.

Should a Festival occur on any day of the following week, "And let the pleasantness," etc., and "But thou art holy," are not said. If the Fast of the Ninth of Ab commences at the termination of the Sabbath, "And let the pleasantness," etc., is omitted.

Reader.--Magnified and sanctified be his great name in the world which he hath created according to his will. May he establish his kingdom during your life and during your days; and during the life of all the house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

Cong. and Reader.--Let his great name be blessed for ever and to all eternity.

[p. 303]

Reader.--Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted. extolled and honored, magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One, blessed be he.; though he be high above all the blessings and hymns, praises and consolations, which are uttered in the world; and say ye Amen.

Cong.--Accept our prayer in mercy and in favor.

Reader.--May the prayers and supplications of all Israel be accepted by their Father who is in heaven; and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--Let the name of the Lord be blessed from this time forth and for evermore.

Reader.--May there be abundant peace from heaven, and life for us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--My help is from the Lord, who made heaven and earth.

Reader.--He who maketh peace in his high places, may he make peace for us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

On Chanukah the lights are here kindled by the Reader.

And God give thee of the dew of heaven, and of the fatness of the earth, and plenty of corn and wine: let peoples serve thee, and nations bow down to thee: be lord over thy brethren, and let thy mother's sons bow down to thee: cursed be every one that curseth thee, and blessed be every one that blesseth thee. And God Almighty bless thee, and make thee fruitful, and multiply thee, that thou mayest be a company of peoples; and give thee the blessing of Abraham, to thee and to thy seed with thee; that thou mayest inherit the land of thy sojournings, which God gave unto Abraham. From the God of thy father--

[p. 304]

may he help thee,--and the Almighty--may he bless thee with blessings of the heavens above, blessings of the deep that coucheth beneath, blessings of the breasts and the womb. The blessings of thy father have prevailed above the blessings of my progenitors unto the utmost bound of the everlasting hills: may they be on the head of Joseph, and on the crown of the head of him that is prince among his brethren. And he will love thee, and bless thee, and multiply thee: he will also bless the fruit of thy body and the fruit of thy ground, thy corn and thy wine and thine oil, the offspring of thy kine and the young of thy flock, in the land which he sware unto thy fathers to give thee. Thou shalt be blessed above all peoples: there shall not be male or female barren among you, or among your cattle. And the Lord will take away from thee all sickness; and he will put none of the evil diseases of Egypt, which thou knowest, upon thee, but will lay them upon all them that hate thee.

The angel who hath redeemed me from all evil bless the lads; and let my name be named on them, and the name of my fathers Abraham and Isaac; and let them grow into a multitude in the midst of the earth. The Lord your God hath multiplied you, and behold ye are this day as the stars of heaven for multitude. The Lord, the God of your fathers, make you a thousand times so many more as you are, and bless you, as he hath promised you.

Blessed shalt thou be in the city, and blessed shalt thou be in the field. Blessed shalt thou be when thou comest in, and blessed shalt thou be when thou goest out. Blessed shall be thy basket and thy kneading-trough. Blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy ground, and the fruit of thy cattle, the offspring of thy kine, and the young of thy flock. The Lord shall command the blessing upon thee in thy barns, and in all that thou puttest thine hand unto; and he shall bless thee in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee. The Lord shall open unto thee his good treasury, the heavens, to give the rain of thy land in its season, and to bless

[p. 305]

all the work of thy hand: and thou shalt lend unto many nations, but thou shalt not borrow. For the Lord thy God will bless thee, as he promised thee: and thou shalt lend unto many nations, but thou shalt not borrow; and thou shalt rule over many nations, but they shall not rule over thee. Happy art thou, O Israel: who is like unto thee, a people saved by the Lora, the shield of thy help, and that is the sword of thy majesty! And thine enemies shall submit themselves unto thee; and thou shalt tread upon their high places.

I have blotted out, as a cloud, thy transgressions, and, as a mist, thy sins; return unto me, for I have redeemed thee. Sing, O ye heavens, for the Lord hath done it; shout, ye nethermost parts of the earth; break forth into singing, ye mountains, and forest, and every tree therein; for the Lord hath redeemed Jacob, and will glorify himself in Israel. Our Redeemer, the Lord of hosts is his name, the Holy One of Israel.

Israel is saved by the Lord with an everlasting salvation: ye shall not be ashamed nor confounded for ever and ever. And ye shall eat in plenty and be satisfied, and shall praise the name of the Lord your God, that hath dealt wondrously with you: and my people shall never be ashamed. And ye shall know that I am in the midst of Israel, and that I am the Lord your God, and there is none else: and my people shall never be ashamed. For ye shall go out with joy, and be led forth with peace: the mountains and the hills shall break forth before you into singing, and all the trees of the field shall clap their hands. Behold, God is my salvation; I will trust, and will not be afraid: for Jah the Lord is my strength and song; and he is become my salvation. Therefore with joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation. And in that day shall ye say, Give thanks unto the Lord, call upon his name, declare his doings among the peoples, make mention that his name is exalted. Sing unto the Lord; for he hath done excellent things: this is made known in all the earth. Cry aloud and shout, thou inhabitant of Zion: for great is the Holy One of Israel in the midst of thee. And one shall say in that day, Lo, this is our God;

[p. 306]

we have waited for him that he should save us: this is the Lord; we have waited for him, let us be glad and rejoice in his salvation.

O house of Jacob, come ye, and let us walk in the light of the Lord. And abundance of salvation, wisdom and knows. edge shall be the steadfastness of thy times: the fear of the Lord is his treasure. And David prospered in all his ways; and the Lord was with him. He hath rescued my soul in peace so that none might come nigh me, for they were many that were striving with me. And the people said unto Saul, Shall Jonathan die who hath wrought this great salvation in Israel? Far be it; as the Lord liveth, there shall not one hair of his head fall to the ground; for he hath wrought with God this day. So the people rescued Jonathan that he died not. And the rescued of the Lord shall return, and come with singing unto Zion; and everlasting joy shall be upon their heads: they shall obtain gladness and joy, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away. Thou hast turned for me my mourning into dancing; thou hast loosed my sackcloth and girded me with gladness And the Lord thy God would not hearken unto Balaam; but the Lord thy God turned the curse into a blessing unto thee, because the Lord thy God loved thee. Then shall the virgin rejoice in the dance, and the young men and the old together; for I will turn their mourning into joy, and will comfort them, and make them rejoice from their sorrow.

He createth the fruit of the lips: Peace, peace to him that is far off and to him that is near, saith the Lord, and I will heal him. Then the spirit came upon Amasai, who was chief of the captains (and he said), Thine are we, David, and on thy side, O son of Jesse; peace, peace be unto thee, and peace be to him that helpeth thee; for thy God helpeth thee. Then David received them, and made them chiefs of the band. And thus ye shall say, All hail, and peace be unto thee, and peace be to thy house, and peace be unto all that thou hast. The Lord will give strength unto his people; the Lord will bless his people with peace.

Rabbi Jochanan said, In every passage where thou findest

[p. 307]

the greatness of God mentioned, there thou findest also his humility. This is written in the Law, repeated in the Prophets, and a third time stated in the Writings. [**] It is written in the Law, for the Lord your God, he is God of gods, and Lord of lords, the great, mighty and revered God, who regardeth not persons, nor taketh a bribe. And it is written afterwards, He doth execute the judgment of the fatherless and widow, and loveth the stranger, in giving him food and raiment. It is repeated in the Prophets, as it is written, For thus saith the high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, and whose name is holy, I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones. It is a third time stated in the Writings, Sing unto God, sing praises to his name: extol ye him that rideth upon the heavens by his name Jah, anti rejoice before him. And it is written afterwards, A father of the fatherless, and a judge of the widows, is God in his holy habitation. The Lord our God be with us, as he was with our fathers: let him not leave us, nor forsake us. And ye that cleave unto the Lord your God are alive every one of you this day. For the Lord hath comforted Zion: he hath comforted all her waste places, and hath made her wilderness like Eden, and her desert like the garden of the Lord; joy and gladness shall be found therein, thanksgiving and the voice of melody. It pleased the Lord for his righteousness' sake, to magnify the Law and to make it honorable.

Psalm cxxviii.

A Song of Degrees. Happy is every one that feareth the Lord, that walketh in his ways. When thou shalt eat the labor of thine hands, happy shalt thou be, and it shall be well with thee. Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine, in the recesses of thine house: thy children like olive plants, round about thy

[p. 308]

table. Behold thus shall the man be blessed that feareth the Lord. May the Lord bless thee out of Zion: mayest thou see the good of Jerusalem all the days of thy life. Yea, mayest thou see thy children's children. Peace be upon Israel.

The Reader says Habdalah, <page 310>, omitting the Introductory Verses.

It is our duty to praise the Lord of all things, to ascribe greatness to him who formed the world in the beginning, since he hath not made us like the nations of other lands, and hath not placed us like other families of the earth, since he hath not assigned unto us a portion as unto them, nor a lot as unto all their multitude. For we bend the knee and offer worship and thanks before the supreme King of kings, the Holy One, blessed be he, who stretched forth the heavens and laid the foundations of the earth, the seat of whose glory is in the heavens above, and the abode of whose might is in the loftiest heights. He is our God; there is none else: in truth he is our King; there is none besides him; as it is written in his Law, And thou shalt know this day, and lay it to thine heart, that the Lord he is God in heaven above and upon the earth beneath: there is none else.

We therefore hope in thee, O Lord our God, that we may speedily behold the glory of thy might, when thou wilt remove the abominations from the earth, and the idols will be utterly cut off, when the world will be perfected under the kingdom of the Almighty, and all the children of flesh will call upon thy name, when thou wilt turn unto thyself all the wicked of the earth. Let all the inhabitants of the world perceive and know

[p. 309]

that unto thee every knee must bow, every tongue must swear. Before thee, O Lord our God, let them bow and fall; and unto thy glorious name let them give honor; let them all accept the yoke of thy kingdom, and do thou reign over them speedily, and for ever and ever. For the kingdom is thine, and to all eternity thou wilt reign in glory; as it is written in thy Law, The Lord shall reign for ever and ever. And it is said, And the Lord shall be king over all the earth: in that day shall the Lord be One, and his name One.

The following Kaddish is said by a Mourner.

Mourner.--Magnified and sanctified be his great name in the world which he hath created according to his will. May he establish his kingdom during your life and during your days, and during the life of all the house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

Cong. and Mourner.--Let his great name be blessed for ever and to all eternity.

Mourner.--Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted, extolled and honored, magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One, blessed be he; though he be high above all the blessings and hymns, praises and consolations, which are uttered in the world; and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--Let the name of the Lord be blessed from this time forth and for evermore.

Mourner.--May there be abundant peace from heaven, and life for us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--My help is from the Lord, who made heaven and earth.

Mourner.--He who maketh peace in his high places, may he make peace for us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

[p. 310]

  

THE HABDALAH SERVICE

A cup of wine is taken in the right hand, and the following is said:--

Behold, God is my salvation; I will trust, and will not be afraid: for Jah the Lord is my strength and song, and he is become my salvation. Therefore with joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation. Salvation belongeth unto the Lord: thy blessing be upon thy people. (Selah.) The Lord of hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our refuge. (Selah.) The Jews had light and joy and gladness and honor. So be it with us. I will lift the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe who createst the fruit of the vine.

The spice-box is taken, and the following is said:--

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe who createst divers kinds of spices.

The hands are spread towards the light, and the following is said:--

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who createst the light of the fire.

The cup is again taken in the right hand, and the following is said:--

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who makest a distinction between holy and profane, between light and darkness, between Israel

[p. 311]

and other nations, between the seventh day and the six working days. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who makest a distinction between holy and profane.

May he who maketh a distinction between holy and profane pardon our sins; our offspring and our possessions may he multiply as the sand, and as the stars in the night.

The day hath declined like the palm tree's shade; I call upon God who performeth all things for me; the watchman saith, The morning cometh, though it now be night.

Thy righteousness is like Mount Tabor: O pass thou wholly over my sins; let them be as yesterday which is past, and as a watch in the night.

The season of mine oblations is over: would that rest again were mine! I am weary with my groaning; in my tears I melt away every night.

Hear my voice, lee it not be cast away; open to me the lofty gate, for my head is filled with dew, my locks with the drops of the night.

Be entreated, O dreaded and awful God; while I cry, grant me thy redemption, in the twilight, in the evening of the day, yea, in the blackness of the night.

I call upon thee, Lord, save thou me; make me to know the path of life; from pining sickness snatch thou me, from day to night.

Cleanse the impurity of my deeds, lest my foes should say, Where is the God that made me, who giveth songs in the night?

We are like clay in thy hand; forgive, we beseech thee, our sins both light and grave, and day shall pour forth the word unto day, and night unto night.

May he who maketh a distinction between holy and profane pardon our sins; our offspring and our possessions may he multiply as the sand, and as the stars in the night.

Footnotes

^300:* The Chaldee paraphrase of the preceding verse.

^301:* The Chaldee paraphrase of the preceding verse.

^307:* The third division of the Holy Scriptures, the fist two being the Law and the Prophets.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 312]

  

MEDITATION AND BLESSINGS ON TAKING THE LULAB.

On Tabernacles, previous to Hallel, <page 313>, being said, the Lulab is taken, and the following Meditation and Blessings are read:--

Lo, I am prepared and ready to fulfil the command of my Creator, who hath commanded us in his Law, And ye shall take you on the first day the fruit of the tree Hadar, branches of palm trees, a bough of the tree Aboth, and willows of the brook. While I wave them, may the stream of blessings flow in upon me, together with holy thoughts which tell that he is the God of gods and Lord of lords, governing below and above, whose kingdom ruleth over all. May this my observance of the precept of the Four Species be accounted as though I had fulfilled it in all its details and particulars. And let the pleasantness of the Lord our God be upon us, and establish thou the work of our hands upon us; yea, the work of our hands establish thou it. Blessed be the Lord for ever, Amen, and Amen.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast sanctified us by thy commandments, and hast given us command concerning the taking of the Lulab.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast kept us in life, and hast preserved us, and enabled us to reach this season.

The latter Blessing is said on the First Day of the Festival only. Should the First Day, however, fall on Sabbath, it is said on the Second Day.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 313]

  

HALLEL.

The following Prayer (Hallel) is said on New Moon, on Passover, Pentecost and Tabernacles, and on Chanukah.

On the Intermediate Days of Festivals the Tephillin are removed before Hallel; on New Moon, before the Additional Service.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast sanctified us by thy commandments, and hast commanded us to read the Hallel.

Psalm cxiii.

Praise ye the Lord. Praise, O ye servants of the Lord, praise the name of the Lord. Let the name of the Lord be blessed from this time forth and for evermore. From the rising of the sun unto the going down thereof the Lord's name is to be praised. The Lord is high above all nations, and his glory above the heavens. Who is like unto the Lord our God, that dwelleth so high; that looketh down so low upon the heavens and the earth? He raiseth up the lowly out of the dust, and lifteth up the needy from the dunghill; that he may set him with princes, even with the princes of his people. He maketh the barren woman dwell in her house as a joyful mother of children. Praise ye the Lord.

Psalm cxiv.

When Israel went forth out of Egypt, the house of Jacob from a people of strange language; Judah became his sanctuary, Israel his dominion. The sea saw it, and fled; Jordan turned back. The mountains

[p. 314]

skipped like rams, the hills like lambs. What aileth thee, O thou sea, that thou fleest? thou Jordan, that thou turnest back? Ye mountains, that ye skip like rams? Ye hills, like lambs? At the presence of the Lord tremble, O earth, at the presence of the God of Jacob; who turned the rock into a pool of water, the flint into a fountain of waters.

On New Moon and the last Six Days of Passover omit the following paragraph:--

Psalm cxv.

Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give glory, for thy lovingkindness and for the truth's sake. Wherefore should the nations say, Where, then, is their God? But our God is in the heavens, he doeth whatsoever he pleaseth. Their idols are silver and gold, the work of men's hands. They have mouths, but they speak not; eyes have they, but they see not. They have ears, but they hear not; noses have they, but they smell not. As for their hands, they touch not; as for their feet, they walk not; they give no sound through their throat. They that make them shall be like unto them; yea, every one that trusteth in them. O Israel, trust thou in the Lord: he is their help and their shield. O house of Aaron, trust in the Lord: he is their help and their shield. Ye that fear the Lord, trust in the Lord: he is their help and their shield.

[p. 315]

The Lord hath been mindful of us; he will bless, he will bless the house of Israel; he will bless the house of Aaron. He will bless them that fear the Lord both small and great. May the Lord increase you, you and your children. Blessed are ye of the Lord, why, made heaven and earth. The heavens are the heavens of the Lord; but the earth hath he given to the children of men. The dead praise not the Lord, neither any that go down into silence; but we will bless the Lord from this time forth and for evermore. Praise ye the Lord.

On New Moon and the Iasi Sir Days of Passover omit the following paragraph:--

Psalm cxvi.

I love the Lord, because he heareth my voice and my supplications. Because he hath inclined his ear unto me, therefore will I call upon him as long as I live. The cords of death had encompassed me, and the straits of the grave had come upon me: I found trouble and sorrow. Then I called upon the name of the Lord: O Lord, I beseech thee, deliver my soul. Gracious is the Lord and righteous: yea, our God is merciful. The Lord guardeth the simple: I was brought low, and he saved me. Return unto thy rest, O my soul; for the Lord hath dealt bountifully with thee. For thou hast delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, my feet from falling. I shall walk before the Lord in the land of the living. I kept my faith in God ever when I spake, I am greatly afflicted; even when I said in my haste, All men are liars.

[p. 316]

What can I render unto the Lord for all his benefits towards me? I will lift the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord. I will pay my vows unto the Lord, yea, in the presence of all his people. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his loving ones. Ah, Lord, truly I am thy servant: I am thy servant, the son of thy handmaid; thou hast loosed my bonds. I will offer to thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and will call upon the name of the Lord. I will pay my vows unto the Lord, yea, in the presence of all his people; in the courts of the Lord's house, in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem. Praise ye the Lord.

Psalm cxvii.

O praise the Lord, all ye nations; laud him, all ye peoples. For his lovingkindness is mighty over us; and the truth of the Lord endureth for ever. Praise ye the Lord.

The following verses are chanted by the Reader, the Congregation at the end of each verse repeating, "O give thanks," etc., to "ever."

Psalm cxviii.

O give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good: for his lovingkindness endureth for ever.

O let Israel say, that his lovingkindness endureth for ever.

O let the house of Aaron say, that his lovingkindness endureth for ever.

O let them that fear the Lord say, that his lovingkindness endureth for ever.

Out of my straitness I called upon the Lord: the Lord answered me with enlargement. The Lord is for me, I will not fear: what can man do unto me? The Lord is for me among them that help me; therefore shall I see my desire on them that hate me. It is better to trust in the Lord than to confide in man.

[p. 317]

[paragraph continues] It is better to trust in the Lord than to confide in princes. All nations compassed me about: in the name of the Lord I surely cut them down. They compassed me about; yea, they compassed me about: in the name of the Lord I surely cut them down. They compassed me about like bees;--they were extinguished as a fire of thorns:--in the name of the Lord I surely cut them down. Thou didst thrust sore at me that I might fall: but the Lord helped me. The Lord is my strength and song; and he is become my salvation. The voice of exulting and salvation is in the tents of the righteous: the right hand of the Lord doeth valiantly. The right hand of the Lord is exalted: the right hand of the Lord doeth valiantly. I shall not die, but live, and recount the works of the Lord. The Lord hath chastened me sore: but he hath not given me over unto death. Open to me the gates of righteousness: I will enter into them, I will give thanks unto the Lord. This is the gate of the Lord; the righteous may enter into it.

I will give thanks unto thee, for thou hast answered me, and art become my salvation.

Repeat this and the next three verses.

The stone which the builders rejected is become the head-stone of the corner.

This was the Lord's doing; it is marvellous in our eyes.

This is the day which the Lord hath made; we will be glad and rejoice thereon.

Reader and Congregation:--

Save, we beseech thee, O Lord.

Save, we beseech thee, O Lord.

We beseech thee, O Lord, send prosperity.

We beseech thee, O Lord. send prosperity.

[p. 318]

Blessed be he that cometh in the name of the Lord: we bless you out of the house of the Lord.

Repeat this and the next three verses.

The Lord is God, he hath given us light: bind the festal offering with cords, even unto the horns of the altar.

Thou art my God, and I will give thanks unto thee: thou art my God, I will exalt thee.

O give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good: for his lovingkindness endureth for ever.

All thy works shall praise thee, O Lord our God, and thy pious ones, the just who do thy will, together with all thy people, the house of Israel, shall with exultation thank, bless, praise, glorify, exalt, reverence, sanctify and ascribe sovereignty unto thy name, O our King; for it is good to give thanks unto thee, and becoming to sing praises unto thy name, because from everlasting to everlasting thou art God. Blessed art thou, O Lord, a King extolled with praises.

Kaddish, pp. <page 302>, <page 303>. On Chanukah, Kaddish, pp. <page 253>, <page 254>.

For Order of Service at the Reading of the Law on New Moons and the Intermediate Days of Festivals, see pp. <page 81>-<page 87>; on Festivals and on New Moons falling on Sabbaths, see pp. <page 207>-<page 225>.

On New Moons and the Intermediate Days of Festivals:--

    "Happy are they," <page 87>.

    "And a redeemer," <page 90>, to "honorable," <page 92>.

Say Kaddish to "in the world, and say ye, Amen," <page 92>.

On New Moons continue with the following Amidah.

On Festivals, and on the Intermediate Days of Festivals, say the appropriate Amidoth of the Additional Service, pp. <page 336>-<page 347>.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 319]

  

ADDITIONAL SERVICE FOR THE NEW MOON

The following prayer (Amidah) to "as in ancient years," <page 324>, is to be said standing.

O Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall declare thy praise.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, God of Abraham, God of Isaac, and God of Jacob, the great, mighty and revered God, the most high God, who bestowest lovingkindnesses, and possessest all things; who rememberest the pious deeds of the patriarchs, and in love wilt bring a redeemer to their children's children for thy name's sake.

O king, Helper, Savior and shield. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the Shield of Abraham.

Thou, O Lord, art mighty for ever, thou quickenest the dead, thou art mighty to save.

From the Eighth Day of Solemn Assembly until the First Day, of Passover say:--

Thou causest the wind to blow and the rain to fall.

Thou sustainest the living with lovingkindness, quickenest the dead with great mercy, supportest the falling, healest the sick, loosest the bound, and keepest thy faith to them that sleep in the dust. Who is like unto thee, Lord of mighty acts, and who resembleth thee, O King, who killest and quickenest, and causest salvation to spring forth?

Yea, faithful art thou to quicken the dead. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who quickenest the dead. [**]

[p. 320]

Thou art holy, and thy name is holy, and holy beings praise thee daily. (Selah.) Blessed art thou, O Lord the holy God.

When the Reader repeats the Amidah, the following is said, to "holy God."

* Reader.--We will sanctify thy name in the world even as they sanctify it in the highest heavens, as it is written by the hand of thy prophet:

And they called one unto the other and said,

Cong.--Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts: the whole earth is full of his glory.

Reader.--Those over against them say, Blessed--

Cong.--Blessed be the glory of the Lord from his place.

Reader.--And in thy Holy Words it is written, saying,

Cong.--The Lord shall reign for ever, thy God, O Zion, unto all generations. Praise ye the Lord.

Reader.--Unto all generations we will declare thy greatness, and to all eternity we will proclaim thy holiness, and thy praise, O our God, shall not depart from our mouth for ever, for thou art a great and holy God and King. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the holy God.

The beginnings of the months thou didst assign unto thy people for a season of atonement throughout their generations. While they offered unto thee acceptable sacrifices, and goats for a sin offering to atone for them, these were to be a memorial for them all, and the salvation of their soul from the hand of the enemy. O do thou establish a new altar on Zion, and

[p. 321]

we will offer upon it the burnt offering of the New Moon, and prepare he-goats for thine acceptance; while we all of us rejoice in the service of the sanctuary, and in the songs of David thy servant, Which shall then be heard in thy city and chanted before thine altar. O vouchsafe unto them everlasting love, and the covenant of the fathers remember unto the children. Bring us with exultation to Zion thy city, and to Jerusalem thy sanctuary with everlasting joy, and there will we prepare unto thee the offerings that are obligatory for us, the continual offerings according to their order, and the additional offerings according to their enactment; and the additional offering of this New Moon we will prepare and offer unto thee in love according to the precept of thy will, as thou hast prescribed for us in thy Law through the hand of Moses thy servant, by the mouth of thy glory, as it is said:

And in the beginnings of your months ye shall offer a burnt offering unto the Lord; two young bullocks and one ram, seven he-lambs of the first year without blemish. And their meal offering and their drink offerings as hath been ordained, three tenth parts of an ephah of fine flour for each bullock, two tenth parts for the ram, one tenth for each lamb, and wine according to the drink offering of each, a goat for atonement, and two daily offerings according to their institution.

Our God and God of our fathers, renew this month unto us for good and for blessing, for joy and gladness, for salvation and consolation, for support and sustenance,

[p. 322]

for life and peace, for pardon of sin and forgiveness of iniquity, (in Leap Year add, and for atonement of transgression); for thou hast chosen thy people Israel from all nations, and hast appointed unto them statutes for the beginnings of the months. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who sanctifiest Israel and the beginnings of the months.

Accept, O Lord our God, thy people Israel and their prayer; restore the service to the oracle of thy house; receive in love and favor both the fire offerings of Israel and their prayer; and may the service of thy people Israel be ever acceptable unto thee.

And let our eyes behold thy return in mercy to Zion. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who restorest thy divine presence unto Zion.

We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God and the God of our fathers for ever and ever; thou art the Rock of our lives, the Shield of our salvation through every generation. We will give thanks unto thee and declare thy praise for our lives which are committed unto thy hand, and for our souls

Congregation in an undertone

We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God and the God of our fathers, the God of all flesh, our Creator and the Creator of all things in the beginning. Blessings and thanksgivings be to thy great and holy name, because thou hast kept us in life and hast preserved us: so mayest thou continue to keep us in life and to preserve us. O gather our exiles to thy holy courts to observe thy statutes, to do thy will, and to serve thee with a perfect heart; seeing that we give thanks unto thee. Blessed be the God to whom thanksgivings are due.

[p. 323]

which are in thy charge, and for thy miracles, which are daily with us, and for thy wonders and thy benefits, which are wrought at all times, evening, morn, and noon. O thou who art all-good, whose mercies fail not; thou, merciful Being, whose lovingkindnesses never cease, we have ever hoped in thee.

On Chanukah say, "We thank thee also," etc., <page 63>.

For all these things thy name, O our King, shall be continually blessed and exalted for ever and ever.

And everything that liveth shall give thanks unto thee for ever, and shall praise thy name in truth, O God, our salvation and our help. Blessed art thou, O Lord, whose name is All-good, and unto whom it is becoming to give thanks.

At the repetition of the Amidah by the Reader, the following is introduced:--

Our God and God of our fathers, bless us with the three-fold blessing of thy Law written by the hand of Moses thy servant, which was spoken by Aaron and his sons, the priests, thy holy people, as it is said, The Lord bless thee, and keep thee: the Lord make his face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee: the Lord turn his face unto thee, and give thee peace.

Grant peace, welfare, blessing, grace, lovingkindness and mercy unto us and unto all Israel, thy people. Bless us, O our Father, even all of us together, with the light of thy countenance; for by the light of thy countenance thou hast given us, O Lord our God, the

[p. 324]

[paragraph continues] Law of life, lovingkindness and righteousness, blessing mercy, life and peace; and may it be good in thy sight to bless thy people Israel at all times and in every hour with thy peace.

Blessed art thou, O Lord, who blessest thy people Israel with peace.

O my God! guard my tongue from evil and my lips from speaking guile; and to such as curse me let my soul be dumb, yea, let my soul be unto all as the dust. Open my heart to thy Law, and let my soul pursue thy commandments. If any design evil against me, speedily make their counsel of none effect, and frustrate their designs. Do it for the sake of thy name, do it for the sake of thy right hand, do it for the sake of thy holiness, do it for the sake of thy Law. In order that thy beloved ones may be delivered, O save with thy right hand, and answer me. Let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart be acceptable before thee. O Lord, my Rock and my Redeemer. He who maketh peace in his high places, may he make peace for us all and for all Israel, and say ye, Amen.

May it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, that the temple be speedily rebuilt in our days, and grant our portion in thy Law. And there we will serve thee with awe, as in the days of old, and as in ancient years. Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in ancient years.

Kaddish, <page 92>.

"It is our duty," etc., <page 93>.

Mourner's Kaddish, <page 94>.

Psalm civ, <page 264>.

Footnotes

^319:* (See page <page 320>)

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 325]

  

SERVICE FOR FESTIVALS.

On lighting the Festival Lamp in the Home, the following is said--

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast sanctified us by thy commandments, and hast commanded us to. kindle [on Friday add: the Sabbath and] the Festival light.

On the Eve of Festivals, Afternoon Service is said as on Weekdays, see pp. <page 109>-<page 128>, but omitting "And David said," <page 123>, "O Guardian of Israel," <page 124>, "It is our duty" and "Kaddish," pp. <page 126>-<page 127>.

For Evening Service, see pp. <page 159>-<page 166>. Should the evening of the Festival fall on Friday, the Evening Service commences with "A Psalm, a Song for the Sabbath Day," <page 156>.

The following Amidah is said at the Evening, Morning and Afternoon Services of Passover, Pentecost, Tabernacles, and the Eighth Day of Solemn Assembly and the Rejoicing of the Law.

O Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall declare thy praise.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, God of Abraham, God of Isaac, and God of Jacob, the Great, mighty and revered God, the most high God, who bestowest lovingkindnesses and possessest all things; who rememberest the pious deeds of their patriarchs, and in love wilt bring a redeemer to their children's children for thy name's sake.

O King, Helper, Savior and Shield. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the Shield of Abraham.

[p. 326]

Thou, O Lord, art mighty for ever, thou quickenest the dead, thou art mighty to save.

From the Sabbath after the Eighth Day of Solemn Assembly until the First Day of Passover say:--

Thou causest the wind to blow and the rain to fall,

Thou sustainest the living with lovingkindness, quickenest the dead with great mercy, supportest the falling, healest the sick, loosest the bound, and keepest thy faith to them that sleep in the dust. Who is like unto thee, Lord of mighty acts, and who resembleth thee, O King, who killest and quickenest, and causest salvation to spring forth?

Yea, faithful art thou to quicken the dead. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who quickenest the dead. *

Thou art holy, and thy name is holy, and holy beings praise thee daily. (Selah.) Blessed art thou, O Lord, the holy God.

When the Reader repeats the Amidah, the following is said, to "holy God," <page 327>.

* Reader.--We will sanctify thy name in the world even as they sanctify, it in the highest heavens, as it is written by the hand of thy prophet:

And they called one unto the other and said,

Cong.--Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts: the whole earth is full of his glory.

[p. 327]

Reader.--Then with a noise of great rushing, mighty and strong, they make their voices heard, and, upraising themselves towards the Seraphim, they exclaim over against them, Blessed--

Cong.--Blessed be the glory of the Lord from his place.

Reader.--From thy place shine forth, O our King, and reign over us, for we wait for thee. When wilt thou reign in Zion? Speedily, even in our days, do thou dwell there, and for ever. Mayest thou be magnified and sanctified in the midst of Jerusalem thy city throughout all generations and to all eternity. O let our eyes behold thy kingdom, according to the word that was spoken in the songs of thy might by David, thy righteous anointed:

Cong.--The Lord shall reign for ever, thy God, O Zion, unto all generations. Praise ye the Lord.

Reader.--Unto all generations we will declare thy greatness, and to all eternity we will proclaim thy holiness, and thy praise, O our God, shall not depart from our mouth for ever, for thou art a great and holy God and King. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the holy God.

Thou hast chosen us from all peoples; thou hast loved us and taken pleasure in us, and hast exalted us above all tongues; thou hast sanctified us by thy commandments, and brought us near unto thy service, O our King, and hast called us by thy great and holy name.

[p. 328]

On Saturday Night add the following:--

Thou, O Lord our God, hast made known unto us the judgments of thy righteousness; thou hast taught us to perform the statutes of thy will; thou hast given us, O Lord our God, righteous judgments, true laws, good statutes and commandments. Thou hast also caused us to inherit seasons of joy, appointed times of holiness, and feasts of free will gifts, and hast given us as an heritage the holiness of the Sabbath, the glory of the appointed time, and the celebration of the festival. Thou hast made a distinction, O Lord our God, between holy and profane, between light and darkness, between Israel and other nations, between the seventh day and the six working days; thou hast made a distinction between the holiness of the Sabbath and that of the festival, and hast hallowed the seventh day above the six working days: thou hast distinguished and sanctified thy people Israel by thy holiness.

On Sabbath add the words in brackets.

And thou hast given us in love, O Lord our God, [Sabbaths for rest,] appointed times for gladness, festivals and seasons for joy; [this Sabbath Day, and] this day of--

On Passover say:--

The Feast of Unleavened Bread, the season of our Freedom;

On Pentecost:--

The Feast of Weeks, the season of the Giving of our Law;

On Tabernacles:--

The Feast of Tabernacles, the season of our Gladness;

On the Eighth Day of Solemn Assembly and on the Rejoicing of the Law:--

The Eighth-day Feast of Solemn Assembly, the season of our Gladness.

[in love]; an holy convocation, as a memorial of the departure from Egypt.

[p. 329]

Our God and God of our fathers! May our remembrance rise and come and be accepted before thee, with the remembrance of our fathers, of Messiah the son of David thy servant, of Jerusalem thy holy city, and of all thy people the house of Israel, bringing deliverance and well-being, grace, lovingkindness and mercy, life and peace on this day of

On Passover:--

The Feast of Unleavened Bread;

On Pentecost:--

The Feast of Weeks;

On Tabernacles:--

The Feast of Tabernacles;

On the Eighth Day of Solemn Assembly, and on the Rejoicing of the Law:--

The Eighth-day Feast of Solemn Assembly.

[paragraph continues] Remember us, O Lord our God, thereon for our wellbeing; be mindful of us for blessing, and save us unto life: by thy promise of salvation and mercy, spare us and be gracious unto us; have mercy upon us and save us; for our eyes are bent upon thee, because thou art a gracious and merciful God and King.

O Lord our God, bestow upon us the blessing of thy appointed times for life and peace, for joy and gladness, even as thou hast been pleased to promise that thou wouldst bless us. [Our God and God of our fathers, accept our rest.] Sanctify us by thy command with thy goodness, and gladden us with thy salvation; , and grant our portion in thy Law; satisfy us purify our hearts to serve thee in truth; and let us inherit,

[p. 330]

[paragraph continues] O Lord our God, [in love and favor,] with joy and gladness thy holy [Sabbath and] appointed times; and may Israel, who hallow thy name, rejoice in thee. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who hallowest [the Sabbath and] Israel and the seasons.

Accept, O Lord our God, thy people Israel and their prayer; restore the service to the oracle of thy house; receive in love and favor both the fire offerings of Israel and their prayer; and may the service of thy people Israel be ever acceptable unto thee.

And let our eyes behold thy return in mercy to Zion. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who restorest thy divine presence unto Zion.

We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God and the God of our fathers for ever and ever; thou art the Rock of our lives, the Shield of our salvation through every generation. We will give thanks unto thee and declare thy praise for our lives which are committed unto thy hand, and for our souls

Congregation in an undertone

We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God and the God of our fathers, the God of all flesh, our Creator and the Creator of all things in the beginning. Blessings and thanksgivings be to thy great and holy name, because thou hast kept us in life and hast preserved us: so mayest thou continue to keep us in life and to preserve us. O gather our exiles to thy holy courts to observe thy statutes, to do thy will, and to Serve thee with a perfect heart; seeing that we give thanks unto thee. Blessed he the God to whom thanksgivings are due.

[p. 331]

which are in thy charge, and for thy miracles, which are daily with us, and for thy wonders and thy benefits, which are wrought at all times, evening, morn and noon. O thou who art all-good, whose mercies fail not; thou, merciful Being, whose lovingkindnesses never cease, we have ever hoped in thee.

For all these things thy name, O our King, shall be continually blessed and exalted for ever and ever.

And everything that liveth shall give thanks unto thee for ever, and shall praise thy name in truth, O God, our salvation and our help. Blessed art thou, O Lord, whose name is All-good, and unto whom it is becoming to give thanks.

At the repetition of the Amidah by the Reader the following is introduced:--

Our God and God of our fathers, bless us with the three-fold blessing of thy Law written by the hand of Moses thy servant, which was spoken by Aaron and his sons, the priests, thy holy people, as it is said, The Lord bless thee, and keep thee: the Lord make his face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee: the Lord turn his face unto thee, and give thee peace.

At the Morning Service say:--

Grant peace, welfare, blessing, grace, lovingkindness and mercy unto us and unto all Israel, thy people. Bless us, O our Father, even all of us together, with the light of thy countenance; for by the light of thy countenance thou hast given us. O Lord our God, the

[p. 332]

[paragraph continues] Law of Life, lovingkindness and righteousness, blessing, mercy, life and peace; and may it be good in thy sight to bless thy people Israel at all times and in every hour with thy peace.

At the Afternoon and Evening Services say:--

Grant abundant peace unto Israel thy people for ever; for thou art the sovereign Lord of all peace; and may it be good in thy sight to bless thy people Israel at all times and in every hour with thy peace.

Blessed art thou, O Lord, who blessest thy people Israel with peace.

O my God! guard my tongue from evil and my lips from speaking guile; and to such as curse me let my soul be dumb, yea, let my soul be unto all as the dust. Open my heart to thy Law, and let my soul pursue thy commandments. If any design evil against me, speedily make their counsel of none effect, and frustrate their designs. Do it for the sake of thy name, do it for the sake of thy right hand, do it for the sake of thy holiness, do it for the sake of thy Law. In order that thy beloved ones may be delivered, O save with thy right hand and answer me. Let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart be acceptable before thee, O Lord, my Rock and my Redeemer. He who maketh peace in his high places, may he make peace for us and for all Israel, and say ye, Amen.

May it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, that the temple be speedily rebuilt in our days, and grant our portion in thy Law. And there we will serve thee with awe, as in the days of old, and as in ancient years. Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in ancient years.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 333]

  

KIDDUSH FOR FESTIVALS

To be said on Passover, Pentecost and Tabernacles.

When the Festival occurs on Sabbath begin here:--

And it was evening and it was morning,--the sixth day.

And the heaven and the earth were finished and all their host. And on the seventh day God had finished his work which he had made: and he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had made. And God blessed the seventh day, and he hallowed it, because he rested thereon from all his work which God had created and made.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who createst the fruit of the vine.

On Sabbath add the words in brackets.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast chosen us from all peoples, and exalted us above all tongues, and sanctified us by thy commandments. And thou hast given us in love, O Lord our God, [Sabbaths for rest,] appointed times for gladness, festivals and seasons for joy; [this Sabbath day and] this day of--

On Passover say:--

The Feast of Unleavened Bread, the season of our Freedom;

On Pentecost:--

The Feast of Weeks, the season of the Giving of our Law;

[p. 334]

On Tabernacles:--

The Feast of Tabernacles, the season of our Gladness;

On the Eighth Day of Solemn Assembly and on the Rejoicing of the Law.

The Eighth-day Feast of Solemn Assembly, the season of our Gladness.

[in love]; an holy convocation, as a memorial of the departure from Egypt; for thou hast chosen us, and sanctified us above all peoples, and thy holy [Sabbath and] appointed times thou hast caused us to inherit [in love and favor] in joy and gladness. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who sanctifiest [the Sabbath,] Israel and the festive seasons.

On Saturday night the following is added:--

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who createst the light of the fire.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who makest a distinction between holy and profane, between light and darkness, between Israel and other nations, between the seventh day and the six working days. Thou hast made a distinction between the holiness of the Sabbath and that of the festival, and hast hallowed the seventh day above the six working days; thou hast distinguished and sanctified thy people Israel by thy holiness. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who makest a distinction between holy and holy.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast kept us in life, and hast preserved us, and enabled us to reach this season.

The last Blessing is said on the following occasions:--The first two nights of Passover; the two nights of Pentecost; the first two nights of Tabernacles; on the night of the Eighth Day of Solemn Assembly, and on that of the Rejoicing of the Law.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 335]

  

MEDITATION IN THE TABERNACLE.

To be said in the Tabernacle on the first night of the Festival.

May it be thy will, O Lord my God and God of my fathers, to let thy divine presence abide among us. Spread over us the tabernacle of thy peace in recognition of the precept of the Tabernacle which we are now fulfilling, and whereby we establish in fear and love the unity of thy holy and blessed name. O surround us with the pure and holy radiance of thy glory, that is spread over our heads as the eagle over the nest he stirreth up: and thence bid the stream of life flow in upon thy servant (thy handmaid). And seeing that I have gone forth from my house abroad, and am speeding the way of thy commandments, may it be accounted unto me as though I had wandered far in thy cause. O wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. Keep me in life, O Lord; vouchsafe unto me the abundance of thy blessings; and to such as are hungry and thirsty give bread and water unfailingly. Make me worthy to dwell trustingly in the covert of thy shadowing wings at the time when I part from the world. O deal graciously with us in the decree to which thou settest thy seal, and make us worthy to dwell many days upon the land, the holy land, ever serving and fearing thee. Blessed be the Lord for ever. Amen and Amen.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast sanctified us by thy commandments, and hast commanded us to dwell in the Tabernacle.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast kept us in life, and hast preserved us, and enabled us to reach this season.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 336]

  

ADDITIONAL SERVICE FOR THE FESTIVALS

To be said on Passover, Pentecost and Tabernacles, and on the intermediate days of Festivals.

The following prayer (Amidah) to "as in ancient years," <page 347>, is said standing.

O Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall declare thy praise.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, God of Abraham, God of Isaac, and God of Jacob, the great, mighty and revered God, the most high God, who bestowest lovingkindnesses and possessest all things who rememberest the pious deeds of the patriarchs, and in love wilt bring a redeemer to their children's children for thy name's sake.

O King, Helper, Savior and Shield. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the Shield of Abraham.

Thou, O Lord, art mighty for ever, thou quickenest the dead, thou art mighty to save.

From the Sabbath after the Eighth Day of Solemn Assembly until the First Day of Passover say:--

Thou causest the wind to blow and the rain to fall.

Thou sustainest the living with lovingkindness, quickenest the dead with great mercy, supportest the falling, healest the sick, loosest the bound, and keepest thy faith to them that sleep in the dust. Who is like unto thee, Lord of mighty acts, and who resembleth thee, O King, who killest and quickenest, and causest salvation to spring forth? Yea, faithful art thou to

[p. 337]

quicken the dead. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who quickenest the dead. *

Thou art holy, and thy name is holy, and holy beings praise thee daily. (Selah.) Blessed art thou, O Lord, the holy God.

When the Reader repeats the Amidah, the following is added to "holy God," <page 338>.

* Reader.--We will reverence and sanctify thee according to the mystic utterance of the Holy Seraphim, who hallow thy name in the sanctuary, as it is written by the hand of thy prophet, And they called one unto the other and said,

Cong.--Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts: the whole earth is full of his glory.

Reader.--His glory filleth the universe: his ministering angels ask one another, Where is the place of his glory? Those over against them say, Blessed--

Cong.--Blessed be the glory of the Lord from his place.

Reader.--From his place may he turn in mercy and be gracious unto a people who, evening and morning, twice every day, proclaim with constancy the unity of his name, saying in love, Hear--

Cong.--Hear, O Israel: the Lord our God, the Lord is One.

Reader.--One is Our God; he is our Father; he is our King, he is our Savior; and he of his mercy will let us hear a second time, in the presence of all living (his promise), "To be to you for a God."

Cong.--"I am the Lord your God."

[p. 338]

Reader.--And in thy Holy Words it is written, saying,

Cong.--The Lord shall reign for ever, thy God, O Zion, unto all generations. Praise ye the Lord.

Reader.--Unto all generations we will declare thy greatness, and to all eternity we will proclaim thy holiness, and thy praise, O our God, shall not depart front our mouth for ever, for thou art a great and holy God and King. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the holy God.

Thou hast chosen us from all peoples; thou hast, loved us and taken pleasure in us, and hast exalted us above all tongues; thou hast sanctified us by thy commandments, and brought us near unto thy service, O our King, and hast called us by thy great and holy name.

On Sabbath add the words in brackets.

And thou hast given us in love, O Lord our God, [Sabbaths for rest,] appointed times for gladness, festivals and seasons for joy; [this Sabbath day and] this day of

On Passover say:--

The Feast of Unleavened Bread, the season of our Freedom;

On Pentecost:--

The Feast of Weeks, the season of the Giving of our Law;

On Tabernacles:--

The Feast of Tabernacles, the season of our Gladness:

[p. 339]

On the Eighth Day of Solemn Assembly and on the Rejoicing of the Law.

The Eighth-day Feast of Solemn Assembly, the season of our Gladness.

[in love]; an holy convocation, as a memorial of the departure from Egypt.

But on account of our sins we were exiled from our land, and removed far from our country, and we are unable to go up in order to appear and prostrate ourselves before thee, and to fulfil our obligations in thy chosen house, that great and holy temple which was called by thy name, because of the hand that hath been stretched out against thy sanctuary. May it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, merciful King, that thou mayest again in thine abundant compassion have mercy upon us and upon thy sanctuary, and mayest speedily rebuild it and magnify its glory. Our Father, our King, do thou speedily make the glory of thy kingdom manifest upon us; shine forth and exalt thyself upon us in the sight of all living; bring our scattered ones among the nations near unto thee, and gather our dispersed from the ends of the earth. Lead us with exultation unto Zion thy city, and unto Jerusalem the place of thy sanctuary with everlasting joy; and there we will prepare before thee the offerings that are obligatory for us, the continual offerings according to their order, and the additional offerings according to their enactment; and the additional offering of [this Sabbath day with the additional offering of] this

On Passover say:--

Feast of Unleavened Bread--

[p. 340]

On Pentecost:--

Feast of Weeks--

On Tabernacles:--

Feast of Tabernacles--

On the Eighth Day of Solemn Assembly and on the Rejoicing of the Law.

Eighth-day Feast of Solemn Assembly we will prepare and offer unto thee in love according to the precept of thy will, as thou hast prescribed for us in thy Law through the hand of Moses thy servant, by the mouth of thy, glory, as it is said:

[And on the Sabbath day two he-lambs of the first year without blemish, and two-tenth parts of an ephah of fine flour for a meal offering, mingled with oil, and the drink offering thereof; this is the burnt offering of every Sabbath, beside the continual burnt offering and the drink offering thereof.]

On the first two days of Passover say:--

And in the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month, is the Passover unto the Lord. And on the fifteenth day of this month shall be a feast: seven days shall unleavened bread be eaten. On the first day shall be an holy convocation; ye shall do no servile work.

And ye shall offer an offering made by fire, a burnt offering unto the Lord; two young bullocks and one ram, and seven he-lambs of the first year; they shall be unto you without blemish.

On Passover, after the first two days, say the last paragraph only.

[p. 341]

On Pentecost say:--

And on the day of the first fruits, when ye offer a new meal offering unto the Lord in your Feast of Weeks, ye shall have an holy convocation; ye shall do no servile work; ye shall offer a burnt offering for a sweet savor unto the Lord; two young bullocks, one ram, seven he-lambs of the first year.

On the first two days of Tabernacles say:--

And on the fifteenth day of the seventh month ye shall have an holy convocation; ye shall do no servile work, and ye shall keep a feast unto the Lord seven days. And ye shall offer a burnt offering, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savor unto the Lord; thirteen young bullocks, two rams, fourteen he-lambs of the first year; they shall be without blemish.

On all Festivals say:--

And their meal offering and their drink offerings as hath been ordained; three-tenth parts of an ephah for each bullock, and two-tenth parts for the ram, and one-tenth part for each lamb, with wine according to the drink offering thereof, and a he-goat wherewith to make atonement, and the two continual offerings according to their enactment.

On the first of the Intermediate Days of Tabernacles say:--

And on the second day ye shall offer twelve young bullocks, two rams, fourteen he-lambs of the first year without blemish. And their meal offering, etc.

And on the third day ye shall offer eleven bullocks, two rams, fourteen he-lambs of the first year without blemish. And their meal offering, etc.

[p. 342]

On the second of the Intermediate Days of Tabernacles, say:--

And on the third day ye shall offer eleven bullocks two rams, fourteen he-lambs of the first year without blemish. And their meal offering, etc.

And on the fourth day ye shall offer ten bullocks, two rams, fourteen he-lambs of the first year without blemish. And their meal offering, etc.

On the third of the Intermediate Days of Tabernacles, say:--

And on the fourth day ye shall offer ten bullocks, two rams, fourteen he-lambs of the first year without blemish. And their meal offering, etc.

And on the fifth day ye shall offer nine bullocks, two rams, fourteen he-lambs of the first year without blemish. And their meal offering, etc.

On the fourth of the Intermediate Days of Tabernacles, say:--

And on the fifth day ye shall offer nine bullocks, two rams, fourteen he-lambs of the first year without blemish. And their meal offering, etc.

And on the sixth day ye shall offer eight bullocks, two rams, fourteen he-lambs of the first year without blemish. And their meal offering, etc.

On the fifth of the Intermediate Days of Tabernacles (Hoshana Rabba), say:--

And on the sixth day ye shall offer eight bullocks, two rams, fourteen he-lambs of the first year without blemish. And their meal offering, etc.

And on the seventh day ye shall offer seven bullocks, two rams, fourteen lie-lambs of the first year without blemish. And their meal offering, etc.

[p. 343]

On the Eighth Day of Solemn Assembly, and on the Rejoicing of the Law, say:--

On the eighth day ye shall have a solemn assembly; ye shall do no servile work. And ye shall offer a burnt offering, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savor unto the Lord: one bullock, one ram, seven he-lambs of the first year without blemish. And their meal offering, etc.

[They that keep the Sabbath and call it a delight shall rejoice in thy kingdom; the people that hallow the seventh day, even all of them shall be satiated and delighted with thy goodness, seeing that thou didst find pleasure in the seventh day, and didst hallow it; thou didst call it the desirable of days, in remembrance of the creation.]

Our God and God of our fathers, merciful King, have mercy upon us, O thou good and beneficent Being, suffer thyself to be sought of us; return unto us in thy yearning compassion for the fathers' sake who did thy will; rebuild thy house as at the beginning, and establish thy sanctuary upon its site; grant that we may see it in its rebuilding, and make us rejoice in its re-establishment; restore the priests to their service, the Levites to their song and psalmody, and Israel to their habitations: and there we will go up to appear and prostrate ourselves before thee at the three periods of our festivals, according as it is written in thy Law, Three times in the year shall all thy males appear before the Lord thy God in the place which he shall choose, on the feast of unleavened bread; and on the feast of weeks, and on the feast of tabernacles: and they shall not appear before the Lord empty. Every man shall bring according as he is able, according to tile blessing of the Lord thy God which he hath given thee.

[p. 344]

O Lord our God, bestow upon us the blessing of thy appointed times for life and peace, for joy and gladness, even as thou hast been pleased to promise that thou wouldst bless us. [Our God and God of our fathers, accept our rest.] Sanctify us by thy commandments, and grant our portion in thy Law; satisfy us with thy goodness, and gladden us with thy salvation; purify our hearts to serve thee in truth; and let us inherit, O Lord our God [in love and favor,] with joy and gladness thy holy [Sabbath and] appointed times; and may Israel who hallow thy name rejoice in thee. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who hallowest [the Sabbath and] Israel and the seasons.

Accept, O Lord our God, thy people Israel and their prayer; restore the service to the oracle of thy house; receive in love and favor both the fire offerings of Israel and their prayer; and may the service of thy people Israel be ever acceptable unto thee.

And let our eyes behold thy return in mercy to Zion. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who restoreth thy divine presence unto Zion.

We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God and the God of our fathers for ever and ever;

Congregation in an undertone:

We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God and the God of our fathers, the God of all flesh, our Creator and the Creator of all things in the beginning.

[p. 345]

[paragraph continues] Blessings and thanksgivings be to thy great and holy name, because thou hast kept us in life and hast preserved us; so mayest thou continue to keep us in life and to preserve us. O gather our exiles to thy holy courts to observe thy statutes, to do thy will, and to serve thee with a perfect heart; seeing that we give thanks unto thee. Blessed be the God to whom thanksgivings are due.

thou art the Rock of our lives, the shield of our salvation through every generation. We will give thanks unto thee and declare thy praise for our lives which are committed unto thy hand, and for our souls which are in thy charge, and for thy miracles, which are daily with us, and for thy wonders and thy benefits, which are wrought at all times, evening, morn and noon. O thou who art all-good, whose mercies fail not; thou, merciful Being, whose lovingkindnesses never cease, we have ever hoped in thee.

For all these things thy name, O our King, shall be continually blessed and exalted for ever and ever.

And everything that liveth shall give thanks unto thee for ever, and shall praise thy name in truth, O God, our salvation and our help. Blessed art thou, O Lord, whose name is All-good, and unto whom it is becoming to give thanks.

At the repetition of the Amidah by the Reader, the following is introduced:--

Our God and God of our fathers, bless us with the three-fold blessing of thy Law written by the hand of Moses thy servant, which was spoken by Aaron and

[p. 346]

his sons, the priests, thy holy people, as it is said, The Lord bless thee, and keep thee: the Lord make his face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee: the Lord turn his face unto thee, and give thee peace.

Grant peace, welfare, blessing, grace, lovingkindness and mercy unto us and unto all Israel, thy people. Bless us, O our Father, even all of us together, with the light of thy countenance; for by the light of thy countenance thou hast given us, O Lord our God, the Law of life, lovingkindness and righteousness, blessing, mercy, life and peace; and may it be good in thy sight to bless thy people Israel at all times and in every hour with thy peace.

Blessed art thou, O Lord, who blessest thy people Israel with peace.

O my God! guard my tongue from evil and my lips from speaking guile; and to such as curse me let my soul be dumb, yea, let my soul be unto all as the dust. Open my heart to thy Law, and let my soul pursue thy commandments. If any design evil against me, speedily make their counsel of none effect, and frustrate their designs. Do it for the sake of thy name, do it for the sake of thy right hand, do it for the sake of thy holiness, do it for the sake of thy Law. In order that thy beloved ones may be delivered, O save with thy right hand, and answer me. Let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart be acceptable before thee, O Lord, my Rock and my Redeemer. He

[p. 347]

who maketh peace in his high places, may he make peace for us and for all Israel, and say ye, Amen.

May it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, that the temple be speedily rebuilt in our days, and grant our portion in thy Law. And there we will serve thee with awe, as in the days of old, and as in ancient years. Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in ancient years.

  

THE ORDER OF THE BLESSING OF THE PRIESTS

On Festivals, except on Sabbath, the following Order of the Blessing of the Priests is added in the Additional Amidah after "acceptable unto thee," <page 344>.

The Priests ascend the steps of the Ark.

Cong. and Reader.--And may our prayer be acceptable unto thee as burnt offering and as sacrifice. O thou who art merciful, we beseech thee, in thine abundant mercy to restore thy divine presence unto Zion, and the ordained service to Jerusalem. And let our eyes behold thy return in mercy to Zion, and there will we worship thee in awe, as in the days of old and as in ancient years.

[p. 348]

Reader.--Blessed art thou, O Lord, whom alone we serve in awe.

Continue "We give thanks unto thee," <page 344>, to "it is becoming to give thanks," <page 345>.

The Reader says to "and his sons," in an undertone.

Our God and God of our fathers, bless us with the three-fold blessing of thy Law written by the hand of Moses thy servant, which was spoken by Aaron and his sons,

Reader.--The priests,

Cong.--Thy holy people, as it is said:

The Priests pronounce the following blessing:

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast sanctified us with the sanctity of Aaron and hast commanded us to bless thy people Israel in love.

Reader followed by the Priests, word for word. Cong.

The Lord bless thee and keep thee: Amen.

The Lord make his face to shine upon thee and be gracious unto thee: Amen,

The Lord turn his face unto thee and give thee peace. Amen. Selah.

Continue "Grant peace," etc., <page 346>, to the end of the Amidah.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 349]

  

SERVICE FOR NEW YEAR

The lighting of the Festival Lamp as on <page 325>.

Afternoon Service as on Fridays. For Evening Service, see pp. <page 159>-<page 166>. Should the first evening of the New Year fall on Friday, the Evening Service commences with "A Psalm, a Song for the Sabbath Day," <page 156>.

The following Amidah is said at the Evening, Morning and Afternoon Services.

O Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall declare thy praise.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, God of Abraham, God of Isaac, and God of Jacob, the great, mighty and revered God, the most high God, who bestowest lovingkindnesses and possessest all things; who rememberest the pious deeds of the patriarchs, and in love wilt bring a redeemer to their children's children for thy name's sake.

Remember us unto life, O King, who delightest in life, and inscribe us in the book of life, for thine own sake, O living God.

O King, Helper, Savior and Shield. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the Shield of Abraham.

Thou, O Lord, art mighty for ever, thou quickenest the dead, thou art mighty to save.

Thou sustainest the living with lovingkindness. quickenest the dead with great mercy, supportest the falling, healest the sick, loosest the bound, and keepest thy faith to them that sleep in the dust. Who is like

[p. 350]

unto thee, Lord of mighty acts, and who resembleth thee, O King, who killest and quickenest, and causest salvation to spring forth?

Who is like unto thee, Father of mercy, who in mercy rememberest thy creatures unto life?

Yea, faithful art thou to quicken the dead. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who quickenest the dead.

Thou art holy, and thy name is holy, and holy beings praise thee daily. (Selah.)

Now, therefore, O Lord our God, impose thine awe upon all thy works, and thy dread upon all that thou hast created, that all works may fear thee and all creatures prostrate themselves before thee, that they may all form a single band to do thy will with a perfect heart, even as we know, O Lord our God, that dominion is thine, strength is in thy hand, and might in thy right hand, and that thy name is to be feared above all that thou hast created.

Give then glory, O Lord, unto thy people, praise to them that fear thee, hope to them that seek thee, and free speech to them that wait for thee, joy to thy land, gladness to thy city, a flourishing horn unto David thy servant, and a clear shining light unto the son of Jesse, thine anointed, speedily in our days.

[p. 351]

Then shall the just also see and be glad, and the upright shall exult, and the pious triumphantly rejoice, while iniquity shall close her mouth, and all wickedness shall be wholly consumed like smoke, when thou makest the dominion of arrogance to pass away from the earth.

And thou, O Lord, shalt reign, thou alone over all thy works on Mount Zion, the dwelling place of thy glory, and in Jerusalem, thy holy city, as it is written in thy Holy Words, The Lord shall reign for ever, thy God, O Zion; unto all generations. Praise ye the Lord.

Holy art thou, and dreaded is thy name, and there is no God beside thee, as it is written, And the Lord of hosts is exalted in judgment, and the holy God is sanctified in righteousness. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the holy King.

Thou hast chosen us from all peoples, thou hast loved us and taken pleasure in us, and hast exalted us above all tongues; thou hast sanctified us by thy commandments and brought us near unto thy service, O our King, and called us by thy great and holy name.

On Saturday Night add the following:--

Thou, O Lord our God, hast made known unto us the judgments of thy righteousness; thou hast taught us to perform the statutes of thy will; thou hast given us, O Lord our God, righteous judgments, true laws, good statutes and commandments. Thou hast also caused us to inherit seasons of joy, appointed times

[p. 352]

of holiness, and feasts of free will gifts, and hast given us as an heritage the holiness of the Sabbath, the glory of the appointed time, and the celebration of the festival. Thou hast made a distinction, O Lord our God, between holy and profane, between light and darkness, between Israel and other nations, between the seventh day and the six working days; thou hast made a distinction between the holiness of the Sabbath and that of the festival, and hast hallowed the seventh day above the six working days; thou hast distinguished and sanctified thy people Israel by thy holiness.

On Sabbath add the words in brackets.

And thou hast given us in love, O Lord our God [this Sabbath Day and] this Day of Memorial, a day of blowing the Shofar, [on Sabbath substitute for the last phrase--a day of remembrance of blowing the Shofar, in love]; an holy convocation as a memorial of the departure from Egypt.

Our God and God of our fathers! May our remembrance rise and come and be accepted before thee, with the remembrance of our fathers, of Messiah the son of David thy servant, of Jerusalem thy holy city, and of all thy people the house of Israel, bringing deliverance and well-being, grace, lovingkindness and mercy, life and peace on this Day of Memorial. Remember us, O Lord our God, thereon for our wellbeing; be mindful of us for blessing, and save us unto life: by thy promise of salvation and mercy, spare us and be gracious unto us; have mercy upon us and save us; for our eyes are bent upon thee, because thou art a gracious and merciful God and King.

[p. 353]

Our God and God of our fathers, reign thou in thy glory over the whole universe, and be exalted above all the earth in thine honor, and shine forth in the splendor and excellence of thy might upon all the inhabitants of thy world, that whatsoever hath been made may know that thou hast made it, and whatsoever hath been created may understand that thou hast created it, and whatsoever hath breath in its nostrils may say, The Lord God of Israel is King, and his dominion ruleth over all. [Our God and God of our fathers, accept our rest.] Sanctify us by thy commandments, and grant our portion in thy Law; satisfy us with thy goodness,. and gladden us with thy salvation [and in thy love and favor, O Lord our God, let us inherit thy holy Sabbath; and may Israel, who hallow thy name, rest thereon.] O purify our hearts to serve thee in truth, for thou art God in truth and thy word is truth, and endureth for ever. Blessed art thou, O Lord, King over all the earth, who sanctifiest [the Sabbath and] Israel and the Day of Memorial.

Accept, O Lord our God, thy people Israel and their prayer; restore the service to the oracle of thy house; receive in love and favor both the fire offerings of Israel and their prayer; and may the service of thy people Israel be ever acceptable unto thee.

And let our eyes behold thy return in mercy to Zion. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who restorest thy divine presence unto Zion.

[p. 354]

Congregation in an undertone

We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God and the God of our fathers, the God of all flesh, our Creator and the Creator of all things in the beginning. Blessings and thanksgivings be to thy great and holy name, because thou hast kept us in life and hast preserved us; so mayest thou continue to keep us in life and to preserve us. O gather our exiles to thy holy courts to observe thy statutes, to do thy will, and to serve thee with a perfect heart; seeing that we give thanks unto thee. Blessed be the God to whom thanksgivings are due.

We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God and the God of our fathers for ever and ever; thou art the Rock of our lives, the Shield of our salvation through every generation. We will give thanks unto thee and declare thy praise for our lives which are committed unto thy hand, and for our souls which are in thy charge, and for thy miracles, which are daily with us, and for thy wonders and thy benefits, which are wrought at all times, evening, morn and noon. O thou who art all-good, whose mercies fail not; thou, merciful Being, whose lovingkindnesses never cease, the have ever hoped in thee.

For all these things thy name, O our King, shall be continually blessed and exalted for ever and ever.

O inscribe all the children of thy covenant for a happy life.

And everything that liveth shall give thanks unto thee for ever, and shall praise thy name in truth,

[p. 355]

[paragraph continues] O God, our salvation and our help. Blessed art thou; O Lord, whose name is All-good, and unto whom it is becoming to give thanks.

At the repetition of the Amidah by the Reader the following is introduced:--

Our God and God of our fathers, bless us with the three-fold blessing of thy Law written by the hand of Moses thy servant, which was spoken by Aaron and his sons, the priests, thy holy people, as it is said, The Lord bless thee and keep thee: the Lord make his face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee: the Lord turn his face unto thee, and give thee peace.

At the Morning Service say:--

Grant peace, welfare, blessing, grace, lovingkindness and mercy unto us and unto all Israel, thy people. Bless us, O our Father, even all of us together, with the light of thy countenance; for by the light of thy countenance thou hast given us, O Lord our God, the Law of life, lovingkindness and righteousness, blessing, mercy, life and peace; and may it be good in thy sight to bless thy people Israel at all times and in every hour with thy peace.

At the Afternoon and Evening Service Say:--

Grant abundant peace unto Israel thy people for ever; for thou art the sovereign Lord of all peace; and may it be good in thy sight to bless thy people Israel at all times and at every hour with thy peace.

In the book of life, blessing, peace and good sustenance may we be remembered and inscribed before thee, we and all thy people the house of Israel, for a happy life and for peace. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who makest peace.

O my God! guard my tongue from evil and my lips

[p. 356]

from speaking guile; and to such as curse me let my soul be dumb, yea, let my soul be unto all as the dust. Open my heart to thy Law, and let my soul pursue thy commandments. If any design evil against me, speedily make their counsel of none effect, and frustrate their designs. Do it for the sake of thy name, do it for the sake of thy right hand, do it for the sake of thy holiness, do it for the sake of thy Law. In order that thy beloved ones may be delivered, O save with thy right hand, and answer me. Let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart be acceptable before thee, O Lord, my Rock and my Redeemer. He who maketh peace in his high places, may he make peace for us and for all Israel, and say ye, Amen.

May it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, that the temple be speedily rebuilt in our days, and grant our portion in thy Law. And there we will serve thee with awe, as in the days of old, and Is in ancient years. Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the lays of old, and as in ancient years.

The following form of greeting is used on New Year:

May you be inscribed for a happy year.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 357]

  

KIDDUSH FOR NEW YEAR

When New Year occurs on Sabbath begin here:--

And it was evening and it was morning, the sixth day.

And the heaven and the earth were finished and all their host. And on the seventh day God had finished his work which he had made; and he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had made. And God blessed the seventh day, and he hallowed it, because he rested thereon from all his work which God had created and made.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who createst the fruit of the vine.

On Sabbath add the words in brackets.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast chosen us from all peoples and exalted us above all tongues, and sanctified us by thy commandments. And thou hast given us in love, O Lord our God, [this Sabbath day and] this Day of Memorial, a day of blowing the Shofar [on Sabbath substitute for the last phrase--a day of remembrance of blowing the Shofar, in love]; an holy convocation, as a memorial of the departure from Egypt. For thou hast chosen us and hast sanctified us above all nations; and thy word is truth and endureth for ever. Blessed art thou, O Lord, King over all the earth, who sanctifies [the Sabbath and] Israel and the Day of Memorial.

[p. 358]

On Saturday night the following is added:

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who createst the light of the fire.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who makest a distinction between holy and profane, between light and darkness, between Israel and other nations, between the seventh day and the six working days. Thou hast made a distinction between the holiness of the Sabbath and that of the festival, and hast hallowed the seventh day above the six working days; thou hast distinguished and sanctified thy people Israel by thy holiness. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who makest a distinction between holy and holy.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast kept us in life, and hast preserved us, and enabled us to reach this season.

Kiddush and the Blessing over the Bread having been said, an apple, dipped in honey, is taken, before partaking of which the following is said:--

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who createst the fruit of the tree.

After having partaken of the apple and honey, say:--

May it be thy will, O Lord our God, and God of our fathers, to renew unto us a happy and pleasant year.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 359]

  

ADDITIONAL SERVICE FOR NEW YEAR

O Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall declare thy praise.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God and God of out fathers, God of Abraham, God of Isaac, and God of Jacob, the great, mighty and revered God, the most high God, who bestowest lovingkindnesses and possessest all things; who rememberest the pious deeds of the patriarchs, and in love wilt bring a redeemer to their children's children for thy name's sake.

Remember us unto life, O King, who delightest in life, and inscribe us in the book of life, for thine own sake, O living God.

O King, Helper, Savior and Shield. Blessed art. thou, O Lord, the Shield of Abraham.

Thou, O Lord, art mighty for ever, thou quickenest the dead, thou art mighty to save.

Thou sustainest the living with lovingkindness, quickenest the dead with great mercy, supportest the falling, healest the sick, loosest the bound, and keepest thy faith to them that sleep in the dust. Who is like unto thee, Lord of mighty acts, and who resembleth thee, O King, who killest and quickenest, and causest salvation to spring forth?

Who is like unto thee, Father of mercy, who in mercy rememberest thy creatures unto life?

[p. 360]

Yea, faithful art thou to quicken the dead. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who quickenest the dead.

Thou art holy, and thy name is holy, and holy beings praise thee daily. (Selah.)

Now, therefore, O Lord our God, impose thine awe upon all thy works, and thy dread upon all that thou hast created, that all works may fear thee and all creatures prostrate themselves before thee, that they may all form a single band to do thy will with a perfect heart, even as we know, O Lord our God, that dominion is thine, strength is in thy hand, and might in thy right hand, and that thy name is to be feared above all that thou hast created.

Give then glory, O Lord, unto thy people, praise to them that fear thee, hope to them that seek thee, and free speech to them that wait for thee, joy to thy land, gladness to thy city, a flourishing horn unto David thy servant, and a clear shining light unto the son of Jesse, thine anointed, speedily in our days.

Then shall the just also see and be glad, and the upright shall exult, and the pious triumphantly rejoice, while iniquity shall close her mouth, and all wickedness shall be wholly consumed like smoke, when thou makest the dominion of arrogance to pass away from the earth.

[p. 361]

And thou, O Lord, shalt reign, thou alone over all thy works on Mount Zion, the dwelling place of thy glory, and in Jerusalem, thy holy city, as it is written in thy Holy Words, The Lord shall reign for ever, thy God, O Zion, unto all generations. Praise ye the Lord.

Holy art thou, and dreaded is thy name, and there is no God beside thee, as it is written, And the Lord of hosts is exalted in judgment, and the holy God is sanctified in righteousness. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the holy King.

Thou hast chosen us from all peoples; thou hast loved us and taken pleasure in us, and hast exalted us above all tongues; thou hast sanctified us by thy commandments, and brought us near unto thy service, O our King, and called us by thy great and holy name.

On Sabbath add the words in brackets.

And thou hast given us in love, O Lord our God, [this Sabbath day and] this Day of Memorial, a day of blowing the Shofar [on Sabbaths substitute for the last phrase--a day of remembrance of blowing the Shofar, in love]; an holy convocation, as a memorial of the departure from Egypt.

But on account of our sins we were exiled from our land, and removed far from our country, and we are unable to fulfil our obligations in thy chosen house, that great and holy temple which was called by thy name, because of the hand that hath been stretched out against thy sanctuary. May it be thy will, O Lord

[p. 362]

our God and God of our fathers, merciful King, that thou mayest again in thine abundant compassion have mercy upon us and upon thy sanctuary, and mayest speedily rebuild it and magnify its glory. Our Father, our King, do thou speedily make the glory of thy kingdom manifest upon us; shine forth and exalt thyself upon us in the sight of all living; bring our scattered ones among the nations near unto thee, and gather our dispersed from the ends of the earth. Lead us with exultation unto Zion thy city, and unto Jerusalem the place of thy sanctuary with everlasting joy; and there we will prepare before thee the offerings that are obligatory for us, the continual offerings according to their order, and the additional offerings according to their enactment; and the additional offerings of [this Sabbath day and] this Day of Memorial, we will prepare and offer unto thee in love according to the precept of thy will, as thou hast prescribed for us in thy Law through the hand of Moses thy servant, by the mouth of thy glory, as it is said:

[And on the Sabbath day two he-lambs of the first year without blemish, and two-tenth parts of an ephah of fine flour for a meal offering, mingled with oil, and the drink offering thereof; this is the burnt offering of every Sabbath, beside the continual burnt offering and the drink offering thereof.]

And in the seventh month, on the first day of the month, ye shall have an holy convocation; ye shall do no servile work: it shall be a day of blowing the Shofar unto you. And ye shall offer a burnt offering

[p. 363]

for a sweet savor unto the Lord; one young bullock, one ram, seven he-lambs of the first year without blemish. And their meal offering and their drink offerings as hath been ordained; three-tenth parts of an ephah for each bullock, and two-tenth parts for the ram, and one-tenth part for each lamb, with wine according to the drink offering thereof, and two he-goats wherewith to make atonement, and the two continual offerings according to their enactment; beside the burnt offering of the New Moon and the meal offering thereof, and the continual burnt offering and the meal offering thereof, and their drink offerings, according to their ordinance, for a sweet savor, an offering made by fire unto the Lord.

[They that keep the Sabbath and call it a delight shall rejoice in thy kingdom; the people that hallow the seventh day, even all of them, shall be satiated and delighted with thy goodness, seeing that thou didst find pleasure in the seventh day, and didst hallow it; thou didst call it the desirable of days, in remembrance of the creation.]

It is our duty to praise the Lord of all things, to ascribe greatness to him who formed the world in the beginning, since he hath not made us like the nations of other lands, and hath not placed us like other families of the earth, since he hath not assigned unto us a portion as unto them, nor a lot as unto all their multitude. For we bend the knee and offer worship and thanks before the supreme King of kings, the Holy One, blessed be he, who stretched forth the heavens and laid the foundations of the earth, the seat of whose glory is in the heavens above, and the abode of whose might is in the loftiest heights. He is our God; there is none else: in truth he is our King; there is none besides him; as it is written in his Law, And thou shalt know this day, and lay it to thine heart, that

[p. 364]

the Lord he is God in heaven above and upon the earth beneath: there is none else.

We therefore hope in thee, O Lord our God, that we may speedily behold the glory of thy might, when thou wilt remove the abominations from the earth, and the idols will be utterly cut off, when the world will be perfected under the kingdom of the Almighty, and all the children of flesh will call upon thy name, when thou wilt turn unto thyself all the wicked of the earth. Let all the inhabitants of the world perceive and know that unto thee every knee must bow, every tongue must swear. Before thee, O Lord our God, let them bow and fall; and unto thy glorious name let them give honor; let them all accept the yoke of thy kingdom, and do thou reign over them speedily, and for ever and ever. For the kingdom is thine, and to all eternity thou wilt reign in glory; as it is written in thy Law, The Lord shall reign for ever and ever.

And it is said, He hath not beheld iniquity in Jacob, neither hath he seen perverseness in Israel: the Lord his God is with him, and the trumpet shout of a King is among them. And it is said, And he became King in Jeshurun, when the heads of the people were gathered, the tribes of Israel together. And in thy Holy Words it is written, saying, For the kingdom is the Lord's, and he is ruler over the nations. And it is said, The Lord reigneth; he hath robed him in majesty; the Lord hath robed him, yea, he hath girded himself with strength: the world also is set firm, that it cannot be

[p. 365]

moved. And it is said, Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lifted up, ye everlasting doors, that the King of glory may come in. Who, then, is the King of glory? The Lord, strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in battle. Lift up your heads, O ye gates; yea, lift them up, ye everlasting doors, that the King of glory may come in. Who, then, is the King of glory? The Lord of hosts, he is the King of glory. (Selah.) And by the hands of thy servants, the prophets, it is written, saying, Thus saith the Lord, the King of Israel and his Redeemer, the Lord of hosts: I am the first, and I am the last; and beside me there is no God. And it is said, And saviors shall come up on Mount Zion to judge the Mount of Esau, and the kingdom shall be the Lord's. And it is said, And the Lord shall be King over all the earth: in that day shall the Lord be One and his name One. And in thy Law it is written saying, Hear, O Israel: the Lord our God, the Lord is One.

Our God and God of our fathers, reign thou in thy glory over the whole universe, and be exalted above all the earth in thine honor, and shine forth in the splendor and excellence of thy might upon all the inhabitants of thy world, that whatsoever hath been made may know that thou hast made it, and whatsoever hath been created may understand that thou hast created it, and whatsoever hath breath in its nostrils may say, the Lord God of Israel is King and his dominion ruleth over all. [Our God and

[p. 366]

[paragraph continues] God of our fathers, accept our rest.] Sanctify us by thy commandments, and grant our portion in thy Law; satisfy us with thy goodness, and gladden us with thy salvation: [and in thy love and favor, O Lord our God, let us inherit thy holy Sabbath; and may Israel, who hallow thy name, rest thereon]. O purify our hearts to serve thee in truth, for thou art God in truth, and thy word is truth, and endureth for ever. Blessed art thou, O Lord,) King over all the earth, who sanctifiest [the Sabbath and] Israel and the Day of Memorial.

Thou rememberest what was wrought from eternity and art mindful of all that hath been formed from of old: before thee all secrets are revealed and the multitude of hidden things from the beginning; for there is no forgetfulness before the throne of thy glory; nor is there ought hidden from thine eves. Thou rememberest every deed that hath been done: not a creature is concealed from thee: all things are manifest and known unto thee, O Lord our God, who lookest and seest to the end of all generations. For thou wilt bring on the appointed time of memorial when every spirit and soul shall be visited, and the multitudinous works be remembered with the innumerable throng of thy creatures. From the beginning thou didst make this thy purpose known, and from aforetime thou didst disclose it. This day, on which was the beginning of thy work, is a memorial of the first day, for it is a statute for Israel, a decree of the God of Jacob. Thereon also sentence is pronounced upon countries,--which of them is destined to the

[p. 367]

sword and which to peace, which to famine and Which to plenty; and each separate creature is visited thereon, and recorded for life or for death. Who is not visited on this day? For the remembrance of every creature cometh before thee, each man's deeds and destiny, his works and ways, his thoughts and schemes, his imaginings and achievements. Happy is the man who forgetteth thee not, and the son of man who strengtheneth himself in thee; for they that seek thee shall never stumble, neither shall any be put to shame who trust in thee. Yea, the remembrance of all works cometh before thee, and thou enquirest into the doings of them all. Of Noah also thou wast mindful in thy love, and didst visit him with a promise of salvation and mercy, when thou broughtest the waters of the flood to destroy all flesh on account of their evil deeds. So his remembrance came before thee, O Lord our God, to increase his seed like the dust of the earth, and his offspring like the sand of the sea: as it is written in thy Law, And God remembered Noah, and every living thing, and all the cattle that were with him in the ark: and God made a wind to pass over the earth, and the waters subsided. And it is said, And God heard their groaning, and God remembered his covenant with Abraham, with Isaac and with Jacob. And it is said, Then will I remember my covenant with

[p. 368]

[paragraph continues] Jacob; and also my covenant with Isaac, and also my covenant with Abraham will I remember; and I will remember the land. And in thy Holy Words it is written saying, He hath made a memorial for his wondrous works: the Lord is gracious and full of compassion. And it is said, He hath given food unto them that fear him: he will ever be mindful of his covenant. And it is said, And he remembered for them his covenant, and repented according to the multitude of his lovingkindnesses. And by the hands of thy servants, the prophets, it is written saying, Go and cry in the ears of Jerusalem, saying, Thus saith the Lord, I remember for thee the kindness of thy youth, the love of thy bridal state; how thou wentest after me in the wilderness, in a land that was not sown. And it is said, Nevertheless, I will remember my covenant with thee in the days of thy youth, and I will establish unto thee an everlasting covenant. And it is said, Is Ephraim a precious son unto me? Is he a caressed child? As often as I spake against him, I earnestly remembered him . therefore my heart yearneth for him: I will surely have mercy upon him, saith the Lord.

Our God and God of our fathers, let us be remembered by thee for good: grant us a visitation of salvation and mercy from thy heavens, the heavens of old; and remember unto us, O Lord our God, the covenant and the lovingkindness and the oath which thou swarest unto Abraham our father on Mount Moriah: and may the binding with which Abraham our father bound his son Isaac on the altar appear before thee.

[p. 369]

how he overbore his compassion in order to perform thy will with a perfect heart. So may thy compassion overbear thine anger against us; in thy great goodness may the fierceness of thy wrath turn aside from thy people, thy city and thine inheritance. Fulfil unto us, O Lord our God, the word in which thou hast bidden us trust in thy Law through the hand of Moses thy servant, from the mouth of thy glory, as it is said, But I will remember unto them the covenant of their ancestors, whom I brought forth out of the land of Egypt in the sight of the nations, that I might be their God: I am the Lord. For thou art he who remembereth from eternity all forgotten things, and before the throne of whose glory there is no forgetfulness. O remember the binding of Isaac this day in mercy unto his seed. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who rememberest the covenant.

Thou didst reveal thyself in a cloud of glory unto thy holy people in order to speak with them. Out of heaven thou didst make them hear thy voice and wast revealed unto them in clouds of purity. The whole world trembled at thy presence, and the works of creation were in awe of thee, when thou didst thus reveal thyself, O our King, upon Mount Sinai to teach thy people the law and commandments, and didst make them hear thy majestic voice and thy holy utterances out of flames of fire. Amidst thunders and lightnings thou didst manifest thyself to them, and while the Shofar sounded thou didst shine forth upon them; as it is written in thy Law, And it came to pass on the

[p. 370]

third day, when it was morning, that there were thunders and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the mount, and the sound of the Shofar exceeding loud; and all the people that were in the camp trembled. And it is said, And the sound of the Shofar waxed louder and louder; Moses spake, and God answered him by a voice. And it is said, And all the people perceived the thunderings and the lightnings, and the sound of the Shofar, and the mountain smoking: and when the people saw it, they were moved and stood afar off. And in thy Holy Words it is written, saying, God is gone up with a shout, the Lord with the sound of a Shofar. And it is said, With trumpets and sound of Shofar shout joyously before the King, the Lord. And it is said, Blow the Shofar on the new moon, at the beginning of the month, for our day of festival; for it is a statute for Israel, a decree of the God of Jacob. And it is said, Praise ye the Lord. Praise God in his sanctuary: praise him in the firmament of his power. Praise him for his mighty acts: praise him according to his abundant greatness. Praise him with the blast of the Shofar: praise him with the harp and the lyre. Praise him with the timbrel and dance: praise him with stringed instruments and the pipe, Praise him with the clear-toned cymbals: praise him with the loud-sounding cymbals. Let everything that hath breath praise the Lord. Praise ye the Lord. And by the hands of thy servants, the prophets, it is written saying, All ye inhabitants of the world, and ye dwellers on the earth, when an ensign is lifted up on the mountains, see ye, and when the Shofar is

[p. 371]

blown, hear ye. And it is said, And it shall come to pass on that day, that a great Shofar shall be blown; and they shall come who were lost in the land of Assyria, and they that were outcasts in the land of Egypt; and they shall worship the Lord in the holy mountain at Jerusalem. And it is said, And the Lord shall be seen over them, and his arrow shall go forth as the lightning: and the Lord God shall blow the Shofar, and shall go with the whirlwinds of the south. The Lord of hosts shall be a shield unto them. So be a shield unto thy people Israel with thy peace.

Our God and God of our fathers, sound the great Shofar for our freedom, lift up the ensign to gather our exiles; bring our scattered ones among the nations near unto thee, and gather our dispersed from the ends of the earth. Lead us with exultation unto Zion, thy city, and unto Jerusalem the place of thy sanctuary with everlasting joy; and there we will prepare before thee the offerings that are obligatory for us, as is commanded us in thy Law through the hand of Moses thy servant, from the mouth of thy glory, as it is said, And in the day of your gladness, and in your set feasts, and in the beginnings of your months, ye shall blow with the trumpets over your burnt offerings, and over the sacrifices of your peace offerings; and they shall be to you for a memorial before your God: I am the Lord your God. For thou hearest the sound of the Shofar and givest heed to the trumpet-blast, and there

[p. 372]

is none like unto thee. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who in mercy hearest the sound of the trumpet-blast of thy people Israel.

Accept, O Lord our God, thy people Israel and their prayer; restore the service to the oracle of thy house; receive in love and favor both the fire offerings of Israel and their prayer; and may the service of thy people Israel be ever acceptable unto thee.

And let our eyes behold thy return in mercy to Zion. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who restorest thy divine presence unto Zion.

We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God and the God of our fathers for ever and ever; thou art the Rock of our lives, the Shield of our salvation through every generation. We will give thanks unto thee and declare thy praise for our lives which are committed unto thy hand, and for our souls which are in thy charge, and for thy miracles, which are daily with us, and for thy

Congregation in an undertone

We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God and the God of our fathers, the God of all flesh, our Creator and the Creator of all things in the beginning. Blessings and thanksgivings be to thy great and holy name, because thou hast kept us in life and hast preserved us so mayest thou continue to keep us in life and to preserve us. O gather our exiles to thy holy courts to observe thy statutes, to do thy will, and to serve thee with a perfect heart; seeing that we give thanks unto thee. Blessed be the God to whom thanksgivings are due.

[p. 373]

wonders and thy benefits, which are wrought at all times, evening, morn and noon. O thou who art all-good, whose mercies fail not; thou, merciful Being, whose lovingkindnesses never cease, we have ever hoped in thee.

For all these things thy name, O our King, shall be continually blessed and exalted for ever and ever.

O inscribe all the children of thy covenant for a happy life.

And everything that liveth shall give thanks unto thee for ever, and shall praise thy name in truth, O God, our salvation and our help. Blessed art thou, O Lord, whose name is All-good, and unto whom it is becoming to give thanks.

At the repetition of the Amidah by the Reader, the following is introduced:--

Our God and God of our fathers, bless us with the three-fold blessing of thy Law written by the hand of Moses thy servant, which was spoken by Aaron and his sons, the priests, thy holy people, as it is said, The Lord bless thee, and keep thee: the Lord make his face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee: the Lord turn his face unto thee, and give thee peace.

Grant peace, welfare, blessing, grace, lovingkindness and mercy unto us and unto all Israel, thy people. Bless us, O our Father, even all of us together, with the light of thy countenance; for by the light of thy countenance thou hast given us, O Lord our God,

[p. 374]

the Law of life, lovingkindness and righteousness, blessing, mercy, life and peace; and may it be good it thy sight to bless thy people Israel at all times and in every hour with thy peace.

In the book of life, blessing, peace and good sustenance may we be remembered and inscribed before thee, we and all thy people the house of Israel, for a happy life and for peace. Blessed art thou, O Lord who makest peace.

O my God! guard my tongue from evil and my lips from speaking guile; and to such as curse me let my soul be dumb, yea, let my soul be unto all as the dust. Open my heart to thy Law, and let my soul pursue thy commandments. If any design evil against me, speedily make their counsel of none effect, and frustrate their designs. Do it for the sake of thy name, do it for the sake of thy right hand, do it for the sake of thy holiness, do it for the sake of thy Law. In order that thy beloved ones may be delivered, O save with thy right hand, and answer me. Let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart be acceptable before thee, O Lord, my Rock and my Redeemer. He who maketh peace in his high places, may he make peace for us and for all Israel, and say ye, Amen.

[p. 375]

May it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, that the temple be speedily rebuilt in our days, and grant our portion in thy Law. And there we will serve thee with awe, as in the days of old, and as in ancient years. Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in ancient years.

For the Blessing of the Priests when the New Year falls on a week-day, see pp. <page 347>-<page 348>.

On the  Day of New Year, or, when New Year falls on Sabbath, on the Second Day, after the Afternoon Service, it is customary to go to the banks of a river, or of any other piece of water, and to say the following:--

Who is a God like unto thee, that pardoneth iniquity and passeth by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? He retaineth not his anger for ever, because he delighteth in lovingkindness. He will turn again and have mercy upon us; he will subdue our iniquities. And thou wilt cast all their sins into the depths of the sea. O mayest thou cast all the sins of thy people, the house of Israel, into a place where they shall be no more remembered or visited, or ever

[p. 376]

again come to mind. Thou wilt show faithfulness to Jacob, and lovingkindness to Abraham as thou hast sworn unto our fathers from the days of old.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

SERVICE FOR THE EVE OF THE DAY OF ATONEMENT

On the day previous to the Fast of Atonement, Afternoon Service is said as on Fridays, but earlier than usual, After "who makest peace," <page 65>, say "Our God . . . let our prayer come," to the end of the Amidah for the Day of Atonement; see pp. <page 383>-<page 389>.

"It is our duty," etc., <page 93>. Kaddish, <page 94>.

Before going to Synagogue the lamp is lighted, and the following Blessing is said:--

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast sanctified us by thy commandments, and commanded us to kindle the light of the [Sabbath and the] Day of Atonement.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 377]

  

SERVICE FOR THE DAY OF ATONEMENT

O Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall declare thy praise.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, God of Abraham, God of Isaac, and God of Jacob, the great, mighty and revered God, the most high God, who bestowest lovingkindnesses, and possessest all things, who rememberest the pious deeds of the patriarchs, and in love wilt bring a redeemer to their children's children for thy name's sake.

Remember us unto life, O King, who delightest in life, and inscribe us in the book of life, for thine own sake, O living God.

O King, Helper, Savior and Shield. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the Shield of Abraham.

Thou, O Lord, art mighty for ever, thou quickenest the dead, thou art mighty to save.

Thou sustainest the living with lovingkindness, quickenest the dead with great mercy, supportest the falling, healest the sick, loosest the bound, and keepest thy faith to them that sleep in the dust. Who is like unto thee, Lord of mighty acts, and who resembleth thee, O King, who killest and quickenest, and causest salvation to spring forth?

[p. 378]

Who is like unto thee, Father of mercy, who in mercy rememberest thy creatures unto life?

Yea, faithful art thou to quicken the dead. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who quickenest the dead.

Thou art holy, and thy name is holy, and holy beings praise thee daily. (Selah.)

Now, therefore, O Lord our God, impose thine awe upon all thy works, and thy dread upon all that thou hast created, that all works may fear thee and all creatures prostrate themselves before thee, that they may all form a single band to do thy will with a perfect heart, even as we know, O Lord our God, that dominion is thine, strength is in thy hand, and might in thy right hand, and that thy name is to be feared above all that thou hast created.

Give then glory, O Lord, unto thy people, praise to them that fear thee, hope to them that seek thee, and free speech to them that wait for thee, joy to thy land, gladness to thy city, a flourishing horn unto David thy servant, and a clear shining light unto the son of Jesse, thine anointed, speedily in our days.

Then shall the just also see and be glad, and the upright shall exult, and the pious triumphantly rejoice, while iniquity shall close her mouth, and all

[p. 379]

wickedness shall be wholly consumed like smoke, when thou makest the dominion of arrogance to pass away from the earth.

And thou, O Lord, shalt reign, thou alone over all thy works on Mount Zion, the dwelling place of thy glory, and in Jerusalem, thy holy city, as it is written in thy Holy Words, The Lord shall reign for ever, thy God, O Zion, unto all generations. Praise ye the Lord.

Holy art thou, and dreaded is thy name, and there is no God beside thee, as it is written, And the Lord of hosts is exalted in judgment, and the holy God is sanctified in righteousness. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the holy King.

Thou hast chosen us from all peoples, thou hast loved us and taken pleasure in us, and hast exalted us above all tongues; thou hast sanctified us by thy commandments, and brought us near unto thy service, O our King, and hast called us by thy great and holy name.

On Sabbath add the words in brackets.

And thou hast given us in love, O Lord our God, [this Sabbath day for holiness and rest, and] this Day of Atonement for pardon, forgiveness, and atonement, that we may [in love] obtain pardon thereon for all our iniquities; an holy convocation, as a memorial of the departure from Egypt.

[p. 380]

Our God and God of our fathers! May our remembrance rise and come and be accepted before thee, with the remembrance of our fathers, of Messiah, the son of David thy servant, of Jerusalem thy holy city, and of all thy people the house of Israel, bringing deliverance and well-being, grace, lovingkindness and mercy, life and peace on this Day of Atonement. Remember us, O Lord our God, thereon for our wellbeing; be mindful of us for blessing, and save us unto life; by thy promise of salvation and mercy, spare us and be gracious unto us; have mercy upon us and save us; for our eyes are bent upon thee, because thou art a gracious and merciful God and King.

Our God and God of our fathers, pardon our iniquities [on this Sabbath day, and] on this Day of Atonement; blot out our transgressions and our sins, and make them pass away from before thine eyes; as it is said, I even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake; and I will not remember thy sins. And it is said, I have blotted out, as a cloud, thy transgressions, and, as a mist, thy sins: return unto me, for I have redeemed thee. And it is said, For on this day shall atonement be made for you, to cleanse you; from all your sins shall ye be clean before the Lord. [Our God and God of our fathers, accept our rest.] Sanctify us by thy commandments, and grant

[p. 381]

our portion in thy Law; satisfy us with thy goodness, and gladden us with thy salvation; [and let us inherit, O Lord our God, in love and favor, thy holy Sabbath; and may Israel, who hallow thy name, rejoice thereon]; and purify our hearts to serve thee in truth; for thou art the forgiver of Israel and the pardoner of the tribes of Jeshurun in every generation, and beside thee we have no king who pardoneth and forgiveth. Blessed art thou, O Lord, thou King, who pardonest and forgivest our iniquities and the iniquities of thy people, the house of Israel, who makest our trespasses to pass away year by year, King over all the earth, who sanctifiest [the Sabbath and] Israel and the day of Atonement.

Accept, O Lord our God, thy people Israel and their prayer; restore the service to the oracle of thy house; receive in love and favor both the fire offerings of Israel and their prayer; and may the service of thy people Israel be ever acceptable unto thee.

And let our eyes behold thy return in mercy to Zion. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who restorest thy divine presence unto Zion.

We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God and the God of our fathers for ever and ever; thou art the Rock of our lives, the Shield of

Congregation in an undertone

We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God and the God of our fathers, the God of all flesh, our Creator and the Creator of all things in the beginning.

[p. 382]

[paragraph continues] Blessings and thanksgivings be to thy great and holy name because thou hast kept us in life and hast preserved us so mayest thou continue to keep us in life and to preserve us. O gather our exiles to thy holy courts to observe thy statutes, to do thy will, and to serve thee with a perfect heart; seeing that we give thanks unto thee. Blessed be the God to whom thanksgivings are due.

our salvation through every generation. We will give thanks unto thee and declare thy praise for our lives which are committed unto thy hand, and for our souls which are in thy charge, and for thy miracles, which are daily with us, and for thy wonders and thy benefits, which are wrought at all times, evening, morn and noon. O thou who are all-good, whose mercies fail not; thou, merciful Being whose lovingkindnesses never cease, we have ever hoped in thee.

For all these things thy name, O our King, shall be continually blessed and exalted for ever and ever.

O inscribe all the children of thy covenant for a happy life.

And everything that liveth shall give thanks unto thee for ever, and shall praise thy name in truth, O God, our salvation and our help. Blessed art thou, O Lord, whose name is All-good, and unto whom it is becoming to give thanks.

At the repetition of the Amidah by the Reader the following is introduced:--

Our God and God of our fathers, bless us with the

[p. 383]

three-fold blessing of thy Law written by the hand of Moses thy servant, which was spoken by Aaron and his sons, the priests, thy holy people, as it is said, The Lord bless thee, and keep thee: the Lord make his face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee: the Lord turn his face unto thee, and give thee peace.

At the Morning Service say:--

Grant peace, welfare, blessing, grace, lovingkindness and mercy unto us and unto all Israel, thy people. Bless us, O our Father, even all of us together, with the light of thy countenance; for by the light of thy countenance thou hast given us, O Lord our God, the Law of life, lovingkindness and righteousness, blessing, mercy, life and peace; and may it be good in thy sight to bless thy people Israel at all times and in every hour with thy peace.

At the Afternoon and Evening Service say:--

Grant abundant peace unto Israel thy people for ever; for thou art the sovereign Lord of all peace; and may it be good in thy sight to bless thy people Israel at all times and at every hour with thy peace.

In the book of life, blessing, peace and good sustenance may we be remembered and inscribed before thee, we and all thy people the house of Israel, for a happy life and for peace. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who makest peace.

Our God and God of our fathers,

let our prayer come before thee; hide not thyself from our supplication, for we are not arrogant and stiff-necked, that we should say before thee, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, we are righteous and have not sinned; but verily, we have sinned.

[p. 384]

We have trespassed, we have been faithless, we have robbed, we have spoken basely, we have committed iniquity, we have wrought unrighteousness, we have been presumptuous, we have done violence, we have forged lies, we have counselled evil, we have spoken falsely, we have scoffed, we have revolted, we have blasphemed, we have been rebellious, we have acted perversely, we have transgressed, we have persecuted, we have been stiff-necked, we have done wickedly, we have corrupted ourselves, we have committed abomination, we have gone astray, and we have led astray.

We have turned aside from thy commandments and good judgments, and it hath profited us nought. But thou art righteous in all that is come upon us; for thou hast acted truthfully, but we have wrought unrighteousness.

What shall we say before thee, O thou who dwellest on high, and what shall we recount unto thee, thou who abidest in the heavens? dost thou not know all things, both the hidden and the revealed?

Thou knowest the secrets of eternity and the most hidden mysteries of all living. Thou searchest the innermost recesses, and triest the reins and the heart. Nought is concealed from thee, or hidden from thine eyes.

May it then be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, to forgive us for all our sins, to pardon us for all our iniquities, and to grant us remission for all our transgressions.

[p. 385]

For the sin which we have committed before thee tinder compulsion, or of our own will;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee in hardening of the heart:

For the sin which we have committed before thee unknowingly;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee with utterance of the lips:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by unchastity;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee openly and secretly:

For the sin which we have committed before thee knowingly and deceitfully:

And for the sin which we have committed before thee in speech:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by wronging our neighbor;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee by the sinful meditating of the heart:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by association with impurity;

And for the sin which have committed before thee by confession with the mouth alone:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by despising parents and teachers;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee in presumption or in error:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by violence;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee by the profanation of the divine Name:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by unclean lips;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee by folly of the mouth:

[p. 386]

For the sin which we have committed before thee by the evil inclination;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee wittingly or unwittingly:

For all these, O God of forgiveness, forgive us, pardon us, grant us remission.

For the sin which we have committed before thee by denying and lying;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee by taking of bribes:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by scoffing;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee by slander:

For the sin which we have committed before thee in business;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee in eating and drinking:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by usury and interest;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee by the stretched forth neck of pride:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by the conversation of our lips;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee with wanton looks:

For the sin which we have committed before thee with haughty eyes;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee by effrontery:

For all these, O God of forgiveness, forgive us, pardon us, grant us remission.

[p. 387]

For the sin which we have committed before thee by breaking off the yoke of thy commandments;

And for the sin which we have committed before them by contentiousness:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by ensnaring our neighbor;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee by envy:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by levity;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee by being stiff-necked:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by running to do evil;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee by tale-bearing:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by vain oaths;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee by causeless hatred:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by breach of trust;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee with confusion of mind:

For all these, O God of forgiveness, forgive us, pardon us, grant us remission.

And also for the sins for which we owe a burnt offering:

And for the sins for which we owe a sin offering:

And for the sins for which we owe an offering, varying according to our means:

And for the sins for which we owe an offering, whether for certain or for doubtful trespass.

And for the sins for which we are liable to the penalty of chastisement:

[p. 388]

And for the sins for which we are liable to the penalty of forty stripes:

And for the sins for which we are liable to the penalty of death by the hand of heaven:

And for the sins for which we are liable to the penalty of excision and childlessness:

For all these, O God of forgiveness, forgive us, pardon us, grant us remission.

And also for the sins for which we are liable to any of the four death penalties inflicted by the court, stoning, burning, beheading, and strangling; for the violation of positive, or for the violation of negative precepts, whether these latter do or do not admit of a remedy by the subsequent fulfilment of a positive command; for all our sins, whether they be or be not manifest to us. Such sins as are manifest to us, we have already declared and confessed unto thee, while such as are not manifest unto us, are manifest and known unto thee, according to the word that hath been spoken, The secret things belong unto the Lord our God; but the things that are revealed belong unto us and to our children for ever, that we may do all the words of this Law. For thou art the forgiver of Israel and the pardoner of the tribes of Jeshurun in every generation, and beside thee we have no king, who pardoneth and forgiveth.

O my God, before I was formed I was nothing worth, and now that I have been formed I am but as though I had not been formed. Dust am I in my life: how much more so in my death. Behold I am before

[p. 389]

thee like a vessel filled with shame and contusion, O may it be thy will, O Lord my God and God of my fathers, that I may sin no more, and as to the sins I have committed, purge them away in thine abounding compassion though not by means of affliction and sore diseases.

O my God! guard my tongue from evil and my lips from speaking guile; and to such as curse me let my soul be dumb, yea, let my soul be unto all as the dust. Open my heart to thy Law, and let my soul pursue thy commandments. If any design evil against me, speedily make their counsel of none effect, and frustrate their designs. Do it for the sake of thy name, do it for the sake of thy right hand, do it for the sake of thy holiness, do it for the sake of thy Law, In order that thy beloved ones may be delivered, O save with thy right hand, and answer me. Let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart be acceptable before thee, O Lord, my Rock and my Redeemer. He who maketh peace in his high places, may he make peace for us and for all Israel, and say ye, Amen.

May it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, that the temple be speedily rebuilt in our days, and grant our portion in thy Law. And there we will serve thee with awe, as in the days of old, and as in ancient years. Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in ancient years.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 390]

  

ADDITIONAL SERVICE FOR THE DAY OF ATONEMENT

O Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall declare thy praise.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, God of Abraham, God of Isaac, and God of Jacob, the great, mighty and revered God, the most high God, who bestowest lovingkindnesses and possessest all things; who rememberest the pious deeds of the patriarchs, and in love wilt bring a redeemer to their children's children for thy name's sake.

Remember us unto life, O King, who delightest in life, and inscribe us in the book of life, for thine own sake, O living God.

O King, Helper, Savior and Shield. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the Shield of Abraham.

Thou, O Lord, art mighty for ever, thou quickenest the dead, thou art mighty to save.

Thou sustainest the living with lovingkindness, quickenest the dead with greet mercy, supportest the falling, healest the sick, loosest the bound, and keepest thy faith to them that sleep in the dust. Who is like unto thee Lord of mighty acts, and who resembleth thee, O King, who killest and quickenest, and causest salvation to spring forth?

Who is like unto thee, Father of mercy, who in mercy rememberest thy creatures unto life?

[p. 391]

Yea, faithful art thou to quicken the dead. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who quickenest the dead.

Thou art holy, and thy name is holy, and holy being. praise thee daily. (Selah.)

Now, therefore, O Lord our God, impose thine awe upon all thy works, and thy dread upon all that thou hast created, that all works may fear thee and all creatures prostrate themselves before thee, that they may all form a single band to do thy will with a perfect heart, even as we know, O Lord our God, that dominion is thine, strength is in thy hand, and might in thy right hand, and that thy name is to be feared above all that thou hast created.

Give then glory, O Lord, unto thy people, praise to them that fear thee, hope to them that seek thee, and free speech to them that wait for thee, joy to thy land, gladness to thy city, a flourishing horn unto David thy servant, and a clear shining light unto the son of Jesse, thine anointed, speedily in our days.

Then shall the just also see and be glad, and the upright shall exult, and the pious triumphantly rejoice, while iniquity shall close her mouth, and all wickedness shall be wholly consumed like smoke, when thou makest the dominion of arrogance to pass away from the earth.

[p. 392]

And thou, O Lord, shalt reign, thou alone over all thy works on Mount Zion, the dwelling place of thy glory, and in Jerusalem, thy holy city, as it is written in thy Holy Words, The Lord shall reign for ever, thy God, O Zion, unto all generations. Praise ye the Lord.

Holy art thou, and dreaded is thy name, and there is no God beside thee, as it is written, And the Lord of hosts is exalted in judgment, and the holy God is sanctified in righteousness. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the holy King.

Thou hast chosen us from all peoples, thou hast loved us and taken pleasure in us, and hast exalted us above all tongues; thou hast sanctified us by thy commandments, and hast brought us near unto thy service, O our King, and hast called us by thy great and holy name.

On Sabbath add the words in brackets.

And thou, hast given us in love, O Lord our God, [this Sabbath day for holiness and rest, and] this Day of Atonement for pardon, forgiveness and atonement, that we may [in love] obtain pardon thereon for all our iniquities; an holy convocation, as a memorial of the departure from Egypt.

But on account of our sins we were exiled from our land, and removed far from our country, and we are unable to fulfil our obligations in thy chosen house, that great and holy temple which was called by thy

[p. 393]

name because of the hand that hath been stretched out against thy sanctuary. May it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, merciful King, that thou mayest again in thine abundant compassion have mercy upon us and upon thy sanctuary, and mayest speedily rebuild it and magnify its glory. Our Father, our King, do thou speedily make the glory of thy kingdom manifest upon us; shine forth and exalt thyself upon us in the sight of all living; bring our scattered ones among the nations near unto thee, and gather our dispersed from the ends of the earth. Lead us with exultation unto Zion thy city, and unto Jerusalem the place of thy sanctuary, with everlasting joy; and there we will prepare before thee the offerings that are obligatory for us, the continual offerings according to their order, and the additional offerings according to their enactment: and the additional offerings of [this Sabbath day and] this day of Atonement we will prepare and offer unto thee in love according to the precept of thy will, as thou hast prescribed for us in thy Law through the hand of Moses thy servant, by the mouth of thy glory, as it is said:--

[And on the Sabbath day two he-lambs of the first year without blemish, and two-tenth parts of an ephah of fine flour for a meal offering, mingled with oil, and the drink offering thereof; this is the burnt offering of every Sabbath, beside the continual burnt offering and the drink offering thereof.]

And on the tenth day of this seventh month there shall be an holy convocation unto you; and ye shall

[p. 394]

afflict your souls, ye shall do no manner of work. And ye shall offer a burnt offering unto the Lord for a sweet savor; one young bullock, one ram, seven he-lambs of the first year; they shall be unto you without blemish. And their meal offering and their drink offerings as hath been ordained; three-tenth parts of an ephah for each bullock, and two-tenth parts for the ram, and one-tenth part for each lamb, with wine according to the drink offering thereof, and two he-goats wherewith to make atonement, and the two continual offerings according to their enactment.

[They that keep the Sabbath and call it a delight shall rejoice in thy kingdom; the people that hallow the seventh day, even all of them shall be satiated and delighted with thy goodness, seeing that thou didst find pleasure in the seventh day and didst hallow it; thou didst call it the desirable of days, in remembrance of the creation.]

Our God and God of our fathers, pardon our iniquities [on this Sabbath day, and] on this Day of Atonement; blot out our transgressions and our sins, and make them pass away from before thine eyes; as it is said, I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake; and I will not remember thy sins. And it is said, I have blotted out, as a cloud, thy transgressions, and, as a mist, thy sins: return unto me, for I have redeemed thee. And it is said, For on this day shall atonement be made for you, to cleanse you; from all your sins shall ye be clean before the Lord. [Our God and God of our fathers, accept our rest.] Sanctify us by thy commandments, and grant

[p. 395]

our portion in thy Law; satisfy us with thy goodness and gladden us with thy salvation; [and let us inherit, O Lord our God, in love and favor, thy holy Sabbath and may Israel, who hallow thy name, rejoice thereon] and purify our hearts to serve thee in truth; for thou art the forgiver of Israel and the pardoner of the tribes of Jeshurun in every generation, and beside thee We have no king who pardoneth and forgiveth. Blessed art thou, O Lord, thou King who pardonest and forgivest our iniquities and the iniquities of thy people, the house of Israel, who makest our trespasses to pass away year by year, King over all the earth, who sanctifiest [the Sabbath and] Israel and the day of Atonement.

Accept, O Lord our God, thy people Israel and their prayer; restore the service to the oracle of thy house; receive in love and favor both the fire offerings of Israel and their prayer; and may the service of thy people Israel be ever acceptable unto thee.

And let our eyes behold thy return in mercy to Zion. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who restorest thy divine presence unto Zion.

We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God and the God of our fathers for ever and ever; thou art the Rock of

Congregation in an undertone

We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God and the God of our fathers, the God of all flesh, our Creator and the Creator of all things in the beginning.

[p. 396]

[paragraph continues] Blessings and thanksgivings be to thy great and holy name, because thou hast kept us in life and hast preserved us: so mayest thou continue to keep us in life and to preserve us. O gather our exiles to thy holy courts to observe thy statutes, to do thy will, and to serve thee with a perfect heart; seeing that we give thanks unto thee. Blessed be the God to whom thanksgivings are due.

our lives, the Shield of our salvation through every generation. We will give thanks unto thee and declare thy praise for our lives which are committed unto thy hand, and for our souls which are in thy charge, and for thy miracles, which are daily with us, and for thy wonders and thy benefits, which are wrought at all times, evening, morn and noon. O thou who art all-good, whose mercies fail not; thou, merciful Being, whose lovingkindnesses never cease, we have ever hoped in thee.

For all these things thy name, O our King, shall be continually blessed and exalted for ever and ever.

O inscribe all the children of thy covenant for a happy life.

And everything that liveth shall give thanks unto thee for ever, and shall praise thy name in truth, O God, our salvation and our help. Blessed art thou, O Lord, whose name is All-good, and unto whom it is becoming to give thanks.

At the repetition of the Amidah by the Reader, the following is introduced:--

Our God and God of our fathers, bless us with the

[p. 397]

three-fold blessing of thy Law written by the hand of Moses thy servant, which was spoken by Aaron and his sons, the priests, thy holy people, as it is said, The Lord bless thee, and keep thee: the Lord make his face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee: the Lord turn his face unto thee, and give thee peace.

Grant peace, welfare, blessing, grace, lovingkindness and mercy unto us and unto all Israel, thy people. Bless us, O our Father, even all of us together, with the light of thy countenance; for by the light of thy countenance thou hast given us, O Lord our God, the Law of life, lovingkindness and righteousness, blessing, mercy, life and peace; and may it be good in thy sight to bless thy people Israel at all times and in every hour with thy peace.

In the book of life, blessing, peace and good sustenance may we be remembered and inscribed before thee, we and all thy people the house of Israel, for a happy life and for peace. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who makest peace.

Our God and God of our fathers,

Let our prayer come before thee; hide not thyself from our supplication, for we are not arrogant and stiff-necked, that we should say before thee, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, we are righteous and have not sinned; but verily, we have sinned

[p. 398]

We have trespassed, we have been faithless, we have robbed, we have spoken basely, we have committed iniquity, we have wrought unrighteousness, we have been presumptuous, we have done violence, we have forged lies, we have counselled evil, we have spoken falsely, we have scoffed, we have revolted, we have blasphemed, we have been rebellious, we have acted perversely, we have transgressed, we have persecuted we have been stiff-necked, we have done wickedly, we have corrupted ourselves, we have committed abomination, we have gone astray, and we have led astray.

We have turned aside from thy commandments and good judgments, and it hath profited us nought. But thou art righteous in all that is come upon us; for thou hast acted truthfully, but we have wrought unrighteousness.

What shall we say before thee, O thou who dwellest on high, and what shall we recount unto thee, thou who abidest in the heavens? dost thou not know all things, both the hidden and the revealed?

Thou knowest the secrets of eternity and the most hidden mysteries of all living. Thou searchest the innermost recesses, and triest the reins and the heart. Nought is concealed from thee, or hidden from thine eyes.

May it then be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, to forgive us for all our sins, to pardon us for all our iniquities, and to grant us remission for all our transgressions.

[p. 399]

For the sin which we have committed before thee under compulsion, or of our own will;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee in hardening of the heart:

For the sin which we have committed before thee unknowingly;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee with utterance of the lips:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by unchastity;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee openly and secretly:

For the sin which we have committed before thee knowingly and deceitfully:

And for the sin which we have committed before thee in speech:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by wronging our neighbor;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee by the sinful meditating of the heart:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by association with impurity;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee by confession with the mouth alone:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by despising parents and teachers;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee in presumption or in error:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by violence;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee by the profanation of the divine Name:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by unclean lips;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee by folly of the mouth:

[p. 400]

For the sin which we have committed before thee by the evil inclination;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee wittingly or unwittingly:

For all these, O God of forgiveness, forgive us, pardon us, grant us remission.

For the sin which we have committed before thee by denying and lying;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee by the taking of bribes:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by scoffing;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee by slander:

For the sin which we have committed before thee in business;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee in eating and drinking:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by usury and interest;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee by the stretched forth neck of pride:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by the conversation of our lips;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee with wanton looks

For the sin which we have committed before thee with haughty eyes;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee by effrontery:

For all these, O God of forgiveness, forgive us, pardon us, grant us remission.

[p. 401]

For the sin which we have committed before thee by breaking off the yoke of thy commandments;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee by contentiousness:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by ensnaring our neighbor;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee by envy:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by levity;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee by being stiff-necked:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by running to do evil;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee by tale-bearing:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by vain oaths;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee by causeless hatred:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by breach of trust;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee with confusion of mind:

For all these, O God of forgiveness, forgive us pardon us, grant us remission.

And also for the sins for which we owe a burnt offering:

And for the sins for which we owe a sin offering:

And for the sins for which we owe an offering, varying according to our means:

And for the sins for which we owe an offering, whether for certain or for doubtful trespass.

And for the sins for which we are liable to the penalty of chastisement:

[p. 402]

And for the sins for which we are liable to the penalty of forty stripes:

And for the sins for which we are liable to the penalty of death by the hand of heaven:

And for the sins for which we are liable to the penalty of excision and childlessness:

For all these, O God of forgiveness, forgive us, pardon us, grant us remission;

And also for the sins for which we are liable to any of the four death penalties inflicted by the court,--stoning, burning, beheading, and strangling; for the violation of positive, or for the violation of negative precepts, whether these latter do or do not admit of a remedy by the subsequent fulfilment of a positive command; for all our sins, whether they be or be not manifest to us. Such sins as are manifest to us, we have already declared and confessed unto thee, while such as are not manifest unto us, are manifest and known unto thee, according to the word that hath been spoken, The secret things belong unto the Lord our God; but the things that are revealed belong unto us and to our children for ever, that we may do all the words of this Law. For thou art the forgiver of Israel and the pardoner of the tribes of Jeshurun in every generation, and beside thee we have no king, who pardoneth and forgiveth.

O my God, before I was formed I was nothing worth, and now that I have been formed I am but as though I had not been formed. Dust am I in my life: how much more so in my death. Behold I am before thee like a vessel filled with shame and confusion.

[p. 403]

[paragraph continues] O may it be thy will, O Lord my God and God of my fathers, that I may sin no more, and as to the sins I have committed, purge them away in thine abounding compassion though not by means of affliction and sore diseases.

O my God! guard my tongue from evil and my lips from speaking guile; and to such as curse me let my soul be dumb, yea, let my soul be unto all as the dust. Open my heart to thy Law, and let my soul pursue thy commandments. If any design evil against me, speedily make their counsel of none effect, and frustrate their designs. Do it for the sake of thy name, do it for the sake of thy right hand, do it for the sake of thy holiness, do it for the sake of thy Law. In order that thy beloved ones may be delivered, O save with thy right hand, and answer me. Let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart be acceptable before thee, O Lord, my Rock and my Redeemer. He who maketh peace in his high places, may he make peace for us and for all Israel, and say ye, Amen.

May it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, that the temple be speedily rebuilt in our days, and grant our portion in thy Law. And there we will serve thee with awe, as in the days of old, and as in ancient years. Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in ancient years.

For the Blessing of the Priests when the Day of Atonement falls on a week-day, see pp. <page 347>-<page 348>

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 404]

  

AFTERNOON SERVICE FOR THE DAY OF ATONEMENT

For the Amidah, see <page 377>

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

CONCLUSION SERVICE FOR THE DAY OF ATONEMENT

"Happy are they," etc., "And a redeemer," etc., and "Kaddish" pp <page 250>-<page 254>.

O Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall declare thy praise.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, God of Abraham, God of Isaac, and God of Jacob, the great, mighty and revered God, the most high God, who bestowest lovingkindnesses, and possessest all things; who rememberest the pious deeds of the patriarchs, and in love wilt bring a redeemer to their children's children for thy name's sake.

Remember us unto life, O King, who delightest in life, and seal us in the book of life, for thine own sake, O living God.

O King, Helper, Savior and Shield. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the Shield of Abraham.

Thou, O Lord, art mighty for ever, thou quickenest the dead, thou art mighty to save.

Thou sustainest the living with lovingkindness, quickenest the dead with great mercy, supportest the falling, healest the sick, loosest

[p. 405]

the bound, and keepest thy faith to them that sleep in the dust. Who is like unto thee, Lord of mighty acts, and who resembleth thee, O King, who killest and quickenest, and causest salvation to spring forth?

Who is like unto thee, Father of mercy, who in mercy rememberest thy creatures unto life?

Yea, faithful art thou to quicken the dead. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who quickenest the dead.

Thou art holy, and thy name is holy, and holy beings praise thee daily. (Selah.)

Now, therefore, O Lord our God, impose thine awe upon all thy works, and thy dread upon all that thou hast created, that all works may fear thee and all creatures prostrate themselves before thee, that they may all form a single band to do thy will with a perfect heart, even as we know, O Lord our God, that dominion is thine, strength is in thy hand, and might in thy right hand, and that thy name is to be feared above all that thou hast created.

Give then glory, O Lord, unto thy people, praise to them that fear thee, hope to them that seek thee, and free speech to them that wait for thee, joy to thy land, gladness to thy city, a flourishing horn unto David thy servant, and a clear shining light unto the son of Jesse thine anointed, speedily in our days.

[p. 406]

Then shall the just also see and be glad, and the upright shall exult, and the pious triumphantly rejoice, while iniquity shall close her mouth, and all wickedness shall be wholly consumed like smoke, when thou makest the dominion of arrogance to pass away from the earth.

And thou, O Lord, shalt reign, thou alone over all thy works on Mount Zion, the dwelling place of thy glory, and in Jerusalem, thy holy city, as it is written in thy Holy Words, The Lord shall reign for ever, thy God, O Zion, unto all generations. Praise ye the Lord.

Holy art thou, and dreaded is thy name, and there is no God beside thee, as it is written, And the Lord of hosts is exalted in judgment, and the holy God is sanctified in righteousness. Blessed art thou, O Lord the holy King.

Thou hast chosen us from all peoples, thou hast loved us and taken pleasure in us, and hast exalted us above all tongues; thou hast sanctified us by thy commandments, and brought us near unto thy service, O our King, and hast called us by thy great and holy name.

On Sabbath add the words in brackets.

And thou hast given us in love, O Lord our God [this Sabbath day for holiness and rest, and] this Day of Atonement for pardon, forgiveness, and atonement, that we may [in love] obtain pardon thereon for all our iniquities; an holy convocation. as a memorial of the departure from Egypt.

[p. 407]

Our God and God of our fathers! May our remembrance rise and come and be accepted before thee, with the remembrance of our fathers, of Messiah the son of David thy servant, of Jerusalem thy holy city, and of all thy people the house of Israel, bringing deliverance and well-being, grace, lovingkindness and mercy, life and peace on this Day of Atonement. Remember us, O Lord our God, thereon for our wellbeing; be mindful of us for blessing, and save us unto life: by thy promise of salvation and mercy, spare us and be gracious unto us; have mercy upon us and save us; for our eyes are bent upon thee, because thou art a gracious and merciful God and King.

Our God and God of our fathers, pardon our iniquities [on this Sabbath day, and] on this Day of Atonement; blot out our transgressions and our sins, and make them pass away from before thine eyes; as it is said, I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake; and I will not remember thy sins. And it is said, I have blotted out, as a cloud, thy transgressions, and, as a mist, thy sins: return unto me, for I have redeemed thee. And it is said, For on this day shall atonement be made for you, to cleanse you; from all your sins shall ye be clean before the Lord. [Our God and God of our fathers, accept our rest.] Sanctify us by thy commandments, and

[p. 408]

grant our portion in thy Law; satisfy us with thy goodness, and gladden us with thy salvation; [and let us inherit, O Lord our God, in love and favor, thy holy Sabbath; and may Israel, who hallow thy name, rejoice thereon]; and purify our hearts to serve thee in truth; for thou art the forgiver of Israel and the pardoner of the tribes of Jeshurun in every generation, and beside thee we have no king who pardoneth and forgiveth. Blessed art thou, O Lord, thou King who pardonest and forgivest our iniquities and the iniquities of thy people, the house of Israel, who makest our trespasses to pass away year by year, King over all the earth, who sanctifiest [the Sabbath and] Israel and the day of Atonement.

Accept, O Lord our God, thy people Israel and their prayer; restore the service to the oracle of thy house; receive in love and favor both the fire offerings of Israel and their prayer; and may the service of thy people Israel be ever acceptable unto thee.

And let our eyes behold thy return in mercy to Zion. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who restorest thy divine presence unto Zion.

We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God and the God of our fathers for ever and ever; thou art the Rock of our lives, the Shield of our salvation

Congregation in an undertone

We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God and the God of our fathers, the God of all flesh, our Creator and the Creator of all things in the beginning. [p. 409] Blessings and thanksgivings be to thy great and holy name, because thou hast kept us in life and hast preserved us: so mayest thou continue to keep us in life and to preserve us. O gather our exiles to thy holy courts to observe thy statutes, to do thy will, and to serve thee with a perfect heart; seeing that we give thanks unto thee. Blessed be the God to whom thanksgivings are due.

[p. 409]

through every generation. We will give thanks unto thee and declare thy praise for our lives which are committed unto thy hand, and for our souls which are in thy charge, and for thy miracles, which are daily with us, and for thy wonders and thy benefits, which are wrought at all times, evening, morn and noon. O thou who art all-good, whose mercies fail not; thou, merciful Being, whose lovingkindnesses never cease, we have ever hoped in thee.

For all these things thy name, O our King, shall be continually blessed and exalted for ever and ever.

O seal all the children of thy covenant for a happy life.

And everything that liveth shall give thanks unto thee for ever, and shall praise thy name in truth, O God, our salvation and our help. Blessed art thou, O Lord, whose name is All-good, and unto whom it is becoming to give thanks.

At the repetition of the Amidah by the Reader the following is introduced:--

Our God and God of our fathers, bless us with the

[p. 410]

three-fold blessing of thy Law written by the hand of Moses thy servant, which was spoken by Aaron and his sons, the priests, thy holy people, as it is said, The Lord bless thee, and keep thee: the Lord make his face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee: the Lord turn his face unto thee, and give thee peace.

Grant peace, welfare, blessing, grace, lovingkindness and mercy unto us and unto all Israel, thy people. Bless us, O our Father, even all of us together, with the light of thy countenance; for by the light of thy countenance thou hast given us, O Lord our God, the Law of life, lovingkindness and righteousness, blessing, mercy, life and peace; and may it be good in thy sight to bless thy people Israel at all times and in every hour with thy peace.

In the book of life, blessing, peace and good sustenance may we be remembered and sealed before thee, we and all thy people the house of Israel, for a happy life and for peace. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who makest peace.

Our God and God of our fathers

Let our prayer come before thee; hide not thyself from our supplication, for we are not arrogant and stiff-necked, that we should say before thee, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, we are righteous and have not sinned; but verily, we have sinned.

[p. 411]

We have trespassed, we have been faithless, we have robbed, we have spoken basely, we have committed iniquity, we have wrought unrighteousness, we have been presumptuous, we have done violence, we have forged lies, we have counselled evil, we have spoken falsely, we have scoffed, we have revolted, we have blasphemed, we have been rebellious, we have acted perversely, we have transgressed, we have persecuted, we have been stiff-necked, we have done wickedly, we have corrupted ourselves, we have committed abomination, we have gone astray, and we have led astray.

We have turned aside from thy commandments and good judgments, and it hath profited us nought. But thou art righteous in all that is come upon us; for thou hast acted truthfully, but we have wrought unrighteousness.

What shall we say before thee, O thou who dwellest on high, and what shall we recount unto thee, thou who abidest in the heavens? dost thou not know all things, both the hidden and the revealed?

Thou givest a hand to transgressors, and thy right hand is stretched out to receive the penitent; thou hast taught us, O Lord our God, to make confession unto thee of all our sins, in order that we may cease from the violence of our hands, that thou mayest receive us into thy presence in perfect repentance, even as fire offerings and sweet savors, for thy words' sake which thou hast spoken. Endless would be the fire offerings required for our guilt, and numberless the sweet savors for our trespasses; but thou knowest that our latter end is the worm, and hast therefore multiplied the

[p. 412]

means of our forgiveness. What are we? What is our life? What is our piety? What our righteousness; What our helpfulness? What our strength? What our might? What shall we say before thee, O Lord our God and God of our fathers? Are not all the mighty men as nought before thee, the men of renown as though they had not been, the wise as if without knowledge, and the men of understanding as if with. out discernment? For most of their works are void, and the days of their lives are vanity before thee, and the pre-eminence of man over the beast is nought, for all is vanity.

Thou hast distinguished man from the beginning, and hast recognized his privilege that he might stand before thee; far who shall say unto thee, What doest thou? and if he be righteous what can he give thee? But thou of thy love hast given us, O Lord our God [this Sabbath day and] this Day of Atonement to be the end of, as well as the season of pardon and forgiveness for, all our iniquities, that we may cease from the violence of our hands, and may return unto thee to do the statutes of thy will with a perfect heart. O do thou, in thy abounding compassion, have mercy upon us, for thou delightest not in the destruction of the world, as it is said, Seek ye the Lord, while he may be found, call ye upon him while he is near. And it is said, Let the wicked forsake his way, and the man of iniquity his thoughts; and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God for he will abundantly pardon. But thou art a God ready to forgive, gracious and merciful, slow

[p. 413]

to anger, plenteous in lovingkindness, and abounding in goodness; thou delightest in the repentance of the wicked, and hast no pleasure in their death; as it is said, Say unto them, As I live, saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked; but that the wicked turn from his way and live: turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye die, O house of Israel? And it is said, Have I at all any pleasure in the death of the wicked, saith the Lord God, and not rather that he should return from his way, and live? And it is said, For I have no pleasure in the death of him that dieth, saith the Lord God; wherefore turn yourselves and live. For thou art the pardoner of Israel and the forgiver of the tribes of Jeshurun in every generation, and beside thee we have no King who pardoneth and forgiveth.

O my God, before I was formed I was nothing worth, and now that I have been formed I am but as though I had not been formed. Dust am I in my life: how much more so in my death. Behold I am before thee like a vessel filled with shame and confusion. O may it be thy will, O Lord my God and God of my fathers, that I may sin no more, and as to the sins I have committed, purge them away in thine abounding compassion though not by means of affliction and sore diseases.

O my God! guard my tongue from evil and my lips from speaking guile; and to such as curse me let my soul be dumb, yea, let my soul be unto all as the dust.

[p. 414]

[paragraph continues] Open my heart to thy Law, and let my soul pursue thy commandments. If any design evil against me speedily make their counsel of none effect, and frustrate their designs. Do it for the sake of thy name, do it for the sake of thy right hand, do it for the sake of thy holiness, do it for the sake of thy Law. In order that thy beloved ones may be delivered, O save with thy right hand, and answer me. Let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart be acceptable before thee, O Lord, my Rock and my Redeemer. He who maketh peace in his high places, may he make peace for us and for all Israel, and say ye, Amen.

May it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, that the temple be speedily rebuilt in our days, and grant our portion in thy Law. And there we will serve thee with awe, as in the days of old, and as in ancient years. Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in ancient years.

"Our Father, our King," pp. <page 67>-<page 70>, is said after the Amidoth of the Evening, Morning, and Conclusion Services. On Sabbath this prayer is said only after the Conclusion Service.

The Reader says the following verse, the Congregation repeating it:--

Hear, O Israel: the Lord our God, the Lord is One.

The Reader and Congregation say the following three times:--

Blessed be His name, whose glorious Kingdom is for ever and ever.

The Reader and Congregation say the following seven times:--

The Lord, he is God.

The Shofar is sounded.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 415]

  

ORDER OF COUNTING THE OMER

The Omer is counted from the second night of Passover until the night before Pentecost.

Lo, I am about to fulfil the affirmative precept of the counting of the Omer, as it is written in the Law And ye shall count unto you from the morrow after the day of rest, from the day that ye brought the Omer of the wave-offering, seven complete weeks they shall be; until the morrow of the seventh week shall ye number fifty days.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast sanctified us by thy commandments, and hast given us command concerning the counting of the Omer.

1. This is the first day of the Omer.

2. This is the second day of the Omer.

3. This is the third day of the Omer.

4. This is the fourth day of the Omer.

5. This is the fifth day of the Omer.

6. This is the sixth day of the Omer.

7. This is the seventh day, making one week of the Omer.

8. This is the eighth day, making one week and one day of the Omer.

9. This is the ninth day, making one week and two days of the Omer.

[p. 416]

10. This is the tenth day, making one week and three days of the Omer.

11. This is the eleventh day, making one week and four days of the Omer.

12. This is the twelfth day, making one week and five days of the Omer.

13. This is the thirteenth day, making one week and six days of the Omer.

14. This is the fourteenth day, making two weeks of the Omer.

15. This is the fifteenth day, making two weeks and one day of the Omer.

16. This is the sixteenth day, making two weeks and two days of the Omer.

17. This is the seventeenth day, making two weeks and three days of the Omer.

18. This is the eighteenth day, making two weeks and four days of the Omer.

19. This is the nineteenth day, making two weeks and five days of the Omer.

20. This is the twentieth day, making two weeks and six days of the Omer.

[p. 417]

21. This is the twenty-first, making three weeks of the Omer.

22. This is the twenty-second day, making three weeks and one day of the Omer.

23. This is the twenty-third day, making three weeks and two days of the Omer.

24. This is the twenty-fourth day, making three weeks and three days of the Omer.

25. This is the twenty-fifth day, making three weeks and four days of the Omer.

26. This is the twenty-sixth day, making three weeks and five days of the Omer.

27. This is the twenty-seventh day, making three weeks and six days of the Omer.

28. This is the twenty-eighth day, making four weeks of the Omer.

29. This is the twenty-ninth day, making four weeks and one day of the Omer.

30. This is the thirtieth day, making four weeks and two days of the Omer.

31. This is the thirty-first day, making four weeks and three days of the Omer.

32. This is the thirty-second day, making four weeks and four days of the Omer.

33. This is the thirty-third day, making four weeks and five days of the Omer.

[p. 418]

34. This is the thirty-fourth day, making four weeks and six days of the Omer.

35. This is the thirty-fifth day, making five weeks of the Omer.

36. This is the thirty-sixth day, making five weeks and one day of the Omer.

37. This is the thirty-seventh day, making five weeks and two days of the Omer.

38. This is the thirty-eighth day, making five weeks and three days of the Omer.

39. This is the thirty-ninth day, making five weeks and four days of the Omer.

40. This is the fortieth day, making rive weeks and five days of the Omer.

41. This is the forty-first day, making five weeks and six days of the Omer.

42. This is the forty-second day, making six weeks of the Omer.

43. This is the forty-third day, making six weeks and one day of the Omer.

44. This is the forty-fourth day, making six weeks and two days of the Omer.

[p. 419]

45. This is the forty-fifth day, making six weeks and three days of the Omer.

46. This is the forty-sixth day, making six weeks and four days of the Omer.

47. This is the forty-seventh day, making six weeks and five days of the Omer.

48. This is the forty-eighth day, making six weeks and six days of the Omer.

49. This is the forty-ninth day, making seven weeks of the Omer.

May the All-merciful restore the service of the temple to its place. May it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, that the temple be speedily rebuilt in our days, and grant our portion in thy Law. And there we will serve thee with awe, as in the days of old, and as in ancient years.

Psalm lxvii., <page 299>.

We beseech thee, release thy captive nation by the mighty strength of thy right hand. Accept the joyful chant of thy people, lift us and purify us, O revered God. O thou mighty One, guard as the apple of thine eye them that meditate upon thy unity. Bless them, purify them, have mercy upon them, ever vouchsafe thy righteousness unto them. O powerful and holy Being, in thine abounding goodness lead thy congregation. Turn, thou who art the only and exalted God, unto thy people, who are mindful of thy holiness. Accept our prayer and hearken unto our cry, thou who knowest all secrets. Blessed be His name, whose glorious kingdom is for ever and ever.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 420]

  

SERVICE FOR CHANUKAH

The Feast of Dedication lasts eight days. On the first evening a light is kindled, the number of lights being increased by one on each consecutive evening. The Chanukah lights should be kindled as soon as possible after nightfall.

On Friday the lights are kindled before the beginning of the Sabbath.

Before kindling the lights the following Blessings are said:--

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast sanctified us by thy commandments, and commanded us to kindle the light of Chanukah.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who wroughtest miracles for our fathers in days of old, at this season.

The following Blessing is said on the first evening only:--

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast kept us in life, and hast preserved us, and enabled us to reach this season.

After kindling the first light, the following is said:--

We kindle these lights on account of the miracles, the deliverances and the wonders which thou didst work for our fathers, by means of thy holy priests. During all the eight days of Chanukah these lights are sacred, neither is it permitted us to make any profane use of them; but we are only to look at them, in order that we may give thanks unto thy name for thy miracles, thy deliverances and thy wonders.

In the Synagogue Psalm xxx., <page 103> is chanted.

[p. 421]

In the home the following Hymn is chanted.

O Fortress, Rock of my salvation, unto thee it is becoming to give praise: let my house of prayer be restored, and I will there offer thee thanksgivings when thou shalt have prepared a slaughter of the blaspheming foe, I will complete with song and psalm the dedication of the altar.

Full sated was my soul with ills, my strength was spent with sorrow; they embittered my life by hardship during my subjection to the dominion of Egypt, [**] but God with his great power brought forth the chosen race, while the host of Pharaoh and all his seed sank like a stone into the deep.

To his holy oracle he brought me, yet there also I found no peace, for the oppressor came and led me captive, because I had served strange gods: I had to quaff the wine of bewilderment; well nigh had I perished, when Babylon's end drew near; through Zerubbabel I was saved after seventy years.

The Agagite (Haman), the son of Hammedatha, sought to cut down the lofty fir tree (Mordecai) [*+]; but his design became a snare to himself, and his pride was brought to an end. The head of the Benjamite thou didst exalt, but the enemy's name thou Midst blot out: the many sons he had gotten thou didst hang upon the gallows.

The Grecians were gathered against me in the days of the Hasmoneans; they broke down the walls of my towers, and defiled all the oils; but from one of the last remaining flasks a miracle was wrought for thy beloved [*++], and their men of understanding appointed these eight days for song and praises.

Footnotes

^421:* "The kingdom of the heifer," see Jeremiah xlvi. 20

^421:+ See Talmud Babli, Tr. Megillah, 10 b.

^421:++ Likened to a lily in Song of Solomon ii. 2.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 422]

  

SERVICE FOR PURIM

Before reading the Book of Esther the following Blessings are said:--

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast sanctified us by thy commandments, and hast given us command concerning the reading of the Megillah.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who wroughtest miracles for our fathers in days of old, at this season.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast kept us in life, and hast preserved us, and enabled us to reach this season.

After reading the Book of Esther say:--

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who dost plead our cause, judge our suit and avenge our wrong, who renderest retribution to all that hate our soul, and on our behalf dealest out punishment to our adversaries. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who on behalf of thy people Israel dealest out punishment to all their adversaries, O God, the Savior.

The following paragraph is omitted after the Reading of the Book of Esther in the morning:--

--Who broughtest the counsel of the heathen to nought, and madest the devices of the crafty of none effect, when a wicked man, an arrogant offshoot of the seed of Amalek, rose up against us. Insolent in his riches, he digged himself a pit, and his own greatness laid him a snare. In his mind he thought to entrap, but was himself entrapped, he sought to destroy, but was speedily destroyed. Haman displayed the hatred of his fathers, and stirred up against the children the ancient enmity of the brothers (Esau and Jacob), remembering not the mercy of Saul, through whose compassion for Agag the enemy was born. The wicked plotted to cut off the just, and the unclean was caught in the hands of the pure. (Mordecai's)

[p. 423]

lovingkindness (to Esther) prevailed over the father's (Saul's) error, but the wicked (Haman) heaped sin upon the sins of his ancestor. In his heart he hid his cunning devices, and sold himself to do wickedness. He stretched forth his hand against God's saints; he gave his silver to cut off the remembrance of them. When Mordecai saw that wrath had gone forth, and that the decrees of Haman were issued in Shushan, lie put on sackcloth and wrapped himself in mourning, ordained a fast and sat upon ashes. Who will rise up to atone for error, and obtain pardon for the sin rind iniquity of our fathers? A flower blossomed from the palm tree: lo! Hadassah arose to awaken the merit of those that slept in the grave. Her servants hastened to make Haman drink the wine of the poison of snakes. He rose by his riches, but fell in his wickedness; he made him a gallows, and was himself hanged thereon. All the inhabitants of the world opened their mouths, for the lot of Haman was turned to be our lot. When the righteous was delivered out of the hand of the wicked, and the enemy was put in his stead, the Jews ordained for themselves to celebrate Purim, and to rejoice thereon every year. Thou didst regard the prayer of Mordecai and Esther: Haman and his sons thou didst hang upon the gallows.

The lily of Jacob rejoiced and was glad when Mordecai was seen in the purple. Thou hast ever been Israel's salvation, and their hope in every generation, to make known that all who hope in thee shall not be ashamed, neither shall any be confounded who put their trust in thee. Accursed be Haman who sought to destroy me; blessed be Mordecai the Jew; accursed be Zeresh, the wife of him that terrified me; blessed be Esther my protectress, and may Harbonah also be remembered for good.

"But thou art holy," etc., <page 300>, to "honorable," <page 302>. On Saturday evening begin "And let the pleasantness," etc., <page 299>. The Reader says Kaddish, <page 302>, omitting "May the prayers," etc. "It is our duty," etc., <page 308>. On Saturday evening say the Conclusion Service, <page 303>.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

GRACE BEFORE AND AFTER MEALS

[p. 424]

On washing the hands, previous to partaking of a Meal, say:--

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast sanctified us by thy commandments, and hast given us command concerning the washing of the hands.

The following Blessing is said over the Bread:--

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who bringest forth bread from the earth.

GRACE AFTER MEALS

On Sabbaths and Holy days, and on those days when Tachanun is not said, Psalm cxxvi. is said:--

Psalm cxxvi.

A Song of Degrees.--When the Lord turned again the captivity of Zion, we were like unto them that dream. Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with exultation: then said they among the nations, The Lord hath done great things for them. The Lord hath done great things for us; whereat we rejoiced. Bring back our captivity, O Lord, as the streams in the south. They that sow in tears shall reap in joy. Though he goeth on his way weeping, bearing the store of seed, he shall come back with joy, bearing his sheaves.

[p. 425]

[paragraph continues] The following Introduction is customary if three or more Males, above the age of thirteen, have eaten at table together:

He who says Grace commences thus:--

Let us say grace.

The others respond:--

Blessed be the name of the Lord from this time forth and for ever.

He who says Grace proceeds:--

With the sanction of those present,

If there be present ten or more Males above the age of thirteen, the words "our God" are added:--

We will bless (our God) him of whose bounty we have partaken.

The others respond:--

Blessed be (our God) he of whose bounty we have partaken, and through whose goodness we live.

Persons present who have not partaken of the Meal, say the following:--

Blessed be his name, yea, continually to be blessed for ever and ever.

He who says Grace replies:--

Blessed be (our God) he of whose bounty we have partaken, and through whose goodness we live. Blessed be he, and blessed be his name.

If less than three Males above the age of thirteen be present, begin here:--

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who feedest the whole world with thy goodness, with grace, with lovingkindness and tender mercy; thou givest food to all flesh, for thy lovingkindness

[p. 426]

endureth for ever. Through thy great goodness food hath never failed us: O may it not fail us for ever and ever for thy great name's sake, since thou nourishest and sustainest all beings and doest good unto all, and providest food for all thy creatures whom thou hast created. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who givest food unto all.

We thank thee, O Lord our God, because thou didst give as an heritage unto our fathers a desirable, good and ample land, and because thou didst bring us forth, O Lord our God, from the land of Egypt, and didst deliver us from the house of bondage; as well as for thy covenant which thou hast sealed in our flesh, thy Law which thou hast taught us, thy statutes which thou hast made known unto us, the life, grace and lovingkindness which thou hast vouchsafed unto us, and for the food wherewith thou dost constantly feed and sustain us on every day, in every season, at every hour.

On Chanukah and Purim add, "We thank thee also for the miracles," etc., pp. <page 63>, <page 64>.

For all this, O Lord our God, we thank and bless thee, blessed be thy name by the mouth of all living continually and for ever, even as it is written, And thou shalt eat and be satisfied, and thou shalt bless the Lord thy God for the good land which he hath given thee. Blessed art thou, O Lord, for the land and for the food.

[p. 427]

Have mercy, O Lord our God, upon Israel thy people, upon Jerusalem thy city, upon Zion the abiding place of thy glory, upon the kingdom of the house of David thine anointed, and upon the great and holy house that was called by thy name. O our God, our Father, feed us, nourish us, sustain, support and relieve us, and speedily O Lord our God, grant us relief from all our troubles. We beseech thee, O Lord our God, let us not be in need either of the gifts of flesh and blood or of their loans, but only of thy helping hand, which is full, open, holy and ample, so that we may not be ashamed nor confounded for ever and ever.

On Sabbath say:--

Be pleased, O Lord our God, to fortify us by thy commandments, and especially by the commandment of the seventh day, this great and holy Sabbath, since this day is great and holy before thee, that we may rest and repose thereon in love in accordance with the precept of thy will. In thy favor, O Lord our God, grant us such repose that there be no trouble, grief or lamenting on the day of our rest. Let us, O Lord our God, behold the consolation of Zion thy city, and the rebuilding of Jerusalem thy holy city, for thou art the Lord of salvation and of consolation.

On New Moons and Festivals add:--

Our God and God of our fathers! May our remembrance rise and come and be accepted before thee, with the remembrance of our fathers. of Messiah the

[p. 428]

son of David thy servant, of Jerusalem thy holy city, and of all thy people the house of Israel, bringing deliverance and well-being, grace, lovingkindness and mercy, life and peace on this day of

On new Moon say--

The New Moon.

On New Year--

Memorial.

On Tabernacles--

The Feast of Tabernacles.

On the Eighth Day of Solemn Assembly and on the Rejoicing of the Law--The Eighth Day Feast of Solemn Assembly.

On Passover.--The Feast of Unleavened Bread.

On Pentecost--The Feast of Weeks.

Remember us, O Lord our God, thereon for our wellbeing; be mindful of us for blessing, and save us unto life: by thy promise of salvation and mercy, spare us and be gracious unto us; have mercy upon us and save us; for our eyes are bent upon thee, because thou art a gracious and merciful God and King.

And rebuild Jerusalem the holy city speedily in out days. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who in thy compassion rebuildest Jerusalem. Amen.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, O God, our Father, our King, our Mighty One, our Creator, our Redeemer, our Maker, our Holy One, the Holy One of Jacob, our Shepherd, the Shepherd of Israel, O King, who art kind and dealest kindly with all, day by day thou hast dealt kindly, dost deal kindly, and wilt deal kindly with us: thou hast bestowed, thou dost bestow, thou wilt ever bestow benefits upon us, yielding us grace, lovingkindness, mercy and relief, deliverance and prosperity, blessing

[p. 429]

and salvation, consolation, sustenance and supports mercy, life, peace and all good: of no manner of good let us be in want.

The All-merciful shall reign over us for ever and ever. The All-merciful shall be blessed in heaven and on earth. The All-merciful shall be praised throughout all generations, glorified amongst us to all eternity, and honored amongst us for everlasting. May the All-merciful grant us an honorable livelihood. May the All-merciful break the yoke from off our neck, and lead us upright to our land. May the All-merciful send a plentiful blessing upon this house, and upon this table at which we have eaten. May the All-merciful send us Elijah the prophet (let him be remembered for good), who shall give us good tidings, salvation and consolation.

The following has to be varied according to circumstances:--

May the All-merciful bless my honored father, the master of this house, and my honored mother, the mistress of this house, them, their household, their seed and all that is theirs, us also and all that is ours, as our fathers Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were blessed each with his own comprehensive blessing; even thus may he bless all of us together with a perfect blessing, and let us say Amen.

[p. 430]

Both on their and on cur behalf may there be such advocacy on high as shall lead to enduring peace; and may we receive a blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of our salvation; and may we find grace and good understanding in the sight of God and man.

On Sabbath:--

May the All-merciful let us inherit the day which shall be wholly a Sabbath and rest in the life everlasting.

On New Moon:--

May the All-merciful renew unto us this month for good and for blessing.

On Festivals:--

May the All-merciful let us inherit the day which is altogether good.

On New Year:--

May the All-merciful renew unto us this year for good and for blessing.

On the Intermediate Days of Tabernacles:--

May the All-merciful raise up for us the fallen Tabernacle of David.

May the All-merciful make us worthy of the days of the Messiah, and of the life of the world to come.

[p. 431]

On Week-days:--

Great salvation giveth he to his king. [**]

On Sabbaths, Festivals, and New Moons:--

He is a tower of salvation to his king; [**]

And showeth lovingkindness to his anointed, to David and to his seed, for evermore. He who maketh peace in his high places, may he make peace for us and for all Israel, and say ye, Amen.

O fear the Lord, ye his holy ones; for there is no want to them that fear him. Young lions do lack and suffer hunger: but they that seek the Lord shall not want any good. O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: for his lovingkindness endureth for ever. Thou openest thine hand, and satisfiest every living thing with favor. Blessed is the man that trusteth in the Lord, and whose trust the Lord is. I have been young and now I am old; yet have I not seen. the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging for bread. The Lord will give strength unto his people; the Lord will bless his people with peace.

Footnotes

^431:* These changes are based upon the two readings of this verse in Psalm xviii. 51, and 2 Sam. xxii. 51 respectively.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 432]

  

BLESSINGS ON VARIOUS OCCASIONS

Before drinking Wine:--

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who createst the fruit of the vine.

Before partaking of Food, other than Bread, prepared from any of "the five species of Grain" (wheat, barley, rye, oats and spelt):--

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who createst various kinds of food.

After any Food, excepting Bread:--

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe,

After Wine:--

--for the vine and the fruit of the vine;

After partaking of Grapes, Figs, Pomegranates, Olives or Dates:--

--for the tree and the fruit of the tree;

After Food prepared as above:--

--for the sustenance and the nourishment;

After Food prepared as above and Wine:--

--for the sustenance and the nourishment, the vine and the fruit of the vine;

--for the produce of the field; for the desirable, good and ample land which thou vast pleased to give as an heritage unto our fathers, that they might eat of its fruits and be satisfied with its goodness. Have mercy, O Lord our God, upon Israel thy people, upon Jerusalem thy city, upon Zion the abiding place of thy glory, upon thine altar and thy temple. Rebuild Jerusalem, the holy city, speedily in our days; lead us up thither and make us rejoice in its rebuilding.

[p. 433]

[paragraph continues] May we eat of the fruits of the land, and be satisfied with its goodness, and bless thee for it in holiness and purity.

On Sabbath say:--

Be pleased to fortify us on this Sabbath day.

On New Moon:--

Be mindful of us on this day of the New Moon.

On Festivals:--

Make us rejoice

On Passover:--

On this Feast of Unleavened Bread.

On Pentecost:--

On this Feast of Weeks.

On Tabernacles:--

On this Feast of Tabernacles.

On the Eighth Day of Solemn Assembly and on the Rejoicing of the Law:--

On this Eighth-day Feast of Solemn Assembly.

On New Year:--

Be mindful of us for good on this Day of Memorial. For thou, O Lord, art good and beneficent unto all; and we will give thee thanks for the land,

After Wine:--

and for the fruit of the vine. Blessed art thou, O Lord, for the land and for the fruit of the vine.

[p. 434]

After Fruit:--

--and for the fruits. Blessed art thou, O Lord, for the land and for the fruits.

After Food prepared from any of "the five species of Grain":--

--and for the sustenance. Blessed art thou, O Lord, for the land and for the sustenance.

After Food prepared as above and Wine:--

--for the sustenance and for the fruit of the vine. Blessed art thou, O Lord, for the land, the sustenance and the fruit of the vine.

If Wine and Fruit are partaken of at the same time, begin the Blessing thus:--

--for the vine and the fruit of the vine, the tree and the fruit of the tree.

and conclude:--

--for the land, the vine and the fruits. Blessed art thou, O Lord, for the land, the vine and the fruits.

If Food prepared from any of "the five species of Grain," and Fruit are partaken of at the same time, begin:--

--for the sustenance and the nourishment, the tree and the fruit of the tree.

and conclude:--

--for the land, the sustenance and the fruits. Blessed art thou, O Lord, for the land, the sustenance and the fruits.

If Food prepared from any of "the five species of Grain," Fruit and Wine are partaken of at the same time, begin:--

--for the sustenance and the nourishment, for the vine and the fruit of the vine, for the tree and the fruit of the tree.

[p. 435]

And conclude:--

Blessed art thou, O Lord, for the sustenance and the nourishment, for the vine and the fruit of the vine, for the tree and the fruit of the tree.

All the following Blessings begin with the words, "Blessed art thou O Lord our God, King of the universe."

On eating Fruit which grows on trees:--

--who createst the fruit of the tree.

On eating Fruit which grows on the Ground, Herbage, etc.:--

--who createst the fruit of the earth.

On partaking of Flesh, Fish, Eggs, Cheese, etc., or drinking any Liquor except Wine:--

--by whose word all things exist.

After partaking of any of the Aliments referred to in the three preceding Blessings:--

--who createst many living beings with their wants, for all the means thou hast created wherewith to sustain the life of each of them. Blessed be he who is the life of all worlds.

On smelling Fragrant Woods or Barks:--

--who createst fragrant woods.

On smelling Odorous Plants:--

--who createst odorous plants.

On smelling Odorous Fruits:--

--who givest a goodly scent to fruits.

On smelling Fragrant Spices:--

--who createst divers kinds of spices.

[p. 436]

On smelling Fragrant Oils:--

--who createst fragrant oil.

On witnessing Lightning, or on seeing Falling Stars, Lofty Mountains, or Great Deserts:--

--who hast made the creation.

On hearing Thunder:--

--whose strength and might fill the world.

At the sight of the Sea:--

--who hast made the great sea.

On seeing beautiful Trees or Animals:--

--who hast such as these in thy world.

On seeing the Rainbow:--

--who rememberest the covenant, art faithful to thy covenant, and keepest thy promise.

On seeing Trees blossoming the first time in the Year:--

--who hast made thy world lacking in nought, but hast produced therein goodly creatures and goodly trees wherewith to give delight unto the children of men.

On seeing a Sage distinguished for his knowledge of the Law:--

--who hast imparted of thy wisdom to them that fear thee.

On seeing Wise Men distinguished for other than Sacred Knowledge--

--who hast given of thy wisdom to flesh and blood.

[p. 437]

On seeing a King and his Court:--

--who hast given of thy glory to flesh and blood.

On seeing strangely formed Persons, such as Giants or Dwarfs:--

--who variest the forms of thy creatures.

On fixing a Mezuzah:--

--who hast sanctified us by thy commandments, and commanded us to affix the Mezuzah.

On tasting any Fruit for the first time in the season; on entering into possession of a new House or Land; or on using new Raiment for the first time:--

--who hast kept us in life and hast preserved us, and hast enabled us to reach this season.

On hearing Good Tidings:--

--who art good, and dispensest good.

On hearing Evil Tidings:--

--the true Judge.

The following is said on the Appearance of the New Moon:--

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, by whose word the heavens were created, and by the breath of whose mouth all their host. Thou didst assign them a statute and a season, that they should not change their appointed charge. They are glad and rejoice to do the will of their Master, the truthful Worker whose work is truth, who bade the moon renew itself, a crown of glory unto those that have been upborne by him from the womb, who in the time to come will themselves be renewed like it, to honor their Creator for his glorious kingdom's sake. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who renewest the months.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 438]

  

PRAYERS BEFORE RETIRING TO REST AT NIGHT

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who makest the bands of sleep to fall upon mine eyes, and slumber upon mine eyelids. May it be thy will, O Lord my God and God of my fathers, to suffer me to lie down in peace and to let me rise up again in peace. Let not my thoughts trouble me, nor evil dreams, nor evil fancies, but let my rest be perfect before thee. O lighten mine eyes, lest I sleep the sleep of death, for it is thou who givest light to the apple of the eye. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who givest light to the whole world in thy glory.

God, faithful King.

Hear, O Israel: the Lord our God, the Lord is One.

Blessed he His name, whose glorious kingdom is for ever and ever.

And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might. And these words, which I command thee this day, shall be upon thine heart: and thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up. And thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be for frontlets between thine eyes. And thou shalt write them upon the door-posts of thy house, and upon thy gates.

[p. 439]

And let the pleasantness of the Lord our God be upon us: and establish thou the work of our hands upon us; yea, the work of our hands establish thou it.

Psalm xci.

He that dwelleth in the shelter of the Most High, abideth under the shadow of the Almighty. I say of the Lord, He is my refuge and my fortress; my God in whom I trust.--For he shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler, and from the noisome pestilence. He shall cover thee with his pinions, and under his wings shalt thou take refuge: his truth shall be a shield and a buckler. Thou shalt not be afraid of the terror by night, nor of the arrow that flieth by day; of the pestilence that walketh in darkness, nor of the plague that ravageth at noon day. A thousand may fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand; it shall not come nigh unto thee. Only with thine eyes shalt thou look on, and see the retribution of the wicked.--For thou, O Lord, art my refuge.--Thou hast made the Most High thy dwelling place; there shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any scourge come nigh thy tent. For he shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. They shall bear thee upon their hands, lest thou strike thy foot against a stone. Thou shalt tread upon the lion and the adder: upon the young lion and the serpent shalt thou trample.--Because he hath set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him: I will set him on high, because he knoweth my name. When he calleth upon me I will answer him; I will be with him in trouble: I will deliver him and honor him. With length of days will I satisfy him, and will let him see my salvation. Repeat the last verse.

Psalm iii.

Lord, how are mine adversaries increased! Many are they that rise up against me. Many there are which

[p. 440]

say of my soul, There is no salvation for him in God. (Selah.) But thou, O Lord, art a shield about me; my glory and the lifter up of mine head. I cry unto the Lord with my voice, and he answereth me from his holy mountain. (Selah.) I laid me down and slept; I have awaked, for the Lord sustaineth me. I will not be afraid of the ten thousands of people, that have set themselves against me round about. Arise, O Lord; save me, O my God: for thou hast smitten all mine enemies upon the cheek bone; thou hast broken the teeth of the wicked. Salvation belongeth unto the Lord: thy blessing be upon thy people. (Selah.)

Cause us, O Lord our God, to lie down in peace, and raise us up, O our King, unto life. Spread over us the tabernacle of thy peace; direct us aright through thine own good counsel; save us for thy name's sake; be thou a shield about us; remove from us every enemy, pestilence, sword, famine and sorrow; remove also the adversary from before us and from behind us. O shelter us beneath the shadow of thy wings; for thou, O God, art our Guardian and our Deliverer; yea, thou, O God, art a gracious and merciful King; and guard our going out and our coming in unto life and unto peace from this time forth and for evermore.

Blessed be the Lord by day; blessed be the Lord by night; blessed be the Lord when we lie down; blessed be the Lord when we rise up. For in thy hand are the souls of the living and the dead, as it is, said, In his hand is the soul of every living thing, and the spirit of all human flesh. Into thy hand I commend my spirit; thou hast redeemed me, O Lord, God of truth. Our God who art in heaven, assert the unity of thy name, and establish thy kingdom continually, and reign over us for ever and ever.

[p. 441]

May our eyes behold, our hearts rejoice, and our souls be glad in thy true salvation, when it shall be said unto Zion, Thy God reigneth. The Lord reigneth; the Lord hath reigned; the Lord shall reign for ever and ever: for the kingdom is thine, and to everlasting thou wilt reign in glory; for we have no king but thee.

The angel who hath redeemed me from all evil bless the lads; and let my name be named on them, and the name of my fathers Abraham and Isaac; and let them grow into a multitude in the midst of the earth.--And he said, If thou wilt diligently hearken to the voice of the Lord thy God, and wilt do that which is right in his eyes, and wilt give ear to his commandments, and keep all his statutes, I will put. none of the diseases upon thee, which I have put upon the Egyptians; for I am the Lord that healeth thee--And the Lord said unto the adversary, The Lord rebuke thee, O adversary; yea, the Lord that hath chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee. Is not this a brand plucked out of the fire?--Behold the bed of Solomon: threescore mighty men are about it, of the mighty men of Israel: they all handle the sword, expert in war; every man hath his sword upon his thigh, because of fear in the night.--The Lord bless thee, and keep thee: the Lord make his face to shine upon thee, and he gracious unto thee: the Lord turn his face unto thee, and give thee peace.

To be said three times:--

Behold, he that guardeth Israel will neither slumber nor sleep.

To be said three times:--

For thy salvation I hope, O Lord. I hope, O Lord, for thy salvation. O Lord, for thy salvation I hope.

[p. 442]

To be said three times:--

In the name of the Lord, the God of Israel, may Michael be at my right hand; Gabriel at my left; before me, Uriel; behind me, Raphael; and above my head the divine presence of God.

Psalm cxxviii.

A Song of Degrees.--Happy is every one that feareth the Lord, that walketh in his ways. When thou shalt eat the labor of thine hands, happy shalt thou be, and it shall be well with thee. Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine, in the recesses of thine house: thy children like olive plants, round about thy table. Behold thus shall the man be blessed that feareth the Lord. May the Lord bless thee out of Zion: mayest thou see the good of Jerusalem all the days of thy life. Yea, mayest thou see thy children's children. Peace be upon Israel.

To be said three times:--

Stand in awe, and sin not: commune with your own heart upon your bed, and be still. (Selah.)

He is Lord of the universe, who reigned ere any creature yet was formed:

At the time when all things were made by his desire, then was his name proclaimed King.

And after all things shall have had an end, he alone, the dreaded one, shall reign;

Who was, who is, and who will be in glory.

And he is One, and there is no second to compare to him, to consort with him:

Without beginning, without end; to him belong strength and dominion.

And he is my God--my Redeemer liveth--and a rock in my travail in time of distress;

And he is my banner and my refuge, the portion of my cup on the day when I call.

Into his hand I commend my spirit, when I sleep and when I wake;

And with my spirit, my body also: the Lord is with me, and I will not fear.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 443]

  

MARRIAGE SERVICE

Blessed be he that cometh in the name of the Lord; we bless you out of the house of the Lord.

O come, let us worship and bow down; let us knee before the Lord our Maker.

Serve the Lord with joy; come before him with exulting.

Psalm c., <page 23>.

He who is mighty, blessed and great above all beings, may he bless the bridegroom and the bride,

PRAYER OR ADDRESS

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who createst the fruit of the vine.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast sanctified us by thy commandments, and hast given us command concerning forbidden marriages; who hast disallowed unto us those that are betrothed, but hast sanctioned unto us such as are wedded to us by the rite of the canopy and the sacred covenant of wedlock. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who sanctifiest thy people Israel by the rite of the canopy and the sacred covenant of wedlock.

The Bridegroom places the ring upon the forefinger of the right hand of the Bride, and says:--

Behold, thou art consecrated unto me by this ring, according to the Law of Moses and of Israel.

[p. 444]

The Hebrew Marriage Contract is read by the Celebrant, after which the following Seven Benedictions are said:--

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who createst the fruit of the vine.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast created all things to thy glory.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, Creator of man.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast made man in thine image, after thy likeness, and hast prepared unto him, out of his very self, a perpetual fabric. Blessed art thou, O Lord, Creator of man.

May she who was barren (Zion) be exceeding glad and exult, when her children are gathered within her in joy. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who makest Zion joyful through her children.

O make these loved companions greatly to rejoice, even as of old thou didst gladden thy creature in the garden of Eden. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who makest bridegroom and bride to rejoice.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast created joy and gladness, bridegroom and bride, mirth and exultation, pleasure and delight, love, brotherhood, peace and fellowship. Soon may there be heard in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, the voice of joy and gladness, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride, the jubilant voice of bridegrooms from their canopies, and of youths from their feasts of song. Blessed ay thou, O Lord, who makest the bridegroom to rejoice with the bride.

A glass is broken by the Bridegroom.

The Celebrant pronounces the Benediction.

Psalm cl, <page 39>.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 445]

  

GRACE AFTER THE WEDDING FEAST

He who says Grace commences thus:--

Banish, O Lord, both grief and wrath, and then the dumb shall exult in song. Guide us in the paths of righteousness. Regard the blessing of the children of Jeshurun.

With the sanction of those present we will bless our God, in whose abode is joy, and of whose bounty we have partaken.

The others respond:--

Blessed be our God in whose abode is joy, and of whose bounty we have partaken, and through whose goodness we live.

He who says Grace repeats the last sentence, and continues the Form of Service, pp. <page 425>-<page 431>. At the conclusion of the Grace the Seven Benedictions, <page 444>, are said.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

SERVICE AT THE CONSECRATION OF A HOUSE

Psalm xxx., <page 103>.

Psalm xv.

A Psalm of David.--Lord, who shall abide in thy tent? Who shall dwell in thy holy mountain? He that walketh blamelessly and worketh righteousness, and speaketh truth in his heart. He that slandereth not with his tongue, nor doeth evil to his fellow, nor bringeth reproach upon his neighbor. In whose eyes a reprobate is despised; but he honoreth them that fear the Lord. He that sweareth to his own hurt, and changeth not. He that putteth not out his money to usury, nor taketh a bribe against the innocent. He

[p. 446]

that doeth these things shall never be moved.

Psalm ci. A Psalm of David.

I will sing of lovingkindness and justice: unto thee, O Lord, will I sing praises. I will give heed to the way of integrity: O when wilt thou come unto me? I will walk within my house in the integrity of my heart. I will set no base thing before mine eyes: I hate licentious deeds; they shall not cleave unto me. A froward heart shall depart from me: I will know no evil thing. Whoso secretly slandereth his neighbor, him will I destroy: him that hath an high look and a proud heart will I not suffer. Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the land, that they may dwell with me: he that walketh in the way of integrity, he shall minister unto me. He that worketh deceit shall not dwell within my house: he that speaketh falsehood shall not abide before mine eyes. Morning by morning will I destroy all the wicked of the land: to cut off all the workers of iniquity from the city of the Lord.

Psalms cxxi. (cxxvii., cxxviii., if appropriate), see pp. <page 265>-<page 268>.

Psalm cxix.

BETH.

Wherewith shall a young man keep his way pure? By taking heed thereto according to thy word. With my whole heart have I sought thee: O let me not wander from thy commandments. Thy word have I treasured up within mine heart, that I might not sin against thee. Blessed art thou, O Lord: teach me thy statutes. With my lips have I declared all the judgments of thy mouth. I have rejoiced in the way of thy testimonies, as much as in all riches. I will meditate on thy precepts, and look towards thy paths. I will delight myself in thy statutes: I will not forget thy word.

RESH.

Consider mine affliction, and deliver me; for I do not forget thy Law. Plead thou my cause, and redeem me: quicken me according to thy promise. Salvation

[p. 447]

is far from the wicked; for they seek not thy statutes. Great are thy tender mercies, O Lord: quicken me according to thy judgments. Many are my persecutors and mine adversaries; yet have I not swerved from thy testimonies. I beheld the treacherous dealers, and loathed them; because they observed not thy word. See how I love thy precepts: quicken me, O Lord, according to thy lovingkindness. The sum of thy word is truth: and every one of thy righteous judgments endureth for ever.

CAPH.

My soul pineth for thy salvation: I hope for thy word. Mine eyes pine for thy promise, while I say, When wilt thou comfort me? For I am become like a wineskin in the smoke; yet do I not forget thy statutes. How many are the days of thy servant? When wilt thou execute judgment on them that persecute me? The proud have digged pits for me, they who are not after thy Law. All thy commandments are faithfulness: they persecute me with falsehood; help thou me. They have almost made an end of me on earth; but I forsake not thy precepts. Quicken me according to thy lovingkindness; so shall I observe the testimony of thy mouth.

HE.

Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes; and I will keep it unto the end. Give me understanding. and I will keep thy Law; yea, I will observe it with my whole heart. Make me to tread the path of thy commandments; for therein do I delight. Incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not to covetousness. Turn away mine eyes from looking at vanity, and quicken me in thy way. Confirm thy word unto thy servant, which leadeth unto the fear of thee. Turn away my reproach whereof I am afraid; for thy judgments are good. Behold, I long after thy precepts; quicken me in thy righteousness.

[p. 448]

Sovereign of the universe! Look down from thy holy habitation, and in mercy and favor accept the prayer and supplication of thy children, who are assembled here to consecrate this dwelling, and to offer their thanksgiving unto thee for all the lovingkindness and truth thou hast shown unto them. We beseech thee, let not thy lovingkindness depart, nor the covenant of thy peace be removed from them. Shield this their abode that no evil befall it. May sickness and sorrow not come nigh unto it, nor the voice of lamentation be heard within its walls. Grant that the members of the household may dwell together in this their habitation in brotherhood and fellowship, that they may love and fear thee, and cleave unto thee, and may meditate in thy Law, and be faithful to its precepts.

Vouchsafe thy blessings unto the master of this I house. Bless, O Lord, his substance, and accept the work of his hands. Keep him far from sin and transgression. Let thy grace be upon him, and establish thou the work of his hands. May thy lovingkindness be with her who looketh well to the ways of her household, and may she be mindful that the woman who feareth the Lord, she shall be praised. Bestow upon their sons and daughters the spirit of wisdom and understanding. Lead them in the path of thy commandments, so that all who see them may acknowledge that they are an offspring blessed of the Lord, blessed with a knowledge of thy Law and with the fear of thee. Preserve them from all evil; preserve their lives. May thy gracious promise be realized in them, Blessed shalt thou be when thou comest in, blessed when thou goest out. And even as we have been permitted to consecrate this house, so grant that we may together witness the dedication of thy great and holy temple in Jerusalem, the city of our solemnities, speedily in our days. Amen.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 449]

  

SERVICE AT A CIRCUMCISION

Upon the arrival of the Child who is to be initiated into the Covenant of Abraham, those Present at the Ceremony rise and say:--

Blessed be he that cometh.

The Father of the Child says:--

I am here ready to perform the affirmative precept to circumcise my son, even as the Creator, blessed be he, hath commanded us, as it is written in the Law, And he that is eight days old shall be circumcised among you, every male throughout your generations.

The Mohel takes the child, and, placing it upon a seat, says:--

This is the throne of Elijah:--may he be remembered for good!

For thy salvation I have waited, O Lord. I have hoped, O Lord, for thy salvation; and have done thy commandments. I have hoped for thy salvation, O Lord. I rejoice at thy word, as one that findeth great spoil. Great peace have they who love thy Law; and there is no stumbling for them. Happy is he whom thou choosest, and causest to approach that he may dwell in thy courts.

Those present respond:--

O let us be satisfied with the goodness of thy house, thy holy temple.

The Mohel places the Child upon the knees of the Godfather, and before performing the Circumcision says the following Blessing:--

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast sanctified us by thy commandments, and hast given us command concerning the Circumcision.

Immediately after the Circumcision the Father says the following Blessing:--

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast sanctified us by thy commandments, and hast commanded us to make our sons enter into the covenant of Abraham our father.

[p. 450]

Those present respond:--

Even as he has entered into the covenant, so may he enter into the Law, the nuptial canopy, and into good deeds.

The Mohel continues:--

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who createst the fruit of the vine.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who from the womb didst sanctify Isaac the well-beloved didst set thy statute in his flesh, and seal his offspring with the sign of the holy covenant. On this account, O living God. our Portion and our Rock, give command to deliver from destruction the dearly beloved of our flesh, for the sake of the covenant thou hast set in our bodies. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who makest the covenant.

Our God and God of our fathers, preserve this child to his father and to his mother, and let his name be called in Israel -- the son of --. Let the father rejoice in him that came forth from his loins, and the mother be glad with the fruit of her womb; as it is written, Let thy father and thy mother rejoice, and let her that bare thee be glad: and it is said, And I passed by thee, and I saw thee weltering in thy blood, and I said unto thee, In thy blood live. Yea, I said onto thee, In thy blood live. And it is said, He hath remembered his covenant for ever, the word which he commanded to a thousand generations; (the covenant) which he made with Abraham, and his oath unto Isaac, and confirmed the same unto Jacob for a statute, to Israel for an everlasting covenant And it is said, And Abraham circumcised his son Isaac when he was eight days old, as God had commmanded him. O give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good; for his lovingkindness endureth for ever. This little child --, may he become great. Even as he has entered into the covenant, so may he enter into the Law, the nuptial canopy, and into good deeds.

The Godfather drinks of the Wine; a few drops are given to the Infant, and the Cup of Blessing being Text to the Mother, she also partakes thereof.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 451]

  

GRACE AFTER THE MEAL FOLLOWING A CIRCUMCISION

He who says Grace begins thus:--

Let us say grace.

The others respond:--

Blessed be the name of the Lord from this time forth and for ever.

He who says Grace repeats the last sentence, and continues:--

We will give thanks unto thy name in the midst of the Faithful: blessed are ye of the Lord.

The last sentence is repeated by the company present:--

With the sanction of the awful and revered God, who is a refuge in times of trouble, the God girt with strength, the Lord mighty on high, we will give thanks unto thy name in the midst of the faithful: blessed are ye of the Lord.

With the sanction of the holy Law, pure and clear, which Moses the servant of the Lord commanded us to be an heritage, we will give thanks unto thy name in the midst of the faithful: blessed are ye of the Lord.

With the sanction of the priests and Levites I will call upon the God of the Hebrews, I will declare his glory in every region, I will bless the Lord. We will give thanks unto thy name in the midst of the faithful: blessed are ye of the Lord.

With the sanction of those present I will open my lips  song, yea, my bones shall declare, Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord. We will give thanks unto thy name in the midst of the faithful: blessed are ye of the Lord.

Then proceed as on <page 425>, "We will bless," etc.

After "in the sight of God and man," <page 430>, the following is introduced:--

May the All-merciful bless the father and mother of the child: may they be worthy to rear him, to initiate him in the precepts of the Law, and to train him in wisdom: from this eighth day and henceforth may his blood be accepted, and may the Lord his God be with him.

[p. 452]

May the All-merciful bless the godfather who has observed the covenant of Circumcision and rejoiced exceedingly to perform this deed of piety; may he requite him for his act with a double recompense, and ever exalt him more and more.

May the All-merciful bless the tender infant that has been circumcised on his eighth day; may his hands and heart be firm with God, and may he become worthy to appear before the Divine Presence three times in the year.

If the Mohel says Grace, one of the Company present says the following paragraph:--

May the All-merciful bless him who has circumcised the flesh of the foreskin, duly fulfilling each part of the precept. The service would be invalid of one who is timid and fainthearted, or who failed to perform the three essentials of the ceremony.

May the All-merciful, regardful of the merit of them that are akin by the blood of the circumcision, send us his anointed walking in his integrity, to give good tidings and consolation to the people that is scattered and dispersed among the peoples.

May the All-merciful send us the righteous priest, who remains withdrawn in concealment until a throne, bright as the sun and radiant as the diamond, shall be prepared for him, the prophet who covered his face with his mantle and wrapped himself therein, with whom is God's covenant of life and of peace.

Continue, "May the All-merciful make us worthy," etc., <page 430>.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 453]

  

SERVICE FOR THE REDEMPTION OF THE FIRST-BORN

The first-born Child, if a male, must be redeemed on the thirty-first day of his birth. If, however, the Father be a Cohen or a Levite, or the Mother the daughter of a Cohen or a Levite, they are exempt from the duty of Redemption. Should the thirty-first day fall on a Sabbath or Holyday, the ceremony is postponed until the day following.

The Father, presenting his Child to the Cohen, makes the following declaration:--

This my first-born son is the first-born of his mother, and the Holy One, blessed be he, hath given command to redeem him, as it is said, And those that are to be redeemed of them from a month old shalt thou redeem, according to thine estimation, for the money of five shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, the shekel being twenty gerahs; and it is said, Sanctify unto me all the first-born, whatsoever openeth the womb among the children of Israel, both of man and of beast: it is mine.

The Father then places before the Cohen silver to the amount of five selaim or shekels (four dollars), and the Cohen asks:--

Which wouldst thou rather, give me thy first-born son, the first-born of his mother, or redeem him for five selaim, which thou art bound to give according to the Law?

The Father replies:--

I desire rather to redeem my son, and here thou hast the value of his redemption, which I am bound to give according to the Law.

[p. 454]

The Cohen receives the redemption money, and returns the Child to his Father, whereupon the latter says the following Blessing:--

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast sanctified us by thy commandments, and given us command concerning the redemption of the son.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast kept us in life, and hast preserved us, and enabled us to reach this season.

The Cohen then takes the redemption money, and, holding it over the head of the Child, says:--

This is instead of that, this in commutation for that, this in remission of that. May this child enter into life, into the Law and the fear of Heaven. May it be God's will that even as he has been admitted to redemption, so may he enter into the Law, the nuptial canopy, and into good deeds. Amen.

The Cohen places his hand upon the head of the Child, and pronounces the following Benediction:--

God make thee as Ephraim and Manasseh. The Lord bless thee, and keep thee: the Lord make his face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee: the Lord turn his face unto thee, and give thee peace.

The Lord is thy guardian: the Lord is thy shade upon thy right hand. For length of days, and years of life and peace shall they add to thee. The Lord shall guard thee from all evil; he shall guard thy soul. Amen.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 455]

  

PRAYER TO BE SAID BY A SICK PERSON

Psalm xxiii.

A Psalm of David. The Lord is my shepherd: I shall not want. He maketh me to lie down in green pastures: he leadeth me beside the still waters. He restoreth my soul: he guideth me in the paths of righteousness for his name's sake. Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil; for thou art with me: thy rod and thy staff, they comfort me. Thou preparest a table before me in the presence of mine enemies; thou hast anointed my head with oil; my cup runneth over. Surely happiness and lovingkindness will follow me all the days of my life; and I shall dwell in the house of the Lord for length of days.

Psalm ciii.

A Psalm of David. Bless the Lord, O my soul: and all that is within me bless his holy name. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and Forget not all his benefits: who forgiveth all thine iniquity; who healeth all thy diseases: who redeemeth thy life from the pit; who crowneth thee with lovingkindness and tender mercies: who satisfieth thy mouth with good things; so that thy youth is renewed like the eagle's. The Lord executeth righteous acts, and judgments for all that are oppressed. He made known his ways unto Moses, his doings unto the children of Israel. The Lord is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and abounding in lovingkindness. He will not always contend; neither will he keep his anger for ever. He hath not dealt with us after our sins, nor requited us after our iniquities. For as the heaven is high above the earth, so mighty is his lovingkindness over them that fear him. As far as the east is from the west, so far hath he removed our transgressions from us. Like as a father hath mercy upon his children, so the Lord hath mercy upon them that fear him. For he knoweth our frame; he remembereth that we are dust. As for man, his days are as grass; as the flower of the field, so he flourisheth. For the wind passeth over it, and it is gone; and the place thereof shall know it no more. But the lovingkindness of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him, and his righteousness unto children's children, to such as keep his covenant, and to those that remember his precepts to do them. The Lord

[p. 456]

hath established his throne in the heavens; and his kingdom ruleth over all. Bless the Lord, ye his angels: ye mighty in strength, that fulfil his word, hearkening unto the voice of his word. Bless the Lord, all ye his hosts; ye ministers of his, that do his will. Bless the Lord, all ye his works, in all places of his dominion: bless the Lord, O my soul.

Psalm cxxxix.

For the Chief Musician. A Psalm of David. O Lord, thou hast searched me, and knowest me. Thou knowest my down-sitting and mine uprising, thou understandest my thoughts afar off. Thou siftest my path and my lying down, and art familiar with all my ways. For while there is not yet a word on my tongue, lo, thou, O Lord, knowest it all. Thou hast beset me behind and before, and laid thine hand upon me. Such knowledge is too wonderful for me; it is too high, I cannot attain unto it. Whither can I go from thy spirit? or whither can I flee from thy presence? If I ascend into heaven, thou art there: or if I make the grave my bed, behold thou art there. If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea, even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me. If I say, Let deep darkness cover me, and the light about me be night; even the darkness darkeneth not from thee, but the night is light as the day--the darkness is as the light. For thou didst form my reins: thou didst weave me together in my mother's womb. I will give thanks unto thee, for that I am fearfully and wonderfully made: wonderful are thy works and that my soul knoweth right well. My frame was not hidden from thee, when I was made in secret, and curiously wrought in the depths of the earth. Thine eyes did see mine unshapen substance; and in thy book the days, even all of them that were to he formed, were written, and for it also there was one among them. How precious unto me are thy thoughts, O God! How great is the sum of them! If I would count them, they are more in number than the sand: when I awake, I am still with thee. O that thou wouldst slay the wicked, O God: depart from me, ye bloodthirsty men: they who mention thee for treachery, thine adversaries who take the name in vain. Do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate thee? and do not I strive with those that rise up against thee?

[p. 457]

[paragraph continues] I hate them with perfect hatred: they are become mine enemies. Search me, O God, and know my heart: try me, and know my thoughts: and see if there be any way of sorrow in me, and lead me in the way everlasting

A prayer of the afflicted when he fainteth, and poureth out his complaint before the Lord. Hear my prayer, O Lord, and let my cry come unto thee. Hide not thy face from me in the day of my distress: incline thy ear unto me; in the day when I call answer me speedily. I beseech thee, O Lord, Healer of all flesh, have mercy upon me, and support me in thy grace upon my bed of sickness, for I am weak. Send me and all who are sick among thy children relief and cure. Assuage my pain, and renew my youth as the eagle's. Vouchsafe wisdom unto the physician that he may cure my wound, and so that my health may spring forth speedily. Hear my prayer, prolong my life, let me complete my years in happiness, that I may be enabled to serve thee and keep thy statutes with a perfect heart. Give me understanding to know that this bitter trial hath come upon me for my welfare, so that I may not despise thy chastening nor weary of thy reproof.

O God of forgiveness, who art gracious and merciful, slow to anger and abounding in lovingkindness, I confess unto thee with a broken and contrite heart that I have sinned, and have done that which is evil in thy sight. Behold, I repent me of my evil way, and return unto thee with perfect repentance. Help me, O God of my salvation, that I may not again turn unto folly, but walk before thee in truth and uprightness. Rejoice the soul of thy servant, for unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul. Heal me, O Lord, and I shall be healed, save me, and I shall be saved, for thou art my praise. Amen, and Amen!

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 458]

  

CONFESSION ON A DEATH-BED

I acknowledge unto thee, O Lord my God and God of my fathers, that both my cure and my death are in thy hands. May it be thy will to send me a perfect healing. Yet if my death be fully determined by thee, I will in love accept it at thy hand. O may my death be an atonement for all the sins, iniquities and transgressions of which I have been guilty against thee, Vouchsafe unto me of the bounding happiness that is treasured up for the righteous. Make known to me the path of life: in thy presence is fulness of joy; at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore.

Thou who art the father of the fatherless and judge of the widow, protect my beloved kindred with whose soul my own is knit. Into thy hand I commend my spirit; thou hast redeemed me, O Lord God of truth, Amen, and Amen!

When the end is approaching:--

The Lord reigneth; the Lord hath reigned; the Lord shall reign for ever and ever. (To be said three times.)

Blessed be His name, whose glorious kingdom is for ever and ever. (To be said three times.)

The Lord he is God. (To be said seven times.)

Hear, O Israel: the Lord our God, the Lord is one.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 459]

  

THE BURIAL SERVICE

On those days on which Tachanun (<page 70>) is not said, Psalm xvi. (<page 460>) is read instead of the following:--

The Rock, his work is perfect, for all his ways are judgment: a God of faithfulness and without iniquity, just and right is he. The Rock, perfect in every work, who can say unto him, What workest thou? He ruleth below and above; he killeth and maketh alive: he bringeth down to the grave, and bringeth up again. The Rock, perfect in every deed, who can say unto him, What doest thou? O thou who speakest and doest, of thy grace deal kindly with us, and for the sake of him who was bound like a lamb, O hearken and do. Just in all thy ways art thou, O perfect Rock, slow to anger and full of compassion. Spare and have pity upon parents and children, for thine, Lord, is forgiveness and compassion. Just art thou, O Lord, in killing and in making alive, in whose hand is the charge of all spirits; far be it from thee to blot out our remembrance: O let thine eyes mercifully regard us for thine, Lord, is compassion and forgiveness. If a man live a year or a thousand years, what profiteth it him? He shall be as though he had not been. Blessed be the true Judge, who killeth and maketh alive. Blessed be he, for his judgment is true, and his eye discerneth all things, and he awardeth unto man his reckoning and his sentence, and all must render acknowledgment unto him. We know, O Lord, that thy judgment is righteous: thou art justified when thou speakest, and pure when thou judgest, and it is not for us to murmur at thy method of judging; just art thou, O Lord, and righteous are thy judgments. O true and righteous judge! Blessed be the true judge, all whose judgments are righteous and true. The soul of every living thing is in thy hand; thy right hand is full of righteousness. Have mercy

[p. 460]

upon the remnant of the flock of thy hand, and say unto the angel, Stay thy hand. Thou art great in counsel and mighty in deed; thine eyes are open upon all the ways of the children of men, to give unto every one according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings. To declare that the Lord is upright; he is my Rock, and there is no unrighteousness in him. The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord. And he, being merciful, forgiveth iniquity and destroyeth not: yea, many a time he turneth his anger away, and doth not stir up all his wrath.

Psalm xvi.

Michtam of David.--Guard me, O God, for in thee do I take refuge. I say unto the Lord, Thou art my lord: I have no good beyond thee. As for the saints that are in the earth, they are the noble ones in whom is all my delight. Their sorrows will be multiplied that have gotten unto themselves another God: their drink offerings of blood will I not pour out, nor take their names upon my lips. The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance and of my cup: thou maintainest my lot. The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places; yea, I have a delightsome heritage. I will bless the Lord, who hath given me counsel: yea, my reins admonish me in the night seasons. I have set the Lord always before me: because he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved. Therefore my heart rejoiceth and my glory is glad: my flesh also will dwell in safety. For thou will not abandon my soul to the grave: neither wilt thou suffer thy loving one to see the pit. Thou wilt make known to me the path of life: in thy presence is fulness of joy; at thy right hand are pleasures from evermore.

The coffin is borne from the Hall to the Burial Ground, Those who have not visited the Burial Ground for thirty days, say the following:--

Blessed be the Lord our God, King of the universe, who formed you in judgment, who nourished and sustained you in judgment, who brought death on you in judgment, who knoweth the number of you all in judgment, and will hereafter restore you to life in judgment. Blessed art thou. O Lord, who quickenest the dead.

[p. 461]

Thou, O Lord, art mighty for ever, thou quickenest the dead, thou art mighty to save. Thou sustainest the living with lovingkindness, quickenest the dead with great mercy, supportest the falling, healest the sick, loosest the bound, and keepest thy faith to them that sleep in the dust. Who is like unto thee, Lord of mighty acts, and who resembleth thee, O King, who killest and quickenest, and causest salvation to spring forth? Yea, faithful art thou to quicken the dead.

When the coffin is lowered into the Grave, the following is said, the sentence being varied according to the sex of the departed:--

May he come to his place in peace.

May she come to her place in peace.

On quitting the Burial Ground it is customary to pluck some grass, and to say one of the following sentences:--

And they of the city shall flourish like the grass of the earth.

He remembereth that we are dust.

All those who have been present at the Interment wash their hands and say:--

He will destroy death for ever; and the Lord God will wipe away tears from off all faces; and the rebuke of his people shall he take away from off all the earth: for the Lord hath spoken it.

They then return to the Hall, and say, "And let the pleasantness of the Lord our God be upon us," to "my salvation," <page 439>.

[p. 462]

The following Kaddish is said by children after the Burial of their Parents. On those days on which Tachanun is not said (<page 70>) the Kaddish, <page 94>, is substituted.

Mourners.--May his great name be magnified and sanctified in the world that is to be created anew, where he will quicken the dead, and raise them up into life eternal; will rebuild the city of Jerusalem, and establish his temple in the midst thereof; and will up, root all alien worship from the earth and restore the worship of the true God. O may the Holy One, blessed be he, reign in his sovereignty and glory during your life and during your days, and during the life of all the house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

Cong. and Mourners.--Let his great name be blessed for ever and to all eternity.

Mourners.--Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted, extolled and honored, magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One, blessed be he; though he be high above all blessings and hymns, praises and consolations, which are uttered in the world; and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--Let the name of the Lord be blessed from this time forth and for evermore.

Mourners.--May there be abundant peace from heaven, and life for us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

Cong.--My help is from the Lord, who made heaven and earth.

Mourners.--He who maketh peace in his high places, may he make peace for us and for all Israeli and say ye, Amen.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 463]

  

PRAYER IN THE HOUSE OF MOURNING

After the ordinary Daily Service, the following Psalm (xlix.) is read in the House of the Mourner. On those days on which Tachanun (<page 70>) is not said, Psalm xvi. p. 460, is substituted for Psalm xlix.

Psalm xlix. For the Chief Musician. A Psalm of the Sons of Korah.

Hear this all ye peoples; give ear, all ye inhabitants of the world: both low and high, rich and poor together. My mouth shall speak wisdom; and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding. I will incline mine ear to a parable: I will open my dark saying to the lyre. Wherefore should I fear in the days of evil, when the iniquity of them that would supplant me compasseth me about, even of them that trust in their wealth, and boast themselves in the multitude of their riches? None of them can by any means redeem his brother, nor give to God a ransom for him: (for the redemption of their soul is costly, and must be let alone for ever:) that he should still live always, that he should not see the pit. For he will see that wise men die, the fool and the brutish together perish, and leave their wealth to others. Their inward thought is, that their houses shall continue for ever, and their dwelling places to all generations; they call their lands after their own names. But man that is in glory abideth not: he is like the beasts that perish. This is the way of them that are foolish, and of those who after them take pleasure in their speech. (Selah.) Like sheep they are laid in the grave; death shall be their shepherd: but the upright shall have dominion over them in the morning; and their form shall be for the grave to consume, that there be no habitation for it. But God will redeem my soul from the grasp of the grave: for he will receive me. (Selah.) Be not thou afraid when a man becometh rich, when the glory of his house is increased; for at his death he shall carry nothing away; his glory shall not descend after him. Though while he lived he blessed his soul, and though men praise thee that thou doest well unto thyself, he shall go to the generation of his fathers, who shall never see the light. Man that is in glory, but without understanding, is like the beasts that perish.

[p. 464]

In addition to the above, other appropriate Psalms, such as Psalms xv., <page 445>; xc., <page 26>; xci., <page 27>; ciii., <page 455>; and xxxix., or such passages as Proverbs xxxi. 10-31, <page 180>, should be read in the House of Mourning.

Psalm xxxix.

For the Chief Musician, for Jeduthun. A Psalm of David.--I said, I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue: I will keep my mouth with a bridle, while the wicked is before me. I was dumb, and kept silence, I held my peace, and had no comfort: and my sorrow was stirred. My heart was hot within me; while I was musing the fire kindled: then spake I with my tongue: Lord, make me to know mine end, and the measure of my days, what it is; let me know how fleeting I am. Behold, thou hast made my days as handbreadths; and my lifetime is as nothing before thee: surely every man, though he stand firm, is but a breath. (Selah.) Surely as a mere semblance every man walketh to and fro: surely they are disquieted for vanity: he heapeth up riches and knoweth not who shall gather them. And now, Lord, what wait I for? My hope is in thee. Deliver me from all my transgressions; make me not the reproach of the foolish. I was dumb, I opened not my mouth; because thou didst it. Remove thy stroke away from me: I am consumed by the blow of thine hand. When thou with rebukes dost chasten man for iniquity, thou makest his beauty to waste away like a moth: surely every man is a breath. (Selah.) Hear my prayer, O Lord, and give ear unto my cry; hold not thy peace at my tears; for I am a stranger with thee, a sojourner, as all my fathers were. O spare me, that I may again be glad, before I go hence, and be no more.

O Lord and King, who art full of compassion, in whose hand is the soul of every living thing and the breath of all flesh, who killest and makest alive, who bringest down to the grave and bringest up again, receive, we beseech thee, in thy great lovingkindness the soul of -- who hath been gathered unto his [her] people. Have mercy upon him

[p. 465]

[paragraph continues] [her]; pardon all his [her] transgressions, for there is not a righteous man upon earth, who doeth good and sinneth not. Remember unto him [her] the righteousness which he [she] wrought, and let his [her] reward be with him [her], and his [her] recompense before him [her]. O shelter his [her] soul in the shadow of thy wings. Make known to him [her] the path of life: in thy presence is fulness of joy; at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore. Vouchsafe unto him [her] of the abounding happiness that is treasured up for the righteous, as it is written, Oh how great is thy goodness, which thou hast laid up for them that fear thee, which thou hast wrought for them that trust in thee before the children of men!

O Lord, who healest the broken-hearted and bindest up their wounds, grant thy consolation unto the mourners: put into their hearts the fear and love of thee, that they may serve thee with a perfect heart, and let their latter end be peace. Amen.

Like one whom his mother comforteth, so will I comfort you, and in Jerusalem shall ye be comforted. Thy sun shall no more go down, neither shall thy moon withdraw itself: for the Lord shall be thine everlasting light, and the days of thy mourning shall be ended. He will destroy death for ever; and the Lord God will wipe away tears from off all faces; and the rebuke of his people shall he take away from off all the earth: for the Lord hath spoken it.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 466]

  

SERVICE AT THE SETTING OF A TOMBSTONE

Psalm i.

Happy is the man that walketh not in the counsel of the wicked, nor standeth in the way of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the scornful. But his delight is in the law of the Lord and in his law doth he meditate day and night. And he shall be like a tree planted by the streams of water, that bringeth forth its fruit in its season, whose leaf also doth not wither; and whatsoever he doeth shall prosper. The wicked are not so; but are like the chaff which the wind driveth away. Therefore the wicked shall not stand in the judgment, nor sinners in the congregation of the righteous. For the Lord knoweth the way of the righteous, but the way of the wicked shall perish.

Psalm xv., <page 445>; xvi. <page 460>; xc. <page 26>.

As for man, his days are as grass; as the flower of the field, so he flourisheth. For the wind passeth over it, and it is gone; and the place thereof shall know it no more. But the lovingkindness of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him, and his righteousness unto children's children. Oh that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end. For at his death he shall carry nothing away; his glory shall not descend after him. Mark the innocent man, and behold the upright; for the latter end of that man is peace. The Lord setteth free the soul of his servants; and none that take refuge in him shall be condemned. How precious is thy lovingkindness, O God! and the children of men take refuge under the shadow of thy wings. They sate themselves with the fatness of thy house; and thou givest them to drink of the river of thy pleasures. He shall enter into peace; they shall rest on their beds--each one that walketh in his uprightness.

Psalm xci <page 27>; "O Lord and King, who art full of compassion," etc., <page 464>; Mourner's Kaddish, <page 94>.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 467]

  

MEMORIAL SERVICE FOR THE DEAD

On Holy Days, when the Memorial Service is held, and on the Anniversaries of the Death of Parents, the following is said:--

Lord, what is man, that thou regardest him? or the son of man, that thou takest account of him? Man is like to vanity; his days are as a shadow that passeth away. In the morning he flourisheth, and sprouteth afresh; in the evening he is cut down, and withereth. So teach us to number our days that we may get us a heart of wisdom. Mark the innocent man, and behold the upright: for the latter end of that man is peace. But God will redeem my soul from the grasp of the grave: for he will receive me. My flesh and my heart faileth: but God is the strength of my heart and my portion for ever. And the dust returneth to the earth as it was, but the spirit returneth unto God who gave it. I shall behold thy face in righteousness; I shall be satisfied, when I awake, with thy likeness.

May God remember the soul of my revered father [mother] who has gone to his [her] repose. May his [her] soul be bound up in the bond of life. May his [her] rest be glorious, with fulness of joy in thy presence, and pleasures for evermore at thy right hand.

Father of mercy, in whose hand are the souls of the living and the dead, may thy consolation cheer us as we remember (on this holy day) our beloved and honored kinsfolk who have gone to their rest, our dear parents, the crown of our head and our glory, whose desire it was to train us in the good and righteous way, to teach us thy statutes and commandments,

[p. 468]

and to instruct us to do justice and to love mercy. We beseech thee, O Lord, grant us strength to be faithful to their charge while the breath of life is within us. And may their souls repose in the land of the living, beholding thy glory and delighting in thy goodness.

And now, O good and beneficent God, what shall we say, what shall we speak unto thee? Our needs are many, our knowledge slender. Shame covers us as often as the remembrance of all thy love for us rises within our minds. O turn this day in lovingkindness and tender mercy to the prayers of thy servants who pour out their souls before thee. May thy lovingkindness not depart from us. Give us our needful sustenance, and let us not be in want of the gifts of flesh and blood. Remove from us care and , distress and fear, shame and contempt. Let thy grace be with us, that we may rear our children to keep thy commandments and to fulfil thy will all the days of their life. O God, take us not hence in the midst of our days. Let us complete in peace the number of our years. Verily we know that our strength is frail, and that thou hast made our days as handbreadths. Help us, O God of our salvation, to bear ourselves faithfully and blamelessly during the years of our pilgrimage. And when our end draws nigh and we depart this world, be thou with us, and may our souls be bound up in the bond of life with the souls of our parents and of the righteous who are ever with thee. Amen, and Amen.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 469]

  

NIGHT PRAYER FOR YOUNG CHILDREN

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who makest the bands of sleep to fall upon mine eyes, and slumber upon mine eyelids.

May it be thy will, O Lord my God and God of my fathers, to suffer me to lie down in peace, and to let me rise up again in peace.

Hear, O Israel: the Lord our God, the Lord is One. Blessed be His name, whose glorious kingdom is for ever and ever.

And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might.

And these words which I command thee this day shall be Capon thine heart: and thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, and thou shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up. And thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be for frontlets between thine eyes. And thou shalt write them upon the doorposts of thy house and upon thy gates.

Blessed be the Lord by day; blessed be the Lord by night. Blessed be the Lord when we lie down; blessed be the Lord when we rise up.

Behold, he that guardeth Israel will neither slumber nor sleep.

Into thy hand I commend my spirit: thou hast redeemed me, O Lord God of truth.

For thy salvation I hope, O Lord.

The Standard Prayer Book, tr. by Simeon Singer, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 470]

  

THE MOURNER'S KADDISH

Mourner

Yis-gad-dal v'yis-kad-dash sh'meh rab-bo, b'ol-mo di-v'ro kir'-u-seh v'yam-lich mal-chu-seh, b'cha-ye-chon u-v'yo-me-chon u-v'cha-yeh d'chol bes yis-ro-el, ba-a-go-lo u-viz-man ko-riv, v'im-ru O-men:

Cong. and Mourner

Y'heh sh'meh rab-bo m'vo-rach, l'o-lam ul'-ol-meh ol-ma-yo:

Mourner

Yis-bo-rach, v'yish-tab-bach, v'yis-po-ar, v'yis-ro-mam, v'yis-nas-seh, v'yis-had-dor, v'yis-al-leh, v'yis-hal-lol, sh'meh d'kud'-sho, b'rich hu. L'e-lo min kol bir-cho-so, v'shi-ro-so, tush-b'cho-so, v'ne-ch'-mo-so, di-a-mi-ron b'ol-mo, v'im-ru O-men:

Y'heh sh'lo-mo rab-bo min sh'ma-yo v'cha-yim, o-le-nu v'al kol yis-ro-el, v'im-ru O-men:

O-seh sho-lom bim'-ro-mov, hu ya-a-seh, sho-lom, o-le-nu v'al kol yis-ro-el, v'imru O-men:

 

 

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: spc.txt =====


    
Sacred Places in China, by Carl F. Kupfer, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

SACRED PLACES IN CHINA

  

BY

  

CARL F. KUPFER, A. M., Ph. D.

  

President of William Nast College, Kiukiang, China, Kiangsi Province.

  

CINCINNATI:

  

PRESS OF THE WESTERN METHODIST BOOK CONCERN

  

[1911]

Click to enlarge
Frontispiece: HO SHANG FEN--SEPARATION OF THE PRIESTS.

In the early centuries of the Christian Era, when Buddhism was well established in China, the priests held a conference here and concluded that the Old Patriarch should be appointed as the last of the patriarchs, and they separated into the Provinces.

This historic spot is about five miles south of Kiukiang, near the foot of the lofty Lii Mountains, close by the road that leads to Kuling.

Click to enlarge
Title Page

Click to enlarge
Verso

Scanned, proofed and formatted by John Bruno Hare at sacred-texts.com, August 2008. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

     
Sacred Places in China, by Carl F. Kupfer, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 5]

  

PREFACE.

THE chief reason for producing this little volume is to give to the thoughtful reader of China and the Chinese a clearer conception of the readiness of the people to accept, with full credence, such whimsical and mythological stories as are here related, of their susceptibility of spiritual influences, and of the decay of intellectual vigor among the Buddhist and Taoist priests, as the inevitable result of monasticism. The intellectual vigor of the Chinese is found among the Confucianists, who hold the controlling power in the government, while Buddhism and Taoism seem past any hope of resurrection to real life. They have had their age of faith. But no one need to doubt the spiritual susceptibility, nor despair of the intellectual progress of all classes. Christianity fosters mental growth and science stimulates thought and is eminently fitted to drive out all fear and superstition. Christian education is not failing in accomplishing this. The response is abundantly gratifying. However, the struggle with Buddhism and Taoism is not yet ended, it has scarcely begun.

The reader finds himself here in the midst of the Asiatic world of nearly two thousand years ago, when Buddhist priests had entered actively upon their pilgrim life. To this day all foot-worn mountain paths lead to some monastery or sacred shrine.

The information recorded in this little volume is the fruit of hard labor. The writer traveled to distant mountains in the Mid-China hot summer months, visiting monasteries, and living with monks in the hope of gaining some knowledge of their inner life and hope of the future. Most of this information was obtained verbally, some through Chinese reading.

     
Sacred Places in China, by Carl F. Kupfer, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 6] [p. 7]

  

CONTENTS.

         	EARLY BUDDHISM IN HWANG MEI,

      	<page 9>

     
     	NGN REN TSZ--THE MONASTERY OF BENEVOLENCE,

      	<page 22>

     
     	KIU HUA SHAN--THE NINE-LOTUS-FLOWER MOUNTAIN,

      	<page 27>

     
     	POOT'OO--CHINA'S SACRED ISLAND,

      	<page 43>

     
     	THE WHITE DEER GROTTO UNIVERSITY,

      	<page 70>

     
     	LIEN HSI MU--THE MANDARIN'S GRAVE,

      	<page 81>

     
     	LUNG HU SHAN--THE DRAGON-TIGER MOUNTAIN,

      	<page 92>

     
     	CONCLUSIONS,

      	<page 107>

     
   ACKNOWLEDGMENT.

Five Of the above-named papers appeared in "The East of Asia," a magazine published by the North China Herald, and the permission to reprint these papers the author obtained through the courtesy of that office.

     
Sacred Places in China, by Carl F. Kupfer, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 8]

Click to enlarge
Sz Tseo--THE FOURTH PATRIARCH'S MONASTERY.

[p. 9]

  

Early Buddhism in Hwang Mei.

IT is probably not generally known, that in Hwang Mei Hsien, Hupeh, Buddhism found a most fruitful field in the early centuries of the Christian era. That long range of mountains north of Kiukiang is even now yet teeming with temples of more than ordinary fame. Thousands of pilgrims from many provinces visit these sacred shrines every autumn. The lamentable cries and moanings made by these pilgrims, when they prepare for starting on this pilgrimage, are not soon forgotten by those who spent the hot September nights in Central China cities. That their petitions may be answered, they take upon themselves the best vows, even promising not to look at a vain woman, while on the way to the temples.

The natural features of this granite mountain range are quite sufficiently interesting to explain why it was sought by devout devotees of early Buddhism. In some parts it is extremely rough and lies in such a rugged tumbled chaos, as scarcely to admit of classification. Although the general aspect is one of sheer desolation and barrenness, it must not be supposed that there is no fertility to be found. There are many rich valleys and pleasant little rivulets, fringed with verdure here and there, watering the rice fields far up the winding valleys; even the barest and most stony hillsides are seldom without vegetation.

The Fourth Patriarch's Monastery is situated at the upper end of one of these delightful valleys. Approaching it from the plain below, nothing is seen of it, until the bridge, spanning the Pi Yu, crystal stream, has been crossed, when the temple comes in view, standing in a large natural amphitheater,

[p. 10]

opening toward the south. By a remarkable coincidence, nature has here greatly aided the imagination and the credulous superstition of the Chinese mind. Two rugged spurs of mountains, supposed to be dragons, and as irregular as this fictitious animal can be, fighting for the Chu "Pearl," a little knoll in the open amphitheater, is certainly all that could be required, from the Chinese point of view, to make this a charming situation.

High up on a formidable mountain citadel, west of this monastery, stands a little temple, now in charge of a Taoist recluse. This temple is built over a natural cave in which, during the T'ang Dynasty, the Goddess of Mercy dwelt. When Hwang Ch'ao, the rebel, came to her abode in search of believers in her religion, she leaped across the deep ravine, which separated her from the monastery, and lit upon a solid granite rock, where her foot left an impress about three inches deep. Near by this footprint the place is seen where she rested. Rain and snow, frost and heat, drought and dampness of more than twelve hundred years have been unable to wash away the stain which the tears of the infuriated goddess left upon this granite rock.

The founder of this monastery, Tao Hsin, was born in Honan during the Northern Chou Dynasty in the reign of Ta Hsiang, A.D. 580. The Emperor, having heard of his precociousness and later of his virtues, sent him upon several occasions fine garments and invitations to come to the capital, but he always refused to accept the presents and declined to appear at court. When he was threatened with death if he persisted in his refusal, he calmly offered his head to the envoy. The Emperor, hearing that no Imperial consideration could induce him to improve his condition, left him in peace and built for him the Pi Lu Ta, a rafterless octangular temple. Approaching the monastery, this temple-tower is seen standing on the back of the dragon, which forms the left side of the amphitheater. That this structure was built in the

[p. 11]

Click to enlarge
TEMPLE OVER THE CAVE WHERE THE GODDESS OF MERCY DWELLS.

Click to enlarge
TOMBS OF BUDDHIST PRIESTS.

[p. 12]

sixth century is quite credible; for it clearly shows age. The tooth of time has so deeply set its mark upon it, that its masonry resembles, in age, the rocks of the surrounding hills. No wood was used except for the two doors, one large front door and a small one at the east, which have, however, long since disappeared. Only one corner of the tower is shown on the photograph, the annex to the east is of modern work. In this temple the Patriarch lived and died in the latter part of the seventh century. Seven years after his death the doors burst open of their own accord, and it was seen that the body had not decayed. When the Emperor heard of this, he promoted him to a god among the deities of the Chinese Pantheon. In the Ming Dynasty, the fourth year of the Emperor Wu Tsung, A.D. 1520, it was seen that a flame of fire issued from his head and consumed his body. It is now replaced by a copper image, enshrined in the monastery within an inaccessible shrine. A dim light is kept burning before his gloomy, dismal altar.

In front of the main temple of this monastery stands a large cypress tree with the limbs grown downward, a strange freak of nature. The story told about it is that Hung Jen came to the Fourth Patriarch and desired to be instructed by him in the doctrine. The Patriarch replied, "You are too old now, you will have to wait for a new cycle." Thereupon the future successor of the Patriarchate pushed the small end of his staff into the ground and departed. The staff grew, and the result is the inverted cypress tree. Last year it died, root and branch. A telling illustration indeed of the once apparently flourishing and present decayed condition of this monastery and its inmates. The tree had not grown high. How could it with all its limbs turned down toward the earth! The marvel to us is that it grew as high as it did. What a struggle for life it must have had! And so the marvel to us is how such a class of men as the Buddhist mendicants are, lazy, filthy, ignorant parasites, have been able to maintain

[p. 13]

their position as leaders of a religion among a people so enlightened as the Chinese. A consciousness of extreme dearth of religious life among the people and no hope for improvement, or else no perception of spiritual need, is the only explanation why such leaders have been endured.

Fifteen li east of this monastery, in a valley even more beautiful and fertile than the one just described, richly watered by mountain streams, is the Temple of the Great Sun.

The founder of this temple was Sung Ming I, born in the Kwangtung province during the Eastern Tsin Dynasty, the fifth year of the Emperor T'ai Yuan, A.D. 381. He was, the incarnation of a dragon, who came to his virgin mother in a dream asking to be nursed. Her name was Sing. In the reign of Sung An he received the degree of Doctor of Philosophy. But when in office he found more pleasure in reading sacred books and charts than in his official duties. At an uprising among the people he resigned his position, hung his official seal in the judgment hall and gave himself to wandering about in the country, visiting temples. Traveling through Kiangsi, on a hot summer day, he was famishing of thirst. As he passed a man working in the field, he asked for some tea. The man replied, "I have no time, the sun will soon be down, and I must finish this work to-day." Said Sung to him, "If you will bring me some tea I will place my staff in the earth, and so long as it is there the sun will not go down." When he had refreshed himself with tea he walked off, leaving the staff standing in its place. The farmer, busy with his work, had not noticed the length of the day, until a neighbor came and spoke about the fixed sun; hearing of the reason he cut down the staff, and the spell was broken. Such is the story told and firmly believed by the people. In his journeyings he came to Hwang Mei. While there two young men associated themselves with him to be instructed by him in sacred learning. At this time a long

[p. 14]

Click to enlarge
TOMB OF THE MOTHER OF THE FIFTH PATRIARCH

[p. 15]

drought set in, and the people were in great need of water. He made his appearance before the people and announced that in seven days it would rain. So it did. And all the pools and streams were bountifully filled. After this he retired into seclusion, and lived in a mountain cave. When another drought came the people said to the Hwang Mei official, "Do nothing, but go up to the man living in the cave." The official went, and found him so intensely interesting that he forgot all about his own errand, and they began to write poetry and play chess. When he came out of the cave, behold, everything had changed. He knew no one, and no one knew him, nor could he even find his way back to Hwang Mei. Ages had come and gone; centuries had passed. So he returned to the cave and told Sung about it. While consulting together, sitting on a rock near the cave, they both with the rock ascended to heaven. On the stone, where last their feet rested, their footprints can yet be seen, also a chessboard carved into a stone in the cave. In the Temple of the Great Sun his image in life-size is the chief idol. Here, as in many other places in China, the people seemed to have more faith in this local deity than they have in the Buddhist gods. In connection with this temple, far up in the mountain in a quiet little nook, stands a plain little building, neatly kept, housing a large image of Sung Ming I. The old hermit in charge of this enviable little trust cultivates for his living a few little rice fields. But he has a pathetic story to tell, when we expressed our delight in finding such a cool retreat on a hot summer day. "Ah yes," said he, "what is joy to one brings sorrow to another; a few days ago, the last day in August, frost injured our rice crop."

Leaving the Great Sun Temple, we traveled across a range of most varied scenery. Having walked a distance of fifty li, and at an altitude of about three thousand feet, we suddenly came upon a large open valley, like a basin in the mountain top, surrounded by thickly wooded hills. Here nature

[p. 16]

had indeed been lavish in spending its beauty and glory, and here is located

THE OLD PATRIARCH'S MONASTERY.

No wonder that the Patriarch was charmed with this situation at first sight. The story of his life was told us as follows: He was a native from Mid-India, born during the Chou Dynasty, in the reign of the Emperor Wei Lei, 425 B.C. From birth his left hand was clenched into a fist, until his mother for the first time took him to the idol, when his hand opened, so that he could fold his hands respectfully in worship, whereupon he became deeply interested in idols. Being an unusually precocious boy, he read widely until he came across the Buddhist Canon, and forthwith embraced that religion. After long and patient contemplation he came to China, and on his way north he met the sainted priest, Ta Mo, at the Lu Mountains near Kiukiang. The name of the place is called Ho Shang Fen, that is, the place where the priests separated. Ta Mo had come from Southern India, and was the last of the Western and the first of the Eastern Patriarchs of Buddhism. Ta Mo asked him how old he was. He replied, "My age is eight hundred years." "So," said Ta Mo, "I have been looking for a man of great age, you may be the Old Patriarch," and gave him the robe and bowl of the Patriarchate. After this conference at the foot of the Lu Mountains, the Old Patriarch crossed the swollen Yangtze, and chose the Hwang Mei district as his field of labor. Having set his heart upon the location for a temple, but finding no wood to build with, he went to Lung Ping, on the Yangtze River, where a merchant had a large raft of wood. Said he to the merchant, "May I sink this raft?" The merchant replied, "If you can sink that raft I will give it to you." The raft disappeared, and came up again in that high mountain valley. In like miraculous way his daily needs were supplied. When he had no rice, out of a little hole in a rock

[p. 17]

Click to enlarge
BRIDGE OVER THE Pi Yu--THE CRYSTAL STREAM.
 TEMPLE OF THE GREAT SUN.

[p. 18]

rice came. When the needed oil and salt, from another rock oil and salt flowed. Alas, to-day this once renowned monastery shows no such signs of divine favor. A sickly, diseased looking young man, and a silly boy were the only priests in charge. Their merit is certainly not in works of purity and wisdom duly combined, for none of these virtues are found with them. What Ta Mo (the founder of this temple) taught has apparently perpetuated itself, and may account somewhat for the ignorance and apathy of Buddhist priests, viz., that religion is not to be learned from books, but that man should seek and find the Buddha in his own heart. Every department of this great labyrinthian temple shows utter neglect and rapid decay. Even the main altar with Shakyamuni, the god of all gods, Kaskiapa, the god of the future, and Ananda, the god of the past, are in a most dilapidated and pitiable condition.

It may be supposed that with some of these priests there is a desire for spiritual life, but undoubtedly their spiritual conception is of a very inferior order.

From the moment we entered this beautiful place in the mountain top until we took our departure the sacrilegious thought did not leave us, that it would make a most charming summer resort for Westerners. Traveling sixty li farther eastward over rugged hills and through valleys, along steep cliffs and jagged rocks, we came to

THE FIFTH PATRIARCH'S MONASTERY.

The approach to this temple is a broad stone-paved road, rising immediately up from the level plain toward the massive cliff, like a huge altar of some natural temple, encircled by peaks of various shapes and heights. The founder of this monastery is claimed to have been born into this world the second time in the Sui Dynasty, and the second year of Jen Chou, A.D. 603. In his first stage of existence his name

[p. 19]

was Hung Jen, and he lived in Hwang Mei, where he was a planter of coniferous trees. He came to Tao Hsin, the Fourth Patriarch of Buddhism, for instruction. "May I yet learn the doctrine?" he asked. "Die, and come again, and I will teach you," replied Tao Hsin. Hung Jen asked, "Where shall I go to die?" "Go until you come to a pond where a maiden named Chou is washing clothes, and there stop," said Tao Hsin. He went, and when he came to the place and saw the woman, he said, "I am an old man, may I stop over night?" The maid replied, "I have a father and brother, ask them." While he yet spake a peach came up out of the water, and the maid ate it and she became his mother. Despised and rejected by her people she was driven away from her home, and with her son reduced to beggary. In dire distress she threw the child into a pond, but he would not sink. Rescued from this watery grave, she nursed him again; but the first seven years of his life he never spoke a word, and was mocked and ridiculed by many; saying, "He has neither father nor name." When his mother brought him the first time to the temple, the bells rang of their own accord. Hearing this he said, 'Now I can learn the doctrine." He went again to Tao Hsin to be instructed. "What is your name?" asked the Patriarch. "I have no name," was the reply. "What! no name?" "No," said he, "I am a Fu, an idol. I am emptiness." Having gained the favor of the Fourth Patriarch, he became his successor.

To the credit of Hwang Mei Buddhism, it may be said that this monastery is in a good state of repair, and favored with an intelligent Abbot. It would indeed have been a pleasure to have spent some time with him. He received us dressed in his priestly robes, and spoke very intelligently. But his embarrassment arose when we asked to have a look at the undecayed body of Hung Jen. The most liberal offer which we could make would not induce him to open the sacred shrine where this deified "Emptiness" rested. As with his

[p. 20]

predecessor, so here a dim light is kept burning before his altar.

When the philosophical and abstract teaching on speculative metaphysical subjects, such as the Patriarchs of Buddhism taught their disciples, are taken into account, then we need not be surprised at the indifference of the priests in their habits. Indeed, superficially viewed, the more slovenly they live the more orthodox they might seem in their own eyes. This may be inferred from examples of their doctrine. For instance, when Hung Jen desired to know who should be his successor, Giles tells us that he asked each of his monks to compose a gatha. One of his favorites wrote on a wall:

"Man's body is like the Bodhi trees;
  His mind is like a mirror;
  And should be constantly cleaned
  Lest dust should stick to it."

Lu Hui-neng saw this and came by night and wrote alongside:

"There is no such thing as the Bodhi trees;
  There is no such thing as the mirror;
  There is nothing, which has a real existence;
  How then can dust be attracted?"

This secured for him the robe and bowl of the Patriarchate; for he became the last Patriarch of Buddhism in China, as the doctrine by him was supposed to be well established.

From the above narrative the reader can conclusively notice that the Chinese folklore does not only teem with childish legends, but contains proofs of their implicit faith in miracles; belief in fanciful miracles without the acknowledgment of divine intervention. An unintelligent faith, which has never led them to search for the cause of the accepted wonders.

[p. 21]

Click to enlarge
THE FIFTH PATRIARCH'S TEMPLE.
 LAO TSEO--THE OLD PATRIARCH'S TEMPLE.

     
Sacred Places in China, by Carl F. Kupfer, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 22]

  

Ngn Ren Tsz--The Monastery of Benevolence.

THE premises of this temple are in close proximity to the campus of the Woman's Foreign Missionary Society at Kiukiang, only a narrow lane intervening. The temple facing south and the girls' high school north brings the two institutions face to face. Like many other renowned places in China this temple developed from a very humble beginning, a little shrine, until the virtue proceeding from it reached distant places, even to far-away Tibet. During the golden age of Buddhism, when the faith of that religion had a deep hold upon all classes, having even many officials among its devotees, an Abbot had a dream. In this dream Buddha appeared to him and informed him that on a certain day an incarnate being would be coming down the Yangtse River from Tibet. The Abbot at once notified the officials of the city of his wonderful dream, and elaborate preparations were made for the reception of this divinity. Upon the appointed time the officials all appeared in their official attire and together went to the north gate of the city, where they waited for the coming of the promised deity. Soon they saw, to their amazement, a stone boat floating down the river, and in it stood a majestic being. At the gate the boat drew ashore, and the man of the West, after a dangerous voyage and much fatigued, stepped off, and asked for Ngn Ren Tsz. With due ceremony and in great pomp he was escorted to the sought-for sacred shrine. The news of this strange visitor to this humble place spread throughout the provinces. Pilgrims came from all parts seeking the blessing which this divinity had brought to this temple. To assure the perpetuation of

[p. 23]

his favors, a life-sized metal image was made and enshrined as the patron of benevolence, and the temple flourished beyond all expectation.

The granite stone boat which brought this deity from the far West is lying in the temple grounds, and is proudly shown to this day by the credulous priests as the instrument that brought the once enjoyed fame to their temple. It is of one solid granite block about fifteen feet long and three feet wide, hollowed out like a trough. All admit that of itself it could not float, but the buoyant divinity bore it up, and it bore the divinity down through the gorges to his desired destination.

During the Taiping Rebellion this temple shared the same fate to which all pagan temples in Mid-China were doomed; all were destroyed. After the rebellion was over, and the Abbot returned to his sacred home, he found nothing but desolation and ruins. Out of the broken debris he constructed a little shed for his home and a shrine; but the former fame and virtue did not seem to return. No pilgrim worshipers sought his aid. Every effort to re-establish the past glory seemed in vain. Direst poverty stared him in the face. One day, as he was walking across the once beautiful grounds, he struck his foot against an object. With the usual epithet that always falls from the lips of a Chinese when something untoward happens, he was about to pass on, when, unlike his countrymen, he concluded to return and remove this obstacle, that no one else should henceforth be so unfortunate. When he began to dig with his mattock to remove the contemptible object, to his unspeakable surprise and joy he found it to be the image of the once famous iron Buddha, who had been the means of prosperity and fame in former times. The mutilated god was in a sad plight. One arm was entirely missing, and other serious defects were discovered. He handled him with great care. The missing hand was soon replaced, and all blemishes repaired. Newly gilded over and an altar extemporized, he was soon reinstated. When this

[p. 24]

was known the former reputation of the temple began to return. An Imperial grant was made for the erection of substantial buildings, and a new era for the once famous monastery seemed assured.

Twenty years ago it was doubtless one of the best kept pagan institutions in this part of China. It contained all of the departments necessary to constitute a fully equipped monastery. In a lofty building at the main entrance stand the four imposing images known as the Guardians. Then follows an artificially constructed pool over which is built the Bridge of Fate, leading to the Chief Hall, where the Buddha of the Past, Present, and Future, and the Eighteen Lohan are enshrined. On the north side of the center altar the Goddess of Mercy is represented as standing at the seashore upon the back of a great sea monster. Here, as in other parts of China, she is the most highly revered deity in the Buddhist pantheon. She is to the Buddhist what the Holy Mother Mary is to the Catholic. In the northeast corner of this building hangs a large bronze bell, whose melodious sound is not supposed to die out. Every stroke upon this bell with a horizontally suspended piece of wood drawn by a priest is believed to send a flash of light into the darkness of Buddhist hades, and illuminates the path for a struggling soul to escape from the torturing demons. The vibrations of this bell seem to continue long enough to allow the faithful priest to take a little nap between the strokes. For many years a blind priest sat there day and night performing this meritorious service.

In this spacious hall many priests meet to hold annual gatherings during the month of September. These meetings might be denominated Liturgical conventions, or high mass. They are sometimes continued two or three weeks, and at the close young priests, having taken their vows, are consecrated to the priesthood by the Abbot, who, with a burning incense stick, brands them on top of their shaven heads.

[p. 25]

Click to enlarge
NGN REN TSZ--THE MONASTERY OF BENEVOLENCE.

[p. 26]

In the extreme rear of these grounds is a modest little structure within which stands the once famous iron Buddha in a glass case, testifying of the fame of his past days. To the right and left of this building the monks have their living compartments.

To the east, close by the temple grounds, stands a pagoda for which unusual merit is claimed. Many years ago when the literati of Kiukiang had failed for successive years in their effort to pass in the competitive examination for degrees, one of their number, a savant above the average, advised that a pagoda be erected to regulate the Fung shui, that fortune might again return to the wise men of Kiukiang. All who had faith in this prophecy contributed freely, and enough energy was set in motion to so stimulate the sluggish literati that the very next examination, after the completion of the pagoda, brought brilliant success to a number of competitors. The merit of the pagoda was established beyond doubt, and every year thereafter students of Teh Hwa-hsien Township have been successful. At the last examination, given under the old regime, two of the students of William Nast College were among those who gained the enviable distinction. The competitive examination has been abolished, but the pagoda will doubtless stand as a monument of past superstition for ages to come.

The last effort to fan the dying embers of this decaying monastery by a sister religion was the erection of a Confucian Ancestorial Hall at the southwest corner, between the Home of the Woman's Foreign Missionary Society and the temple. The purpose of this effort is easily seen, even though Confucianists and Buddhists are not close friends. They are allied state religions, and will doubtless assist each other when the death knell of either is heard ringing. He who hath ears to hear can hear them ringing even now.

     
Sacred Places in China, by Carl F. Kupfer, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 27]

  

Kiu Hua Shan--Or The Nine-Lotus-Flower Mountain.

THE traveler on a Yangtze River steamer, passing from Wuhu to Nganking, will see about midway between these two cities, and twenty-five miles from the southern bank, a long range of mountains with unusually sharp, rugged peaks, the highest points of which are probably not over five thousand feet above the Yangtze Valley. The original name of this range was the "Nine Sons," but in the T'ang Dynasty the celebrated poet, Li Pah, made the observation that nine peaks were shaped like the lotus flower, hence it was called the Nine-Lotus-Flower Mountain. In the whole range there are ninety-nine peaks, the most conspicuous of which are:

Tien-T'ai, the Altar of Heaven.

Fung Yung, the Hibiscus Peak.

Chung-Fung, the Middle Peak.

Hui-Sien, the Peak of the Genii.

Wu-lao-fung, the Five Old Peaks.

Tien-chii, the Heavenly Pillar.

Cheu-ran-fung, the Wizard Peak.

Shuang-fung, the Twin Peaks.

Tu-hun, the Most Beautiful.

These peaks rise up keen and high, clothed in beautiful mantles of eternal verdure, holding their heads up in the pure atmosphere, far above the little petty trials and actions of men down in the valley. There may be mountains far more imposing, but for variety of scenery and richness of vegetation none can excel them. What a sight it must have been when they were formed, and who can weary praising their beauty and their greatness? We are not surprised that the

[p. 28]

heathen in his blindness seeks the home of his gods among these majestic granite peaks.

A mere glance at the richness of the flora of these mountains and valleys is of great interest to the lover of nature. We took note of only a few specimens, but one fact must be kept in mind, that much of the information obtained is tinged with mythological superstition.

Huang-li-ta, the yellow rice, which is said to grow high up the valleys. It was originally brought from Siam by Ti Tsang-Wang, being different from all other rice. It is very productive, of a reddish yellow color, , and soft.

Chu-shih, seed-producing bamboo. It happened twice during the Ming Dynasty that the bamboo on these hills produced seeds. In spring and summer they grow purple flowers, and in the autumn seed, like wheat.

Shih chih, the plant that contains the elixir of life. It grows high up on the steep cliffs, and to obtain it ropes must be let down from the top, upon which the adventurous climb up. When this plant is eaten, the body becomes light, as if it could fly, and long life is assured. The cliff upon which it grows is purple on the side facing the sun, and dark on the opposite side.

Chu tien, the bamboo mat, is soft and white like mushrooms. When cooked the juice from it is red like blood; the pulp is good for food, and of pleasant taste.

Chin ti tsa, the golden ground tea. The growth is hollow like the bamboo. The plant is supposed to have been brought from Siam by Ti Tsang Wang.

Ming Yuan Tsa, the Ming fountain tea, so called because it only grows at the Ming fountain, under the shadow of a hill. It does not put forth leaves until the end of spring and the beginning of summer. Its limbs are long, but do not spread out, and the color of its leaves changes suddenly from purple to green. Only the water of the Ming fountain can make good tea of these leaves.

[p. 29]

Wu t'sai sung, the pinus massoniana, has a hair-pin shaped leaf. The seed of this tree is like small chestnuts, with three corners; the kernel is fragrant. The origin is uncertain, some claiming that it also was brought from Siam by Ti Tsan Wang.

Chien t'sai sung, the thousand autumn cedar, does not grow more than two or three inches high, and has leaves like the cypress. It is at home on the high, dry cliffs, and when apparently dead, if watered, it will revive and become green again, like the huan hun t'sao, the soul returning grass.

Sien jen chu, the sacred man's candle, is like the wu t'ung in color. When full grown it can be spanned with one hand, and is not over one foot high. It is so rich in sap that when dug up it will not dry within one year. The burning of one limb will give light for several hours. Dilettantes in fairy grottoes are supposed to use it for their lights when performing their pious frauds in literature.

Loh han poh, the Lohan cypress, thujadolabrata. It grows only one or two feet high, with leaves resembling the arbor vitae. The color is kingfisher green.

Fei hsien kai, the sacred flying cover. The trunk of this tree grows high and limbless. At the top only it has limbs growing down, like the ribs of an umbrella. It compares in beauty with the wistaria chinensis, the leaves being bright and variegated.

Lo han t'iao, the Lohan rope, grows high, and resembles the Chinese juniper. The leaves are purple red, mingled with other colors, having a white line in the center, and are over one foot long. When dry they roll up like a rope, hence the name t'iao.

P'u sa hsien, the idol thread, with an abundance of fine limbs and leaves drooping down almost to the ground, like threads. The leaves are fragrant and of a kingfisher green color.

Yu Nu Chang, the beautiful woman's curtain, is an evergreen,

[p. 30]

and grows ten to twenty feet high. The leaves are long, bright, and glossy, growing in circles, like a screen. It is found in the shade of the rocks and cliffs, often standing in rows.

Hsien chang fan, the sacred palm fan, grows large leaves out of the trunk, like the fans carried in processions. Two sides of the leaves are similar and regular, being of deep green color and fragrant. It is often found at the mouth of the caves.

Chin ch'ien shu, the golden cash tree, grows straight, twenty to thirty feet high. The trunk is dark, and the limbs and leaves are green. During summer and autumn fine thread-like limbs grow out of the larger limbs. Around these drooping threads are little circles like Chinese cash, some having from three to four, others as many as twelve such cash.

Nan t'ien Chu, the Southern heavenly bamboo, nandina domestica. Like all bamboo, it is hollow, and the nodes are far apart. In spring its color is green, in autumn and winter it is red and purple. It flourishes by the side of streams.

Kwan yin chu, the goddess of mercy bamboo, is of small growth, not quite three feet high. Its leaves are fine, and their color bluish green. It is an evergreen.

Shih chu, the stone bamboo, also called the dragon beard bamboo. It grows a fine flower, and its color is red and purple.

Chin pu yao, the shaking golden step. It grows in abundance and flowers profusely. Its leaves and flowers are always shaking, like the aspen.

Hsien kwei, the sacred cassia, has leaves fine and soft, of reddish and greenish colors. The color and shape of the flowers are like red sacks, and the seed like red pearl. When damp with dew both flowers and leaves emit a most pleasant fragrance.

Yu yin lo, the precious brooches. The flower is round

[p. 31]

Click to enlarge
FOOTHILL BRIDGE.

Click to enlarge
THE BRIDGE TEMPLE.

On a ridge 4,000 feet above the .

[p. 32]

and droops, like pure pearls. It grows along streams in clusters, like the garden thyme.

Po lan hua grows over ten feet high, with long fine leaves; the calyx is like the sunflower, and its fragrance is perceptible several li off. It is said that when Ti Tsan Wang went to the Southern altar one of these flowers fell into his patriarchal bowl. At other times this flower had never been known to fall.

So lo hua, a species of sedge. The growth is of different sizes, both large and small, quite different from all other plants. The leaves are always in clusters of seven or nine each. The seed in shaped like the face of a person, having eyes and eyebrows; and the flowers grow close together like the peony tree; their fragrance resembles that of the lotus flower.

La hua, the wax flower, is small, and always has fine, thick, soft petals, like wax. Its color is red and yellow.

Mo lien hua, a species of jasmine. The Chinese claim that it produces seed before it puts forth leaves. It blooms every month except November and December. In color and fragrance it resembles the lotus, shedding perfume on the passing air.

Shui hsien hua is like the jonquil or narcissus. It grows in dark places, and even opens its flowers while partly covered with snow.

Sung chu mei is a strange freak in nature. It grows like the cypress, but is hollow and has nodes like the bamboo and roots like the garlic. It blooms like the plumtree, but is poisonous.

Lung hu t'sao, the dragon beard grass, grows three feet high and has a fine stiff stem without nodes. It is found in abundance on the dizzy heights of the mountain peaks, and is used for making fine mats.

Kin chieh ch'ang pu, the nine-pointed calamus, is found in well-watered rocky places. The stem has nine nodes to one

[p. 33]

inch, and it is claimed that in the T'ang Dynasty some were seen with from twelve to twenty-four nodes to an inch. It is regarded as a sacred plant, and many Chinese poems have been written upon it. The leaves of this plant, with those of artemesia, are hung on the door lintels in the shape of a sword on the fifth day of the fifth moon; the Dragon Festival, in remembrance of the famous rebel, Huang Ch'ao, whose soldiers had orders to spare every family who exhibited a bunch of artemesia and calamus at the door. When it is eaten by aged people their gray hair will become black again.

"Floral apostles, that with dewy splendor
    Blush without sin, and weep without a crime;
  O! may I deeply learn, and ne'er surrender
    Your love divine."

Fung wei t'sao, the male phoenix tail grass, is a fern with twin leaves diverging into two branches like the tail of the phoenix. It is claimed to possess cooling properties in medicine.

Chin hsing t'sao, the golden star plant, has golden specks on its leaves, and black fibres like hair within the stem.

Peh ho, the lily flower, also called the devil's garlic. The bulb can be eaten, and syrup is made from the juice.

Huang chin. The meaning of this name is yellow energy or spirit. It grows in many other places, but these mountains produce the finest quality. To eat the best quality prevents old age and disease, and assures long life.

"Hail, blessed flowers;
  Springing in valleys green and low,
  And on the mountain high;
  And in the wilderness,
  Where no man passes by."

It is not, however, the beautiful natural scenery, nor is it the richness of the flora of this mountain group that has made it famous among the mountains of China, but a great personage, whose influence was powerfully felt in shaping

[p. 34]

the Buddhist religion in China during the early centuries. Buddhist history claims this person to have been a prince of Siam, who, becoming weary of the pomp and vanity of court life, cultivated a love for the Buddhist religion. He was the son of the king. His surname was Gold, and he was called Chiao Chio. As a god he is called Ti Tsan Wang. In the T'ang Dynasty, during the reign of Chih Te, A.D. 754, he forsook his luxurious home to live the life of a poor mendicant. Passing through this unknown country he was attracted by the grandeur of the mountains, and resolved to make them his home. He begged the magistrate of Tsingyanghsien to give him a plot of land in area as large as his coat would cover. The modest request was cheerfully granted, and he built a little stone hut. He lived upon rice and white clay, and drank the fresh, clear mountain water as an evidence of the purity of his desires.

His first adventure was to encounter a poisonous serpent. But the prince remained quietly seated and undisturbed in meditation, offering no resistance. Soon a beautiful woman came and made obeisance to him, apologizing for the baseness of the serpent's action, saying, "The child did not know what he was doing." As a compensation for the inconvenience the serpent had given him, she caused fresh water to bubble out of a rock near by, and to this day sparkling water flows from this rock. It is called the Dragon Daughter Spring, for the beautiful woman was the dragon's daughter, and the impudent serpent was her younger brother.

At Tsingyanghsien, a city near by, there lived a man named Chu Kochieh, who, passing over the hills one day, saw the prince sitting in a little stone hut with a tripod by his side, as a range for cooking his food. Seeing this he was astonished, and bought for him a piece of land, upon which he and Shen Yu, a pupil of the prince, built a temple for him. In later years this temple was named "Hua Ch'en Tsz" by Imperial permission.

[p. 35]

Click to enlarge
TEMPLE OF REFRESHING DEW.

Click to enlarge
THE GOD LING KWANG AND INCENSE BURNERS BY THE WAYSIDE.

[p. 36]

Many of his Siamese countrymen, having heard of their prince's fame across the sea, followed him, and thus his disciples increased daily from abroad and at home. They lived with him a like frugal life, eating rice, millet, and white clay. When he had reached the age of ninety-nine years, and felt that he must soon depart, he called his disciples together. No sooner had they gathered around their beloved master than they heard prolonged, inarticulate sound reverberating among the mountains, and saw shafts of light scintillating along the horizon, until it seemed as if the hills cleft apart, when suddenly he sank into an open gap. They buried him where once stood the little stone hut, and every three years the sarcophagus was opened and his body was found as when living, his joints trembling and giving forth a rattling sound, like golden chains. Thus it was considered beyond all doubt that he had become a god, for flames of light issued from the place, and it was called "the mount of spiritual light." A pagoda is erected over this spot, and around the pagoda a temple is built. Here is the center of interest, for in this pagoda rests the undecayed body of Ti Tsang Wang. But to speak of the temples we must begin at the foot of the mountains.

Approaching from the Tatung plain, the first station, Er Shen Tien, Temple of the Holy One, is seen at a long distance. A night's lodging is here desirable, if the pilgrim's season--September, October, and November--is on. Bands of pilgrims, numbering from fifteen to one hundred, rush by, as if in great haste. Their arrival is announced by a most pitiable lamentation, calling out, "O idol, we, thy humble, spiritual followers, put our trust in thee and burn incense." When they have gathered around the altar, all kneeling, the leader beats a sonorous gong as a signal to the idol, and chants in a lamenting tone: "Saviour of the unseen world, save all the people from their sins and suffering." After which all the others repeat it three times in a similar pleading

[p. 37]

tone. A priest standing by the altar pronounces a benediction upon them as they depart, for which, of course, he expects a few cash. In like manner they make a complete round of all the temples, shrines, and altars, over eighty in number. We can only mention a few.

Passing up a romantic valley other temples for lodging pilgrims are seen, and after an ancient moss-covered bridge is crossed we are called upon to pass through the First Gate to Heaven. As might be expected, it is a very plain, humble structure. On the lintels of the door an inscription reads: "Those who have arrived here are to be considered as not outsiders, but as one of us." The chief idol here is Ling Kwang. He was originally a traveling mendicant during the Sung Dynasty, and became the first in rank of the twenty-six supernatural soldiers under the control of the "Jade Emperor." Above his head is a searching inscription: "Shin wen er hsing," (ask your own heart). He is believed to be a subtle and wide-awake god, having a third eye in the middle of his forehead. In another inscription it says of him: "With one stroke he awakens all men, and with three eyes he overlooks all under heaven. He helps people to gain their object in life with speed; his aid is as quick as thought."

Having passed through the first heavenly gate, the road leads through a dense bamboo grove, within which is located the Temple of Refreshing Dew, a name doubtless suggested by the rich, beautiful foliage with which it is surrounded. This monastery is gorgeously decorated and covered with imperial tiles of various colors; it is also honored by a tablet from Kang Hsi, and contains images of the Three Pure Ones, the Eighteen Lohan, the Goddess of Mercy, and Ti Tsang Wang. When I visited it a great Buddhist rally had just been held, at which two hundred priests had taken orders. A few more li up the mountain side the pilgrim enters the Second Heavenly Gate. This too is a small, unpretentious building. The road leads through the temple. In the passage is also a

[p. 38]

[paragraph continues] Lingkwang, and in a dark and sooty compartment is a Shakjamuni Buddha. At this stage it is claimed that all who accept Buddhism are moved upon and feel the affinity. Happiness is promised to all who come, and virtue administered to every pilgrim.

Beyond the second gate is the Dragon Pool Temple, an edifice of no special renown. A few more steps and the weary pilgrim reaches the Temple of the Southern Heavenly Gate, the half-way station. Such it is in reality up this mountain path from the first temple up to the seat of Ti Tsang Wang, and so it is in like manner the upward path of the Buddhist religion from earth to the ethereal heaven, called the beautiful and spiritual. Then the Temple of Ten Thousand Ages is seen, and the Third Heavenly Gate is reached. Here the pilgrim is welcomed under a large spacious passage, in which a god of riches and the king of the dragons appear in most gaudily painted colors. An attempt at beauty is also made in the inner hall, where the Goddess of Mercy with her servants is enshrined.

Following the winding road up over a ridge we saw an unusual scene. A Lingkwang of life-size was placed by the wayside, seated on a chair, with an incense burner in front of him, and a broken one to his left. The little basket by the burner betrayed the object of his appearance in public--a few cash being in it.

A little farther on, over a thickly wooded knoll, the illuminated glory of Buddha was seen--a restful valley nestled in the top of the mountain. Approaching from the north the Principal Gate of Heaven is seen on the opposite side of the valley. This gate leads to the Hall par excellence, also called the Mortal Body's Precious Hall. Here rest the mortal remains of Ti Tsang Wang; here his chief influence was exerted; and here he is worshiped by millions of devotees.

This building is square. On the east and west sides stand the Ten Rulers of Hades. In the southeast and south-west

[p. 39]

Click to enlarge
HALL OF TRANSMIGRATION.

Click to enlarge
THE CENTENARIANS TEMPLE.

Click to enlarge
PAGODA OVER GATE OF HEAVEN.

[p. 40]

corners are two Police of Hades, one having an ox-head and the other a horse-head. In the northeast corners the civil and military judges preside. In the center of this hall stands a square altar. Upon this altar a pagoda is erected, which reaches up through the roof of the building. On the south side of this altar are five images of Ti Tsang Wang and two servants; on the north four images of Ti Tsang and six servants; on the west two images of Ti Tsang, one Laughing Buddha, and seven servants; on the east two images of Ti Tsang and two servants.

In front of this building and on the outside are these short inscriptions relating to Ti Tsang: "The moral body pagoda;" "These ornaments are precious ornaments;" "He confers grace upon all persons;" "His blessing extends over all Asia;" "His divine power has been shown in all directions;" "His intelligence in Buddhism was innate;" "The lucky wheel of fate stopped here forever;" "All people receive his divine favor;" "His kindness extends to all living beings;" "The divine clouds shelter all;" "This is the most divine place between ten thousand hills."

On the north, outside this building, are five large iron incense holders. The two outer ones have horns and are five feet high and four feet in diameter; the two inner are four feet high, and in the corner stands an incense holder with a cover like a Chinese umbrella. Upon this vessel pilgrims were rubbing cash, until they became bright. The belief is that children who wear these cash around their necks will become heroes. It is called the heavenly vessel. Around these incense burners is the rallying place of all the pilgrims. Here they kneel under the open sky and worship Ti Tsang, burning great quantities of sandal wood.

Beyond this chief temple is the Hall of Transmigration. At the entrance of the south door stand two black and red, ferocious-looking guards. At the north door two yamen runners with ox and horse heads. In the northeast corner is a

[p. 41]

scribe, who keeps the accounts of men's lives; by his side a fierce, black image, holding a banner upon which is written: "Discriminate between good and evil." In the northwest corner stands a military officer holding a sword, upon which is inscribed: "The urgent warrant will seize quickly," and in the southeast corner stands two devil-faced, gaudily dressed yamen runners. The duty of these guards is to keep off all wicked worshipers from Ti Tsang Wang. On the east and on the west sides of this hall the ten divisions of Hades are represented, each presided over by one of the ten kings. They are holding court and mete out indescribably cruel punishments upon all criminals. Above these courts, from the first to the tenth, are the following mottoes: "Lay thy hand upon thy breast and examine thyself." "Here goodness and wickedness must be distinguished." "Who has concealed anything from me?" "Who has ever been forgiven by met" "You knew this condition before you came." "Why do you have so much trouble?" "There is no place for repentance here." "You can not do any better now." "The shore is just behind you," i.e., when you could have reformed. A volume could be written upon these ten courts. That no beneficent influence has resulted from these terrible exhibitions of punishment, or is affecting the people at present, is apparent by the callousness of the worshipers when passing by these awful scenes of the future state. The reason no doubt is because these punishments rest upon a false basis.

In the middle of the ninth Chinese month, when the autumn moon is full, the visitor, standing on any of the surrounding peaks, can look down upon a scene both beautiful and pitiable. All that the creative hand has done is magnificent and grand, and the buoyant air makes one feel as if the elixir of life had indeed entered one's veins; but. that mottled throng down among the temples, the ceaseless thrilling echoes of the thousands of worshipers hastening from altar to altar, calling to the gods; the banging of boisterous

[p. 42]

blunderbusses and fire crackers, the din and noise of merchandise, and the pleading and moaning of countless beggars, create an impression far from what the valley is claimed to be--a fairy land. On our last visit we saw in one day no less than seven thousand pilgrims passing these altars. The great majority of them were young and middle aged men, but often, too, very old women were seen laboring under great difficulty to reach these heights. What weary travelers walk these roads! Occasionally a well-dressed young man is seen, wearing a tinseled head-band in apology for his mother, who has found it impossible to go herself. She will wear this band after death and appear with it before Ti Tsang in the next world. Recognizing the tinseled band, he will take it for granted that she worshiped at his altar in this life. Even gods must be deceived.

But nowhere can more misery be found in this or any land than is congregated here in these mountains during the pilgrimage season. It has become the harvest time of the maimed, halt, and decrepit of every description from the adjoining country far and near. They have united into an organized band, have built booths along the road from the foot of the hills to the highest temple ground. Every one expects, and some impertinently demand recognition from each pilgrim in the shape of small cash. Brokers among them collect these small coins and return to the foot of the mountain, where they sell one thousand of the small cash for four hundred large ones to the newcomers.

The last devotional act of the pilgrim is performed when they re-embark for home. On the bank of the river they kneel down, facing the mountain, and once more in their weird tones they chant their petition to Ti Tsang Wang--Earth's Hidden King.

     
Sacred Places in China, by Carl F. Kupfer, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 43]

Click to enlarge
MAP OF POOT'OO.

  

Poot'oo: China's Sacred Island.

THIS islet is one of the Chusan Archipelago, situated in the 30 degrees North latitude and 122 degrees 25' East longitude. This archipelago includes over one hundred islands and takes its name from Chusan, the longest of the group, which is over twenty miles long and six to ten miles wide. Poot'oo lies a little over one mile east of the Whang Head, is irregular and curiously shaped, about four miles long and very narrow at some places. The ceaseless march of the ocean tide has washed away all arable soil until the bare granite rocks along the shore resisted their incursion, except in a few small sheltered bays, where sandy beaches offer delightful sea bathing. Above the jaggy beach, however, enough soil remains, covering the coarse granite, to produce a rich foliage to the summit. The view from Lookout House, the highest point, about 970 feet above the sea-level, athwart the ridges and down the valleys upon the bestudded main, is highly picturesque and extremely delightful.

On approaching the island the visitor is landed at the southern point upon a well-built stone jetty, from which a broad, well-paved road leads to the three main temples. The front is called Universal Salvation Temple. The rear is called Rain-Producing Temple, and there is another called Wisdom's Salvation Temple. Smaller roads branch off in all directions, leading to grottoes, temples, and shrines of all sizes and shapes. As of ancient Judah, it can indeed be said that "in the high places and on the hills and under every green tree" the gods are worshiped, and even in the rocks images are hewn. These walks are lined with large, shady trees, and aromatic shrubs diffuse the air with a pleasant fragrance.

[p. 44]

The numerous inscriptions chiseled into rocks along the pathways are an evidence that the whole island is devoted to the propagation of the doctrine of the Goddess of Mercy. Here are a few specimens:

"With a reverent heart take a look. The Law of Buddha has sacred affinity. The Goddess regards all men with kindness. Even the stupid stones bow their heads. The Buddhist kingdom together ascends. Ascend and enter the region of formlessness. Ascend and behold the Bodhi--supreme wisdom. Illusory light rises in the East."

On a stone tablet set on the top of a hill are the following inscriptions:

"There is a sacred island on the sea. Over the sea there is a Buddhist kingdom. I put my trust in Amida Buddha. There is another world."

On the opposite side of the tablet is the following:

"Only virtue is original. There is also Wisdom's Salvation Temple. With reverence be cautious not to kill living creatures. Do not pour hot water upon the ground, lest living creatures be injured, and when walking, be careful not to step on anything living. Such is the heart of the Great Conveyance and of Supreme Wisdom, necessary to the enlightenment of Buddha. With uprightness of heart cultivate the body. Be most careful to guard against avariciousness. If these worldly desires are not entirely exhausted the sacred fruit is not complete. Let all under heaven give reverence, and ascend to the other shore. Read good books and speak good words. Do good deeds and be good men. Imitate good examples and retain a good heart. Read the Buddhist ritual and worship Buddha. Abstain from meat with a reverent purpose, and do good in abundance."

In a conspicuous place the following exhortation is inscribed:

"In a Buddhist Classic there is a law in which it is said, 'kill not.' In explanation of this observe: above there are

[p. 45]

Click to enlarge
THE HARBOR AT HIGH TIDE.

Click to enlarge
LANDING OF THE PILGRIMS.

[p. 46]

all kinds of gods, holy men, teachers, monks, and parents; below there are four footed beasts, birds, wriggling worms, and small insects. All that has life should not intentionally be killed. In this classic it is also said: `The winter months breed lice, take them and put them into a bamboo joint, keep them warm with cotton, and give them oily food to eat lest they might freeze or starve.' Such is the doctrine of the Goddess of Mercy."

Following the path that leads eastward along the shore until the northeastern point is reached, a place of unusual interest is seen, called the Fan Yin Tung (Buddhist Echo Cave). In an almost perpendicular rock, over one hundred feet high, is a wide cleft extending back into the rock so far that the end can not be seen from the temple bridge built across the chasm about midway. When the waves dash. against the rocks at the bottom of this cliff, and the sun shines upon the spray and mist rising up into the clefted rock, a natural phenomenon appears, the colors similar to those produced by the sun's rays falling upon raindrops are seen. The devout Buddhists firmly believe that this natural appearance is a living Buddha. A priest said to us, "Only believers can see him." When visiting this place, two elderly women were worshiping upon this temple bridge. After making their prostrations facing the cleft, the old Taoist recluse in charge of this shrine directed their attention to the place where the Buddha would appear. They looked, and they looked, until nature was in their favor, and the sun broke through the clouds, and they saw their heart's desire--the Living Buddha --a fraction of the rainbow.

Because of this belief, in the early days of Buddhism, many devout believers cast themselves down over this precipice in the hope of thus attaining to Buddhahood. A magistrate of Ting-hai, hearing of this, wrote a proclamation in which he exhorted the people not to act so foolishly. He assured them that all who cast  down over this precipice

[p. 47]

Click to enlarge
KIOSK CONTAINING STONE TABLETS WITH INSCRIPTIONS WRITTEN BY KANG HSI.

[p. 48]

would not be protected by the goddess, and would obtain no benefit; but the people did as before. Then he wrote a book and called the attention of the public to the moral nature of this abuse. "They who injure their bodies," said he, "injure their parents, and can not be considered filial. Think of the harm to yourselves in throwing your bodies among those rocks, where they will be dashed in pieces by the waves and eaten by the fish. And think of your families, your fathers and mothers, your wives and children. You came here to worship the Goddess of Mercy, to obtain blessings for your home, and word comes that you have destroyed yourselves. What grief! What sorrow! The goddess does not want such offerings; she herself will be distressed. If any want to sacrifice their lives, let them do so upon the altar of their country, and all will know that some good has come to the world through their devotion. As your official, I consider it my duty thus to exhort you." This book had its desired effect.

Since then the government of this island has become independent of civil jurisdiction, being ruled by the abbots of the chief monasteries. The abbot of the Rear Temple seems to possess more than ordinary business ability, judging from the clean and orderly condition of this temple. He is said to be an ex-compradore of Ningpo and Shanghai. Their mode of government is much the same as the civil government. A priest at Futing-san told us that even the power of administering capital punishment was in their hands, but the island being the home of supernatural beings and so many gods spreading spiritual light, corporeal punishment was seldom required. This priest had an exalted opinion of the deep spiritual enlightenment of their fraternity. When he was asked whether the older priests admonished and exhorted the younger, he indignantly replied: "How can we be exhorted when we have once comprehended the doctrine!"

The next point of interest was the many miraculous legends told and believed by the people. The most of them

[p. 49]

have the coloring of historical authenticity, giving names and dates, but they lack in credibility. The oldest reach back as far as the T'ang Dynasty. We can only give a few:

The Emperor Tai Ho, who reigned near the middle of the ninth century, 827-836, was said to be passionately fond of holi, a species of clam. So the people of these isles yearly sent him all they could gather, even greatly overtaxing themselves for their Emperor. One day, as he was eating of his favorite dish, he found one with a hard shell which he could not open. He cleaved it with a knife and found within an image of the Goddess of Mercy. When he saw this he was frightened, and commanded that the image be incased in a sandalwood casket, overlaid with gold, and placed in the Imperial palace. Then he asked a priest named Wei Chen what this meant. The priest replied: "The goddess desires to open thy heart that thou mayest be temperate in all thy desires." Whereupon the Emperor no longer pressed the people to send him clams, and issued a proclamation that an image of the goddess should be placed in every temple.

Another story is told of the same period, that a priest burned his fingers to show his zeal for the goddess. When his fingers were almost burned off, she appeared to him and comforted him for his faith and devotion.

During the Posterior Liang Dynasty, in the reign of Chen Ming, 915, a Japanese priest named Hui Ngo brought an image of the goddess from Wutai, and was going with it to his home in Japan. When his boat came into the sea of the water lilies, near Poot'oo, it was in danger of being wrecked. So the priest prayed to her and said: "If it is thy pleasure to go with me to my country, I am willing to go with thee wheresoever thou wilt have me to go." After this the boat smoothly glided on its way, and soon came to the landing in front of the Chao Yin Tung, the Tidal Echo Cave. Below the cave lived a man named Chang, who gave his own house to the priest for a temple, and the temple was named "The Unwilling

[p. 50]

to Depart Goddess of Mercy Temple." It is not now in existence.

In the Sung Dynasty, the Emperor Yuan Feng, in the third year of his reign, 1081, sent a minister named Wang Shun-fung to Corea. On his way he encountered a terrific storm, and a large sea monster came to overthrow his boat. Terrified he prayed; as he was looking intently toward the cave in the distant island he saw the goddess coming out of the cave, dressed in gold apparel and adorned with rich jewels. Immediately the monster left him and the sea was calm. He returned in peace and informed the Emperor of his experience, who ordered the place to be called the "Precious Declivity."

In the Sung Dynasty, the Emperor Ch'ung Ning, in the year 1102, sent two Ministers of State to Corea, named Lin and Wu. On their return they passed through the Chusan Archipelago. When sailing among the islands, a dense darkness came upon them, and for four days they did not see either sun or moon. In their distress they remembered the goodness of Goddess of Mercy on Poot'oo, and they worshiped, when suddenly the surface of the sea was illuminated with a brilliant light, and they proceeded rejoicingly on their way, and soon saw Chao pao san, the Hill of Precious Beckoning, near Ningpo, from which they went to the mainland.

During the Southern Sung Dynasty, the Emperor Lung Hsin, in the year 1163, dreamed that he was in Poot'oo, where he saw many wonderful signs of the greatness of the Goddess of Mercy. After this he composed an ode in which he praised her greatness, ascribing to her the ability of accommodating all persons, and of being able to reveal all mysterious doctrine. And he called upon all his subjects to do her homage, for no other god was equal to her in wisdom and goodness, promising to all men what they prayed for. "Her mystery man can never understand," he exclaimed.

In connection with the image which refused to go with

[p. 51]

Click to enlarge
THE SACRED CAMPHOR TREE AND KIOSK CONTAINING INSCRIPTIONS WRITTEN BY K'ANG HSI.

[p. 52]

[paragraph continues] Hui Ngo to Japan another story is told. This image was continually working miracles, so that the people of other places and cities also desired her patronage. Whereupon a certain priest came to Poot'oo, bought a good piece of sandalwood, entered the temple and closed the door. He worked for one month, carving a facsimile image and disappeared with his newly-carved goddess. In the Southern Sung Dynasty, during the first year of the Emperor Chia Ting, 1208, the image which the priest had carved lost a finger. When the priest in whose temple the image was at this time saw the mutilated limb he was terrified. In his agony, as he was looking towards Poot'oo, behold a flower came floating along from the shore below the cave, bearing the missing member. This image is now in Chao ying tung.

In the Southern Sung Dynasty the Emperor Hsien Shun, during the year 1265, had a high official named Fan, who had diseased eyes. He sent his son to Poot'oo to pray. The prince brought some water from a spring below Chao ying tung, with which the statesman washed himself and was cured. Again the Emperor sent his son to offer thanks to the goddess. Having discharged his obligations, he was sitting by the cave when the goddess revealed herself in a cloud of smoke in which she was veiled. When the young prince came to another cave he saw the servants of the goddess standing face to face by his side. They were dressed in white garments with crowns upon their heads, both looking towards him as if they wished to speak.

The following two legends are assigned to the Yuan Dynasty. In the thirteenth year of the emperor Chih Yuan, A.D. 1264, a high official was sent with a Lama priest to the Southern isles to restore order. Upon his arrival he expected to see the goddess as others had seen her, and when no vision appeared he was angry and shot an arrow into the cave and took his departure. On his homeward way he was surrounded by water lilies so dense that all progress was impossible. Fear

[p. 53]

Click to enlarge
REST HOUSE OVER THE POND AT THE CHIEN-SZ.
 THE TIDAL WAVE TEMPLE.

[p. 54]

fell upon the warrior, and he repented of his unbelief and hasty action. Returning to the cave, the goddess revealed herself to him, dressed in white and attended by her maid servant; whereupon he ordered a temple to be built over the cave.

In the fifth year of the Emperor Ta Te, A.D. 1302, a man of literary distinction, named Chu san fung san, was sent to worship on the Li Mountain. On his way hither he passed Chao ying tong, where the goddess appeared to him, wearing a crown and necklace of precious jewels, holding in one hand a willow branch and in the other a blue glass cup. During her visible presence the cave was filled with light.

The Ming Dynasty was specially fruitful in producing interesting legends. In the twenty-second year of the Emperor Yung Loh, A.D. 1424, on the tenth month and nineteenth day, the goddess revealed herself in the Tidal Echo Cave, dressed in white and attended by a dragon king and his daughter, who were accompanied by a host of servants. From ten to eleven o'clock they opened wide their eyes and made a sorrowful countenance. By twelve o'clock their countenance had changed to purple and they stood facing the wall. At six P. M. they were seen at the Archer's Cave, and a god dressed in white, wearing a golden crown, was seen sitting in the midst of the sun, and Bodhisattoa was standing under the sun, while the Lohans were walking upon the sea. On the following morning at six o'clock a god with a purple gold body was seen in the cave.

In the second year of Hsuan Te, A.D. 1428, and the fourth month, Yen Loh Wang, the Ruler of Purgatory (the Chinese Pluto), with his two daughters were seen in the cave.

In the year 1575, the second year of Wan Li, a priest, named Pieh Chuan, was on his way upon the sea to Poot'oo, when he saw in the sky a goddess dressed in white, flying westward, while another priest, named Tsai Fung, saw her passing over Chentu, the capital of Szechuan.

[p. 55]

Six years after this a priest named Ta Szyung came to this island and found the conditions very favorable. The desire of his heart was to build a temple, and he came to the cave where the Goddess of Mercy dwelt, and prayed, "If I should build a temple here, give me a sign." In the evening of the same day he saw the tide bring in a large bamboo. "There," said he, "is the sign," and he built a Tidal Wave Temple.

In the fourteenth year of the Emperor Wan Li there lived a Hangchow priest at Poot'oo, whose mother was a most ardent worshiper of the gods. She was also a vegetarian, and went about collecting subscriptions for temples. One day as she was soliciting gifts an idol was given her. The neck of this idol was of gold, and she gave it to her son, the priest. When he saw that the neck was of gold, he coveted the valuable metal and engaged a workman to peel it off; but no sooner had the workman begun his sacrilegious work than he dropped dead. Soon after this the mother came in her wanderings to Poot'oo. When the priestly son saw her he began to curse and said, "The one who injured me has come," and he dealt her a slap with the hand. After rushing over the hills in his madness he cut his throat, but before dying he said to his colleagues, "Follow not my example, for if you do, you will come to the world of misery."

Four years after this, on the tenth month, the priests of the island had an altercation which they could not settle among themselves. So the case was submitted to the magistrate at Tinghai. When he came to the island to settle their trouble, his faith in Buddhism and the pretensions of the priests was thoroughly shaken, and he took a set of the standard Classics of the Lotus School and burned them and made the priests walk over the ashes. That night he had a dream. In his dream he saw a sacred man coming to him, who explained to him the meaning of the Buddhist doctrine, and then said: "Heretofore you believed this doctrine, and now you

[p. 56]

persecute it; for this you can not obtain forgiveness. In the spiritual world you will have to become a herdsman." Hearing this he was deeply grieved, and he begged the idol to forgive him; also a priest named Ta Chih prayed to the idol for him. Soon after this he had another dream, when Buddha appeared to him and said, "Forgiveness may be granted if you replace one hundred volumes for every volume you have destroyed." With this the magistrate gladly complied and returned to his island city, where he had one hundred sets of the Classics printed and sent to Poot'oo.

The following are of the Ch'ing Dynasty. In the reign of the Emperor Shun Chih, about the middle of the seventeenth century, there was a pirate chief named Nu Chin, who consulted with a Japanese priest to take to Japan all the Buddhist books which the Emperors of the Ming Dynasty had presented to the monasteries of Poot'oo. When a priest named Chao Chung came with several hundred priests and begged the chief not to rob them of their books, he became angry and said, "If you want these books, you will have to descend into the depth of the sea and confer with the dragon king in his yamen," and forthwith he set sail for Japan. When far out upon the ocean, behold, a great fish prevented his boat from going any further. All skill was baffled, and he was in great despair. He repented of his evil and returned, when a fair wind brought him to Poot'oo in less than half a day. The priests all rejoiced and replaced the books in their respective libraries.

In the third year of K'ang Hi, the first month and the first day, the priests at Poot'oo saw a crescent-shaped white light resting with one end upon the top of a temple and with the other upon a hill not far distant. And they saw the goddess dressed in white walking from the temple over this arch to the adjoining hilltop. From this they concluded that evil would soon befall this temple. One year later foreigners came to this island and took all the idols, banners and curtains, and

[p. 57]

Click to enlarge
TA TIEN OF THE CH'IEN SZ. THE MAIN HALL WITH ITS GLORIOUS GOLDEN TILE ROOF.

Click to enlarge
THE ECHO CAVE.

[p. 58]

carried them off to Japan, where they were sold for Tls. 200,000. On their return to their native land their ship was destroyed by fire, and they all perished in the sea. The same year pirates made a raid upon the island, burning the temple and smelting the copper images. When they came to the Rear Temple, the robbers, eager to plunder, pressed into the inner parts, while the front was set on fire, and thus they perished by their own hands.

Some years after this, in the Spring, when the tide was high, a fleet of gunboats passed this island. The sailors went ashore and found the temple all destroyed and the place clean, as if no one had lived there. Upon their return they were pursued by numerous poisonous snakes, also many vicious dogs came out of the jungle. Many of the sailors were bitten and perished. All because the god had been ill-treated and the temple destroyed. During the latter part of this year the Ningpo admiral came to this island with his ship, and his soldiers found a bronze image which they took with them. When they were on their way, the ship became so heavy by the weight of the god that it began to sink. The admiral, suspecting that something was wrong, searched the ship. When he found the god he ordered him to be returned, and his ship regained its buoyancy.

In the twenty-first year of K'ang Hi a literary man named Kao-Sz-chi wrote the book of Rewards and Punishments, a kind of commentary of modern Taoism. His wife embraced the Buddhist religion and also read the Chin Kang Chin, the Diamond Sutra--the Sutra of the Pradjna, which is able to crush diamonds. In the fourth month of this year she became ill and knew herself that she could not recover from her illness. On the twenty-seventh day she became unconscious, but soon revived, when she repeated the Sutra and said: "If I can but re-establish a temple on Poot'oo Isle, I shall live two years more." But on the fourth day of the following month she died. Before her death her husband

[p. 59]

requested of her a petition. "If in the Kingdom of Shades you really do not suffer agony, I want you to let me know through a dream." She nodded with her head and departed. On the second month and the seventh day of the following year her eldest son had a dream. In this dream he met seven or eight aged priests walking in a forest. Said one of them to him: "Would you like to see your mother? If so, come into my sleeve, and I will take you to Poot'oo." Immediately they were on the island, where he saw many large temples, and in one, named the All Pervading Majestic Temple, a number of priests were chanting prayers. One of their number said: "If any one will repair this temple his merit will last through all generations, and neither in this life nor in the life to come will he be exposed to the turning of the wheel and subject to transmigration, but in heaven and among men he will have all kinds of blessings." This promise spoken, he saw his mother dressed in a yellow and pink coat and a white skirt, folding her hands, as if in prayer. She said: "The doctrine of the Sutra fills all space, its grace reaches to all, and all men under heaven should honor it. Through the help of Buddha I have learned all this doctrine and have not forgotten a word. My heart is fixed. I have attained supreme intelligence; in all eternity I can never be changed. Tell this to your father, that he may not be concerned about me." While thus dreaming, he heard the rushing of water, and awoke. When the father heard this, he said: "This, my son, is honest, and would not tell a lie, hence I will write what he has seen and heard in his dream upon my garments." On the first day of the tenth month he burned these clothes in sacrifice, that his departed wife might see his devotion.

In the year 1691, the twenty-ninth year of K'ang Hsi, the spirit of miracles seems to have departed from Poot'oo. It was during this year that the Chentai (General) of Tinghai came to the Buddhist Echo Cave, where a god appeared to him. His face was red, eyebrows heavy, beard long, eyes

[p. 60]

white and brilliant, and his nose a mere white speck. He wore a crown which shone like a flame of fire, and his garments were yellow and black with a broad collar, all loose and flowing, with one arm bare. Upon his head stood a little bare-footed Bodhisattoa. When the general made prostrations before this goddess, he (the god) disappeared. The god mentioned here is a metamorphosis of the Goddess of Mercy, which may be male or female.

No description of Poot'oo could give satisfaction without trying to describe at least one of the many temples. All sizes included, there are doubtless nearly one hundred. We choose the Universal Salvation Temple, also called the Front Temple from its location, being the first large temple the pilgrims see when coming from the landing. Like most temples in China, it faces the south, lying in a quiet valley, basking in the noonday sun. All that nature and Chinese art have done has rendered it quite an enchanting scene. The main buildings are covered with green and yellow tiles, indicative of imperial distinction, and are kept in a remarkably good condition. But an indisputable characteristic of the Chinese is here also clearly seen. The buildings, which cost them nothing, are very much neglected and in a dilapidated condition. The two pavilions housing the Imperial Tablets of K'ang Hsi, standing in the most prominent places of the two largest temples, are not only neglected, but subjected to a most sacrilegious use, having practically become the rendezvous of barbers and beggars, with all their belongings. We would not attempt a minute description of this temple, but only give an outline of its arrangement. We may say here that the Chinese seem to have great liberty in arranging the position of certain gods. It would be difficult to find two temples exactly alike.

Approaching this monastery, the visitors enter a shady avenue, where stands a stone arch of considerable age. It much resembles the ordinary arches which perpetuate the

[p. 61]

Click to enlarge
THE TEMPLE OF ATTRACTIONS.

[p. 62]

memory of virtuous widows, of whom China seems to have had many. Upon this arch are Tibetan inscriptions, a conclusive proof that Lama priests from Tibet or Mongolia have made pilgrimages to these shrines. Between this arch and the temple ground proper is a large lotus pond, spanned by a moss and ivy covered bridge. This pond teems with fish, and is the receptacle of much that might seem distasteful to these sacred vertebrate animals, but they leisurely seem to enjoy it. Beyond the bridge stands the pavilion, which contains three tablets. The center tablet is of a dark blue marble, fifteen feet high, five feet wide, and one foot thick. It stands upon a pedestal two and a half feet high. The inscription upon it was written by the Emperor K'ang Hsi in the forty-third year of his reign, the eleventh month and the fifteenth day. The following is a free translation:

"Studying the Buddhist religion, I learned that there were sacred mountains. One of these is located in the Southern sea. These books, however, did not give much accurate information. During the change of dynasties front the Ming to the Tsing, we were tossed in revolution all around; the island was overthrown by pirates, and all the temples were destroyed by fire. After the twenty-second year of my reign peace and order were established. Priests returned from the mainland, looked up the old foundations, cleaned away the weeds and debris, and began to build anew. When I came to the Cheh-kiang province, I sent an official to reverentially rebuild the temples and worship, and I myself prayed, saying, "May the temples forever keep (the sea) in subjection." Having prayed thus, I also sent gold for the repairs of the temples. The corridors and windows I ordered to be embellished with red and green, and all the beams beautified. Every beam and every stone was given by the Government, and all the artisans and laborers were paid by the Government. This I did for my parents above me and my people below me.

"When I was young I read historical classics, in which

[p. 63]

[paragraph continues] I learned how to cultivate the body, the home, and to execute government affairs in important matters. At that time I had no leisure to read the litanies, and they seemed to me as empty shadows, for I did not know the meaning of the mysterious Buddhist doctrine. Now I have learned that heaven is the greatest good, and the goddess rests upon this good, hence there can be no difference between the two. Heaven delights to create and give life to all creatures. The goddess is of great mercy in saving all that has life, hence she is not second to heaven. I have prayed for the Government to be active on behalf of the people for over forty years. And although there is no more rebellion in the land, yet the people are not fully at rest. The people are not yet pure-minded, and the ignorant are easily moved upon. In times of floods, droughts, and failure of crops, unseemly depredations are committed. These things never left me, even though I was asleep. I trusted to the great mercy of the goddess. I prayed that clouds of mercy, showers of rain, sweet dew and favorable winds might come to give a plentiful year to the people, and benevolence and longevity might prevail. If thus the goddess could save the nation and gain great merit, great good would also come to the world. This is my honest wish. Therefore I have written it to be cut into a stone tablet, that men may read it for all ages to come."

One month later he wrote an eulogy on the Goddess of Mercy, which is inscribed on a tablet at the Rear Temple. In this he says:

"I have heard that the goddess is all wise and has a wonderful appearance, that she is the origin of all truth and has opened a way to experience, giving evidence of the wisdom of the gods. Coming to this island, the moaning of the waves and the chanting of prayers can be heard, the deep purple temples can be seen, and peace can be had as expansive as the wide sea. But the goddess has other temples on Poot'oo besides this rain-producing temple. This renowned island

[p. 64]

has become a kingdom of the gods. It is like a ship of mercy upon the great sea; hills blue as the fleecy sky, and high as the heavens of Brahma; upon this lucky, clean place the waves dash up to bathe the sun. Its reputation stands as a pillar, supporting the sky. From its summits all places are connected.

"But when a time of trouble came, the priests scattered, as the morning clouds and the ashes of the burning temples were driven by the wind. Now, since happiness and peace have been restored, and the waves of the troubled sea cease to roar, the priests longingly looking to this place have returned. Special imperial grants were bestowed to aid in rebuilding the temples, to accomplish which it took much time, but they wearied not. When laying the foundations they beat a drum to stimulate the workmen to activity. In building, they did not erect pearl halls with precious doors, but used the huge turtle for the base of the pillars and the iguana for beams, that they might know how to cross the stream of error, that leads astray. The precious image of the goddess they seated in a natural colored lotus flower. Having furnished all, they placed a shining wheel of the Buddhist law on the building, and planted the purple bamboo in the forests. When majestic images were arranged in all the halls, then clouds of mercy spread over the earth, and the Emperor gave the temple the beautiful name Fa Yu (Law of Rain). Heaven can boast of protecting the doctrine of the gods; for they are established high, like a beacon cloud, and ships will come from all kingdoms to do them homage. Thus all can cross the stream upon the raft (Buddhist doctrine), and ascend the other shore.

"Now, since the great temple is completed, I pray that my mother may be blessed with long life; for this I borrow mercy. May my people also obtain many blessings! And may benevolence and longevity abound, and all under the brightness of the moon be filled with mercy. Let this be

[p. 65]

Click to enlarge
FA YU--THE LAW OF RAIN, OR RAIN-PRODUCING TEMPLE.

[p. 66]

carved into a good stone tablet that all who come may read it."

Leaving this pavilion, we see to the right and left two little three-storied kiosks, half hidden in the shady grove. In the one to the right is an image of a patron saint, in the other an image of Ti Tien Wang, the ruler of the Ten Halls in Hades. The first temple building we enter might be denominated the Protection Hall. Like most regularly constituted Chinese monasteries, it contains images of the four great kings, standing near the east and west wall, facing each other, Milehfu sitting on an elevated altar in the middle of the hall, and Weit'o standing on the opposite side looking north.

These four kings were brothers, and lived about 1100 B.C. They are supposed to be protectors of Milehfu, governing the center of the universe. Their faces are red, green, white, and black. The one with the red face holds an umbrella in his hand, with which he overshadows the universe. If he opens it, all is turned into chaos, sun and moon refuse to shine, and darkness covers the earth. The one with a green face holds a zither in his hands, and when he strikes upon it fire and wind come forth. The black faced one looks ferocious, and is supposed to be the eldest of the brothers. He holds in his hands an animal, which he has charmed into submission to do his will. The white faced one seems less ferocious, and holds in his hands a sword. When he brandishes it myriads of arrows fly in all directions, destroying all that would injure Buddha and his doctrine.

Between the four kings, in the midst of the hall, sits, in a glass encasement, "Laughing Buddha," the Merciful One, who is expected to appear and open a new era about three thousand years hence, when he will take the place of Shakyamuni. He is the Coming Buddha, the Messiah. His friendly mien invites the worshipers to come to him with all petitions. His devotees are chiefly women, who beseech him that in

[p. 67]

the next world they may be born men and not despised women.

Weit'o has a sword in hand, entwined with a gilt dragon. His stately bearing well becomes him as celestial protector. All the gods in this hall are still in the "wheel of the metempsychosis."

The space between this hall and the principal building is about one hundred feet wide. In it stand two miniature iron pagodas and a huge bronze incense-burner. This building is one hundred and fifty feet long and seventy feet wide. Two rows of pillars, six in each row, support the imperial yellow and green tile roof. Upon entering this lofty hall we see in the corner to the right an image of the celestial protector, Weit'o; to the left, a large drum over ten feet in diameter, and in the midst of the hall the main altar. At the front door, and over the altar, are curtains beautifully embroidered after patterns evidently very antique. In front of the altar are two brass incense holders, urns for flowers, and eight candle supporters. The tinsel and ornamental accessories upon the altar and images can not be described. Instead of the Three Pure Ones, Shakyamuni, Kaskiapa, and Ananda, upon the raised altar, as in the other Buddhist monasteries, there are here four images of the Goddess of Mercy. The temple being dedicated to this deity, she naturally occupies the most conspicuous place. The four stand in a row from the front of the altar to the rear. The first is the goddess standing. Directly back of her is a large gilt image sitting cross-legged upon a lotus flower. This image was sent from Tibet by the Emperor K'ang Hsi. She is beautifully draped with yellow silk, and wears the crown of the Boddhisattoas. The third stands in sacred reverence with a halo over her masculine head. Behind her is a monstrous male god, supposed to represent the ruler of the monastery, and who is denominated by K'ang Hsi as "The Savior of all Living Beings." All of these images have servants, except the

[p. 68]

male gods. To the right and to the left of this altar are images of Kuo Hai and Sung Tsz, that is, the goddess that crossed the sea, and the giver of children. In place of the Eighteen Lohans (disciples of Buddha) along the east and west walls, there are thirty-two metamorphoses of the goddess, the Lohans being relegated to side chapels.

In a little room adjoining this building a scene of the lower world is represented. A Lohan is sitting upon a one horned sacred ox, which is standing upon a jagged rock. Under the rock is a cave. In the cave an official is holding court. Before him a man is kneeling. The executioner is near with his ax. To the left stands Weit'o, and to the right Ming Wang, the ruler of Hades.

The third building, directly back of the main hall, is exceedingly plain. In the northeast corner is a drum, in the southwest hangs a bell, in the northwest stands a Fu, holding a little pagoda in his hand; on the center altar are the Three Buddhas, all in perfect keeping with the plainness of the whole building. Upstairs, in a hall almost void of furniture, sits a goddess hewn from a precious white stone, found in Southern Tibet, called by the priests pehtsz yu, or white jade. She is loosely draped with a red silk cape, and were it not for the cynical smile playing upon her face, she might be considered a rare beauty. This room also contains the library.

The fourth and last of the temple buildings is even more plainly furnished than the third, but it contains, beyond all doubt, sculpturally, the finest work of art we have seen in China. It is a small image of the goddess, about three feet long, of like material as the one in the library building, a white, watery-looking jade. The image is modestly lying down within a glass case, gracefully resting her head upon her right arm, and is covered with beautifully embroidered red silk--a speaking likeness of the goddess of beauty. Visitors should not fail to look into this hidden compartment.

Near the monastery is a small stone pagoda four stories

[p. 69]

high. It dates from the Ming Dynasty, being dedicated to the Emperor Wang Li, who reigned during the latter part of the sixteenth century, and it is probably the only structure on the island which survived the change of dynasties. The architecture is quite unlike modern Chinese, rather resembling Hindoo art. Twelve images are hewn in the four sides, which are supposed to have control of the elements of nature.

But what interested us more than the beautiful scenery, works of art, and strange legends was, in the first place, to observe the unmistakable keen sense of chastity in their idolatrous worship. Free from all vulgarism and meretricious ornaments, there was not even the suggestion of what might be offensive to the moral sense. However much we may pity the Chinese in their ignorance in worshiping the workmanship of their own hands, we can not help but admire their belief in the purity of their gods. The next point of supreme interest to us was the people who visit these shrines. To see something of their devotion we took passage from Ningpo on a regular pilgrims' sailing boat. Forty-odd persons crowded on to the little barque. The room was quite insufficient for that number to lie down, but for one day and two nights they patiently sat without a murmur or complaint. They had come from various provinces, Chih in the north, Szechuan in the far west, and a goodly number from Hunan. Stoic resignation and privation seemed impressed upon every face, not because of a lack of vitality, but on account of the vows they had taken.

The earliest mention made of this island reaches back to the Liang Dynasty, A.D. 502-556. During the Sung and Yuan Dynasties reports are recorded of building and repairing temples. During the present dynasty special efforts have been put forth, both to beautify the temples and to increase their number, in the belief that the gods may spread great spiritual light. Let all who believe that the worship of the Goddess of Mercy is on the decline visit Poot'oo.

     
Sacred Places in China, by Carl F. Kupfer, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 70]

  

The White Deer Grotto University.

ON the southeastern slope of the Lu Mountains, in a little valley at the junction of the two rippling brooks, one flowing east and the other south, stands one of the oldest universities of which we have any knowledge; Salerno, the oldest European university, not excepted. With Wu lao fung, "five old peaks," standing like parapets on a rampart for the background, and the Poyang Lake winding up the valley beyond the lower undulating hills, it can claim a situation at once attractive and grand. The grotto shows no sign of ever having been a natural cave, being dug into the hillside and arched over with masonry work. It contains the image of a deer hewn out of stone placed there by Ho Tsing in the fourteenth century. According to historical statements it was the studio and home of the illustrious poet Li P'u, who flourished during the T'ang Dynasty in the reign of Cheu Yuan, the latter part of the ninth century. He and his elder brother She made this cave their private home. P'u had a tame white deer which always accompanied his master in his walks over the hills; and thus he was called peh lu sien-seng, "the white deer gentleman," and his residence the cave of the white deer.

During the reign of Pao Li, A.D. 825, P'u was promoted to be sub-prefect at Kiang-chou, now Kiukiang. To perpetuate the memory of his old sequestered-home, he built a kiosk over it, from which time the cave of the white deer became famous. At the end of the T'ang Dynasty, when there was great confusion in the Empire, the scholars from far and near assembled in the cave for research. During these troublous times when five successive dynasties rose and fell in two

[p. 71]

Click to enlarge
THE FAIRY BRIDGE-ENTRANCE TO THE UNIVERSITY CAMPUS

[p. 72]

years (A.D. 805-807), a school was opened here, fields bought, buildings erected, and students gathered. The scholarly Si Shan-tao, who had thoroughly mastered the Nine Canonical Books, was chosen from the Imperial Academy of Learning to be the president of this institution, and it was called the Government School of the Lu Mountains. The institution soon increased in number and influence, and many of the early students became famous in public life. In the year A.D. 960, the institution was raised to the grade of a university, and stood equal in rank and influence with Chi Yong, Shih Ku, and Yo Lao Universities. The attendance of over one hundred students is mentioned at this time.

In the cyclical year Ting-cheo (A.D. 976), during the reign of the two Emperors, T'ai Ping and Hsin Kuah, the sub-prefect of Kiukiang begged the Emperor to present a set of the Nine Canonical Books of the Imperial Academy of Learning Edition; this modest request was granted, and the books were sent to the cave by the government postal service.

The institution passed through various changes, more failures than successes following each other, until the cyclical year Chi-hai (1174) in the Sung Dynasty, and the reign of Shun Hsi, when the great philosopher and expositor of the Confucian Canon, Chu Hui-ngan, became the prefect of Nang-k'angfu. No sooner had he arrived than he ordered the official director of students to proceed at once to the cave and investigate conditions. Later he personally went there and carefully looked all the property over, whereupon he sent a message to the President of the Board of Works, informing him that the building might be repaired, and also reminded. him that the White Deer Grotto was a place where the former worthies had concealed themselves, and where students had been supported by previous dynasties, which favors should not be forgotten. In pathetic terms he appealed for help: "The buildings are falling down, and the prefect can not but take the burden of repairs upon himself; he has measured

[p. 73]

the place and calculated the expenses. Why should he do this? Because the name of this institution is recorded in the national annals."

After a lapse of time he sent another message to the Senior Secretary of the Board and to the Minister of State, begging to be appointed President of University, and to ask for some grants to be bestowed. If this could be done, he would be asking for no other favor in his life than to be allowed to study with his students until death. He also pointed out how much better this would be than to add glory to the heterodox priests who only burn incense and do nothing for the good of mankind nor for their food and clothing. And he further pleads that this institution receive recognition as well as Yu Lao University and a tablet be bestowed naming it the White Deer Grotto University, and that some parts of the classics be written upon this stone tablet by the Emperor Kow Tsun himself. It is well known that at this time the publication of the Classics of Confucius and Mencius was forbidden, in consequence of which education had also fallen to a low ebb, and all classes, the officials and common people, complained of this, feeling deeply chagrined. When Chu Hui-ngan was acting as Inspector of the State Department, he had an audience with the Emperor, and he again made a plea for more liberal education. Said he: "The Taoist and Buddhist temples are built everywhere. In the provincial capital there are more than one hundred, in every prefecture several tens, all well established publicly and privately, and yet there is desire for more; while there is only one school or college open in a prefecture, and small districts have none. Thus temples are prosperous, while schools and colleges are neglected; temples are numerous, while schools and colleges are few. Why this inequality? Is it not wrong that the civil authorities do not make this right, and that they even look upon any information with suspicion? If this continues the Grotto University will soon be despised

[p. 74]

by the common people, and not be kept open unless an Imperial Tablet be bestowed. Is it not the way by which your Majesty can praise your meritorious predecessors and do the scholars a favor? This I venture to beg at the hazard of my life." When the Emperor Hsiao Tsung heard this he granted the request; but the tablet did not assure the institution perpetual peace and blessings. At the end of the following dynasty--the Yuan--it was cast out into the brushwood during a commotion, and not until the sixth Emperor of the Ming Dynasty was it found and replaced.

History does not clearly state how long Chu Fu-tsz labored here, but hereditary legend claims that he spent the rest of his life in this institution, and was buried in the shady grove back of the college. The legend also pretends to know the origin of his superhuman wisdom. When he came to live at the grotto, a hu li sien, "fox-fairy," in the likeness of a young woman, came to live with him and serve him. She brought with her a pearl of great value, and insisted upon Chu swallowing it. After long persuasion he yielded to her entreaties, and the pearl became in him the fountain of wisdom, such as is not possessed by mortal man. Soon after this a ka ma sien," frog-fairy," also in the likeness of a young woman, came to dwell with him. But alas, the women did not live together long in peace. In an altercation the last arrival said, "And who are you but a fox?" Replied the other, "And what are you but a frog?" The next day the two fairies were missing, and a dead fox and a dead frog were found lying under the old bridge below the college. They were buried with due ceremony in the college grove, where a little stone marks their resting place, to the credulous belief of the student and admirer of Chu Fu-tsz.

A visit to this historical spot is least desirable in summer, when the students are here from all parts of the central provinces; during the Chinese New Year vacation it is a pleasure and profit. If a well-informed student can be secured

[p. 75]

Click to enlarge
UNIVERSITY BUILDINGS.

[p. 76]

as guide, much that seems to have no significance becomes interesting. Being thus provided, we left Kiukiang two days before the New Year, early in the morning, and arrived there late in the evening. A young man from Fou lan hsien, an unsophisticated youth, who had never seen a foreigner, was the only dweller within these walls. He had come here to spend the holidays, having heard that a man having done so the year before, worshiping Confucius on New Year's Day, took his degree at the next competitive examination. On the morning of the last day of the old year he walked five miles to Nank'ang to buy candles and incense, and that night and the following one he kept them burning upon all the altars in those labyrinthian rooms. He was radiant with hope.

If the present condition of this institution is a criterion of the state of the religion it stands for, then Confucianism is in a most hopeless and woeful plight. It is an institution without a recognized president or faculty, without a Board of Trustees, or even a janitor. The tipao was said to be in charge, but during three days' stay we did not see him. The director of the literary class of Nank'ang, having heard of our arrival, called upon us, but he did not assume any responsibility. The students seem to be a law unto themselves. They bring their own cooking utensils with them and build a little hearth for their private use; some unite in clubs. This explains the dilapidated condition of the buildings; whole sections of the wooden partition being broken out and used for fuel. Over some parts the roof is crushed in, and weeds are flourishing in the rooms. The memorial tablets, of which there are many, have sagged in all directions, and many have fallen down and are broken. It is now nothing more than a quiet place for students to hide away from the disturbances of home life, and so be better able to prosecute their private studies.

The Literary Assembly Hall is a large, substantial building, but entirely void of all furniture, there being not even a scroll to decorate the black walls. But the learner here

[p. 77]

Click to enlarge
THE CONFUCIAN ALTAR.

The Image of Confucius, veiled with red curtains, is here dimly seen. In front is the altar where all professors and students of this institution have worshiped. The curtains are moth-eaten and the altar is a rendezvous for bats.

Click to enlarge
THE CHIEF DISCIPLES OF CONFUCIUS.

Click to enlarge
MENCIUS.

[p. 78]

stands face to face with the eight virtues which are indelibly inscribed in large, bold characters upon stone slabs set in the walls:

Hsiao--Filial Piety.

Ti--Respect of younger brothers.

Chung--Loyalty.

Hsin--Sincerity.

Li--Propriety.

I--Righteousness.

Lien--Purity.

Chih--The feeling of shame.

On the inside of the back door of this hall is written an amplification by Chu Fu-tsz on the Five Relations as taught by Mencius; upon these Chu based his Rules of Order: "Between father and son there should be affection; between sovereign and minister righteousness; between husband and wife attention to their separate duties; and between old and young respect; and between friends fidelity." These are the instructions regarding the five relations, and the observing of them was also enforced by Yao and Shun, who appointed Su to be the minister of instruction and to teach carefully the relations of humanity. The students should learn them in the following regular order: Study them extensively, enquire about them accurately, reflect upon them carefully, discriminate clearly, and practice earnestly; such is the order of learning: study, enquire, reflect, and discriminate thoroughly by examining the principles. To practice earnestly refers to the cultivation of moral conduct, the managing of business affairs, and the making acquaintance with others.

"In regard to the cultivation of moral conduct, the most important thoughts are: let the words be sincere and truthful, the actions honorable and careful, the anger restrained, and the lust chastened. Reform and be good.

"In regard to the managing of business affairs two things are necessary, the action must be orderly without scheming

[p. 79]

to gain profit, and the doctrine must be thoroughly understood without counting too much the toil in getting the mastery of it.

"In regard to making acquaintance with others, the important part to be remembered is: not to do to others as you would not wish others to do to you; and when you do not realize what you need, then turn inward and examine yourselves in every point.

"We learn that ancient worthies instructed men to investigate the principles of righteousness and to cultivate a moral conduct by which they might influence others. They did not merely wish men to commit to memory, write compositions, by which they might gain fame,' vaunt themselves and gain profit. But the student of the present time (the days of Chu Fu-tsz) do not follow the methods of instruction as taught by the ancient worthies. Let the students who have earnest thoughts give due attention, inquire and discriminate. If one knows what ought to be done and forces himself to do it, will he not eventually know intuitively what his duties are without rules of order? The rules which have been established are for students of a lower grade than those of ancient times. And as the methods of the present day students do not agree with those of the ancients, I do not put the rules of ancient methods in this hall, but on the lintels of the door. Those important subjects which the ancient worthies taught, I myself will investigate and follow with all the students, and we will force ourselves to practice them. Moreover, we will endeavor to be even more rigid and careful what we are thinking, speaking, and doing, than these subjects require of us. And those who are inclined to abrogate and neglect these regulations should at least try to follow them. May all think of my words over and over again!"

Among the numerous other inscriptions upon walls, lintels, and tablets, we would only mention one. It is composed of four characters, but when verbally translated it teaches

[p. 80]

volumes of truth in practical life: Yu T'ien Ti T'san, "with the heavenly earthly is mixed." However, the Confucianist sees a very different meaning in this inscription. He reads from it: "The virtue of Confucius is equal to heaven and earth."

In a little room in front of the Confucian Temple is enshrined a tutelar god. Upon inquiring why this wayside shrine was in this unusual place, we were informed that this room had become noted for the remarkable success which all students who had studied here had met with in their examinations--all having taken high degrees. In consequence of this inexplicable favor conferred upon all who studied here, there was a great rush every season for its occupancy, and when quarreling and even murder ensued, it was relegated to an idol, and no student was allowed to study there. The propitiousness of this room is ascribed to an idol--a literary god--standing in a little pavilion across the brook. This idol is facing the college and is holding a pencil in his right hand, and this pencil points directly to that room, and guides the pen of the favored student to supernatural success.

Another evidence that these Confucian scholars are far from being free of the belief in idols and images is clearly seen in the Confucian Temple located in the midst of the college buildings. In the main hall of this building are large images of Confucius, Mencius, and fifteen of the most famous disciples of Confucius. And what is not seen even at a Buddhist temple there are here four gods standing on the top of the roof, two looking northward, and two southward. In the room in front of the grotto is also a large image of Chu Fu-tsz.

"Scarce can the classic pilgrim sweep free
    From fallen architrave the desert vine,
  Trace the dim names of their divinity;
    Gods of the ruined temples, where, O where are ye?"

     
Sacred Places in China, by Carl F. Kupfer, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 81]

  

The Mandarin's Grave.

FIFTEEN li, or about five English miles, southeast of Kiukiang, near the foot of the Lu Mountains, and on the southwestern slope of the Oak Tree Hill, is the grave of the celebrated Chou Fu Tsz, called in Chinese Lien Chi Mu, Lienchi being the name of his birthplace. To foreigners this place has become a beautiful spot for an afternoon excursion; but to the more devout Chinese it is a sacred sanctuary. If beauty of scenery and balmy air can add anything to the peaceful repose of departed spirits when they see their "mortal coil" surrounded by such lavish gifts of nature, then Chou Fu Tsz can certainly have nothing to regret for having chosen this location. Sheltered from the northern winds, nestled in a little amphitheater-like valley, surrounded by huge trees of many centuries' growth, with the five thousand feet mountain peaks looming up into the clouds, and the Lotus Flower Peak near by, what more could immortal shades desire? Beautiful as it is by nature, the aesthetic taste of man has added much to its picturesque harmony.

Chou Fu Tsz was a native of Hunan, born in Lienchi in the Sung Dynasty in the year 1017 A.D. He was commonly known as Chou Tsz and spoken of as Lien Chi Sienseng, the gentleman from Lienchi. When he was but a child his father died, and his mother was so poor that she brought him to her brothers, whose family name was Chen. When his mother died, she was buried by the side of her brothers' graves. Forty-four years later these graves were destroyed by a flood, and Chou Fu Tsz removed his mother's remains to their present resting place. Two years after this he died, and was buried on the left side of his mother's grave.

[p. 82]

In the year 1488 a prefect of Kiukiang named Tung built an ancestral hall near by and endowed it with real estate property. Fourteen years later a Literary Chancellor named Shao Pao invited the members of the Chou family to worship at this hall.

Within the amphitheater a mound is raised. On top of this mound are the graves, apparently under one cover, shaped like a tortoise. In front of this tortoise-shaped cover five tablets are erected. The middle and largest one is dedicated to his mother, who received the posthumous title usually conferred upon native women of "Taichun." At the upper end of this tablet the two words Tao Ma are engraved (The Source of the Doctrine).

To his mother's left is a tablet containing an inscription written by Peng Yu-lin, the celebrated admiral of the Yangtze: "This is the grave of the Ancient Worthy Lien Chi Chou Tsz of the Sung Dynasty, who received posthumous honors and was named Yuen Kung."

To the left of this is another tablet containing an engraving of Chou Fu Tsz, without date or name of author. How near it resembles the worthy sage no one can tell.

The tablet to his mother's right is in honor of his two wives. His first wife was of the family Leo, the second of the family Chih. It is, however, worthy of mention that they were not his wives contemporaneously. It is believed that polygamy was less popular in those dark mediaeval days than it is now.

On the tablet to the extreme right a beautiful vine is artistically carved into the side and upper part of the stone. Under the vine a boy and girl are standing. They are called Chin Tung and Yu Nu, and are supposed to be the beings who serve as guides to departed spirits over the No-Alternative Bridge--in Purgatory--which all spirits must cross.

Back of the grave is a wall built in the  of a horseshoe, reaching round to the front. In this wall three stone

[p. 83]

Click to enlarge
CHOU FU TSZ.

[p. 84]

tablets are set. The middle and larger one was erected by Peng Yu-lin, and contains the following inscription: "Southeast of Kinkiang, below the Lotus Flower Peak, is the grave of Lien Chi Sienseng. In the spring of the fifth year of Hsien Feng (1856 A.D.), I, with Li Se-ping, brought soldiers to Kiukiang. When we had time we came to this grave to worship. This place was Chou's own choice, and his mother's grave is in the middle. When he died he was buried to his mother's left, and his wives to her right. We found their graves badly dilapidated, so we bought stones and had them repaired. A government student, a corporal, and a descendant of the twenty-second generation of Chou's family managed the repairs. In one month the work was completed.

"That we have had such men as Chou is proof that the doctrine of the ancient Sages still flourishes. If after Confucius and Mencius no other holy men had come, the people under heaven would have followed after temporal honors and riches, and have become idlers like Buddhist priests, none searching the Doctrine of the Ancient Worthies. During the two turbulent periods (from 420 to 554 A.D.) when six dynasties rose and fell (and from 907 to 960) when five dynasties followed in rapid succession, the calamities of the people were great. All because the people of those times did not know or follow the Doctrine of the Ancients. But at last a holy man was born in Hunan--Chou Fu Tsz came. Having no one to instruct him, he devoted himself to private study and meditation, and then wrote the Ting Shu, a calendar advising the people how to do and act according to the Doctrine of the Ancients. Then the people began to understand the teaching of Confucius and Mencius. His instruction was profoundly deep, and also practical for the moral improvement of the people. As he understood the doctrine, others also were kept from error. The teaching in the Kingdom was corrected, the Government again began to flourish, and the evil in the land ceased to prevail. If all would practice the doctrine of benevolence

[p. 85]

Click to enlarge
CROSSING THE BRIDGE OF FATE--NO ALTERNATIVE.

[p. 86]

and righteousness as Chou did, applying it to their person, virtue would be secured, and in the affairs of life peace assured, and there would be culture among the officials and prosperity among the people. To save from calamity is as if saving from disease. If the constitution is sound and healthy the evil influences of disease can not come upon man. Thus Chou's doctrine was more and more appreciated, as he influenced his times by thinking of and teaching refinement."

On the tablet to the left of this is the following inscription in bold characters: "The Grave of the Nankang Prefect Lien Chi Sienseng. Erected first year of Chia Ching (1522 A.D.) by Kao Yao-ching, Prefect of Nank'angfu."

But the tablet to the right attracts the attention of the visitor above everything else to be seen here. It is called the "T'ai Kih Tao" (the Chart of the Absolute). This inscription is intended to set forth in picture and word the cosmogony of Chou Fu Tsz. A satisfactory translation of this inscription is not an easy task. As very few of the native scholars know anything of the philosophy it purports to advance, a foreigner is sometimes obliged to resort to conjecture, hence we can not claim this to be more than a free translation: "From the U-kih the Infinite to the T'ai kih the Absolute. The Absolute moved and brought forth light, the male principle. Again it moved with greater rapidity and then stood quiet, which brought forth darkness, the female principle. Then the Absolute again moved and the movement and repose were denominated 'Yang' (light) and 'Ying' (darkness). In the Eight Diagrams the symbol of light, or positive principle, consists of a single line, thus --. The symbol of darkness; negative principle consists of a broken line, thus - -. Then light united with darkness and brought forth the five elements: fire, water, earth, metal, and wood. The five vapors--rain, sunshine, heat, cold, and wind--appeared and kept in harmony with the seasons. These elements contained darkness and light caused by the Absolute; and the Absolute

[p. 87]

also contained the five vapors. The Infinite united in deepest mystery with the five elements and the five vapors, and they firmly congealed.

"The Way of Heaven caused the male principle. The Way of Earth caused the female principle. These two acted upon each other and produced the innumerable living creatures. But man endowed by the grace of heaven, the most sagacious, has received a body that contains the functions of five senses and wisdom that enables him to distinguish good from evil. The holy man controls all these in himself and can not be easily disturbed, thus establishing a perfect man. Hence the virtue of the holy man is as great as heaven and earth, and his wisdom as clear as the sun and moon; and as the seasons are regular in their succession, so there is order in all that he does. He knows as if by intuition how to conform his actions so as to obtain the good and avoid the evil. He practices the doctrines in all benevolence and righteousness. As it has been said, if one gives thought to his beginning and end, he can know of life and death. Thus the Doctrine of the Changes is perfect above all other doctrines."

The Doctrine of the Changes referred to in this inscription is the "I King" (Canon of Changes), containing a fanciful system of divination from the combination of diagrams, mysterious in the extreme, called the Eight Diagrams. That this book was extant as far back as history can lead us, there can be no doubt. In the Confucian Analects VII, 14, Confucius says: "If some years were added to my life I would give fifty to the study of the 'I' (Canon of Changes), and might then escape falling into a great error." Such was the faith of the great Sage in the Doctrine of Changes. Hearing of a man here in Kiukiang who is reported to understand the mysteries of the "I," I sent word to him for a little explanation of the Chart of the Absolute, and he replied, "If the gentleman who desires this information is willing to spend a lifetime in studying the 'I,' then he will understand it." As

[p. 88]

the prime of my days is passed, I will not try to master this mysterious monument of antiquity.

Approaching the grave from the entrance, there are two tablets standing below the mound, one to the right and the other to the left. The one to the right is a small moss-covered slab containing the following inscription:

"Chou Fu Tsz deduced his philosophy from the Eight Diagrams, which the Emperor Fu Hsi discovered on the back of a tortoise. The philosopher I Loh is said to have perfected this doctrine. The hills are bare, and man is dead. So the stream vainly flows. For whom is the grass over the grave so beautiful? In the evening it spreads over the ground, and the chilly air makes us sad. (Signed) Li Pa-yang, Prefect of Kiukiang, 1573 A.D." The Emperor Fu Hsi mentioned in this inscription is supposed to have lived 2838 B.C., being the first of the Five Legendary Emperors. He is claimed to have been of miraculous birth, a native of Shan si.

To the left stands a larger tablet, erected by Peng Yu-lin, Admiral of the Yangtze, with this inscription:

"Lienchi Chou Tsz is our Hunan, Taochou man. His grave is below the Oak Tree Hill. In the seventh year of Kwang Hsu (1882), when I was Admiral of the Yangtze, I came to Kiukiang with the Chentai and magistrate of Hu-kou, and we worshiped at the grave. When I saw that our previous repairs were not substantial, I gave money and ordered the Chentai to repair it and build the horseshoe-shaped wall back of the grave, and make a broader entrance. I examined the historic annals of the Sung Dynasty, and found that Chou Fu Tsz's mother's grave, originally at Renchou in Hunan, had been destroyed by a flood, and Chou Fu Tsz had begged the Prefect of Nank'ang to have his mother's grave removed to this place. After this he himself became Prefect of Nankang, and built a home at Lien hwa fung. Two years later he died and was buried to his mother's left. His wives

[p. 89]

Click to enlarge
CHART OF THE ABSOLUTE.

[p. 90]

are to her right. This can be seen in the official annals of K'anghsi.

"During the Sung Dynasty this place was called Tehhwa Village, with an altar called the Clear Water Shrine. In the year 1215, eighth year of the Emperor Chia Ting of the Southern Sung Dynasty, a minister of state named Wei Liao-wang, passed here and worshiped. When he arrived at the palace in Peking he begged of the Emperor to grant Chou posthumous honors. This was done, and Chou received the name Yuen Kung. In the Ming Dynasty, during the reign of Hung Chih (1490 A.D.), the Prefect of Kiukiang built an ancestral hall near the grave, and named it Yuen Kung Chou Siensing. So I now write with due honors: `The Ancient Worthy Yuen Kung Lienchi Chou Fu Tsz Mu.' This is in accord with ancient propriety. But to repair his grave and worship him is of no benefit to any one, if he does not receive his doctrine. If all who pass here will honor him and follow his example, then his teaching will not have been in vain.

"Now, since the work of repairs is completed, I write these words of commendation, that the chief points of his life may be held in remembrance. All who have aided in these repairs shall have their names inscribed on the opposite of this tablet.

"Done in the tenth year, third moon of Kwang Hsu (April, 1885). Peng Yu-lin."

About two miles northwest of the grave there was a school. Lienchi Chou Fu Tsz loving the sight of the mountains and the fresh water, had a home here. In the year 1850 there was a great flood in the Yangtze Valley, and this home perished, and with it the last material remembrance of this noted man disappeared; but his name will be held in high esteem by his countrymen for ages to come.

The classic pilgrim who desires to visit this shrine will find it on his way to Kuling, five li from Shihlipu, turning to the left at this village.

[p. 91]

Click to enlarge
CHANG TIENSZ LXII, POPE OF THE TAOIST RELIGION.

Click to enlarge
SHANG TSING KUNG--RESIDENCE CITY OF THE POPE.

     
Sacred Places in China, by Carl F. Kupfer, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 92]

  

Lung-Hu Shan--The Dragon-Tiger Mountain.

WHEREVER in China this mountain is mentioned, whether in Kiang-si or in the most distant province, every one knows what it stands for. Just as much as Rome is known to all Catholics to be the home of the Pope of the Roman Catholic Church, so all Chinese know that the Pope of the Taoist Religion has his residence here. It was to this mountain retreat that Chang Taoling, the first Pope of the Taoist Religion, was directed in the first century of the Christian era. He had retired into seclusion in the mountains of Western China, devoting himself wholly to meditation and the study of alchemy. From the hands of Laotze, the founder of the Taoist Religion, who had lived six hundred years before him, he supernaturally received a mystic treatise by which he was enabled to compound the elixir of life. When manipulating this elixir of the dragon and tiger he met a spirit who said to him, "In the Pesung Mountain is a stone house where the writings of the Three Emperors and a liturgical book may be found. By getting these you can ascend to heaven, if you pass through the discipline which they enjoin." He came. He dug and found them. By means of these he was instructed how to discipline himself for a thousand days, and was then able to leave his body and walk among the stars and fight with the king of demons, divide mountains and seas, and command storm and thunder to obey him. All the demons fled before him, leaving not a trace of their retreating footsteps. On account of the prodigious slaughter of demons by this hero, various divinities came with eager haste to acknowledge their faults.

The Pesung Mountain is a harp-shaped section of the

[p. 93]

range that runs from northeast to southwest, separating the Kiangsi province from Fukien. Between this mountain and Shan Sing Kung, the Pope's resident town, a river as clear as crystal is clamoring for the Poyang Lake, where its pure water is soon tainted with the impurities of that body.

The latter years of the mystic earthly experience of Chang Taoling were spent on the -Tiger Mountains, and it was there, where at the age of 123 years, after having compounded and swallowed the grand elixir, that he had gained power to ascend to heaven to enjoy, the bliss of immortality.

Six hundred years before this (B.C. 604) Laotsze, the founder of the Taoist Religion, was born in the province of Honan. Lao Tsze means Old Boy, and doubtless was given him because at his birth his face is said to have been wrinkled and his hair gray like an aged man of seventy. Very little is known of his early life. He preferred solitude and quiet, and early withdrew from the busy haunts of man. When Confucius was quite a young man and in search of the Tao--the word--he came to the aged philosopher and said, "I have sought for the Tao for twenty years." Laotsze replied, "If the Tao could be offered to men, there is no one who would not be willing to offer it to his prince; if it could be presented to men, everybody would like to present it to his parents; if it could be announced to men, each man would gladly announce it to his brothers; if it could be handed down to men, who would not wish to transmit it to his children? Why then can you not obtain it h This is the reason. You are incapable of giving it a resting place in your heart." The young philosopher may not have relished or fully understood the instruction he received, for he came back to his disciples and said, "To-day I have seen Laotsze, and I can only compare him with the Dragon." Even to us he seems mysterious as the mystical animal; but we can not read the sayings of this pagan philosopher without feeling that there is a vital, restful

[p. 94]

Click to enlarge
LUNG HU SHAN--THE DRAGON-TIGER MOUNTAIN.

[p. 95]

Click to enlarge
CONTINUATION OF LUNG HU SHAN.

Here is where Chang Taoling, at the age of one hundred and twenty-three, ascended to the heavens to enjoy the bliss of immortality, and in this temple is his image in life size, where all the popes have worshiped.

[p. 96]

strength and wonderful spirit manifested here that does not exist in other Chinese literature. Mystical and apt spiritual simplicity and universal wisdom is here expressed. It seems to come from a heart that has been touched by divine revelation. A few quotations from his wonderful work, the Tao Teh King, convinces one that he must have been not only a great and good man, but an inspired man. He doubtless had some conception of Him who was promised by the Prophets. Note these quotations, and compare them with what the beloved disciple of Christ said of the Logos: "Its name may be named, but it is not an ordinary name. Its nameless period preceded the birth of the universe. Having a name it is the mother of all things. The Tao is full, yet it operates as though not self-elated. In its origin it is, as it were, the ancestor of all things. I know not whose offspring it is. Its form existed before God was (by the term "God," as used in Chinese literature, is understood the First Ruler, or the Highest Ruler). It is mysterious, recondite, and penetrating. Pellucid as a spreading ocean, it yet has the semblance of permanence. There was something formed from chaos which came into being before heaven and earth. Silent and boundless it stands alone, and never changes. It pervades everything, and may be called the mother of the universe. I know not its name, but its designation is Tao. Heaven is Tao, and Tao survives the death of him who is the embodiment of it, living on unharmed forever. The Tao of heaven never strives, yet excells in victory. The Tao of heaven resembles a drawn bow. It brings down the high and exalts the lowly; it takes from those who have superfluity, and gives to those who have not enough. The great Tao is all-pervasive; it may be seen on the right and on the left. All things depend upon it and are produced by it; it denies itself to none. With tenderness it nourishes all things, yet claims no lordship over them."

The philosopher Huai Nantsze, an adherent of Lao Tsz's

[p. 97]

Click to enlarge
CHANG TIENSZ LXII, POPE OF THE TAOIST RELIGION, AND FAMILY.

[p. 98]

philosophy, commenting on the Tao, described it thus: "Tao is that which covers heaven and supports earth; its height can not be measured, nor its depth fathomed; it enfolds the universe in its embrace. The Tao reaches upward to heaven and touches the earth beneath; it holds together the universe and the ages, and supplies the three luminaries with light. It is by the Tao that mountains are high and abysses deep; that beasts walk and birds fly; that the sun and moon are bright and the stars revealed in their courses; that the unicorn roams about and the phoenix hovers in the air. Tao is the beginning and end of the visible creation. Tao, in its sublimest aspect, regards itself as the author of creation, the power which completes, transforms, and gives all things their shape. All-pervading and everywhere revolving, yet can not be sought out; subtle and impalpable, it yet can not be overlooked. If it be piled up it will not be high; if it be added to it will not increase; if it be deducted from it will not diminish. Shadowy and indistinct, it has no form. Indistinct and shadowy, its resources have no limit. Hidden and obscure, it reinforces all things out of formlessness. Penetrating and permeating everywhere, it never acts in vain. Utterly non-existent, Tao is yet ever ready to respond to those who seek it."

Let one more quotation of Laotsze suffice. It is his conception of the ideal man, and I would pronounce it the brightest gem in pagan philosophy. "The ideal man recompenses injury with kindness." This is equal to the crowning glory of Christianity, return of good for evil.

That this great wizard chose this locality in those early days, and all succeeding popes dwelt here, is not surprising. The scenery is prodigiously picturesque, indeed, it is enchanting. Doubtless those children of nature in their imagination saw the mountains leaping like lambs. I have traveled in many lands, and have seen beautiful natural scenery, but nowhere have I ever seen a place where nature has been so lavish in bestowing her charms than in this mountain retreat. Nature

[p. 99]

truly has done her part well. But what contrast do we find when we inspect the works of man!

At the foot of the Dragon-Tiger Mountain, on the southeastern slope stands a temple, at the place where Chang Tao-ling is supposed to have ascended the throne on high. This temple, at one time doubtless a most costly structure, and though housing the image of such an honored personage and the place where the chief of a great world religion worships, is in a most dilapidated condition, the rendezvous of beggars and bats, in charge of a lonely old woman whose husband had died a year before, but in his coffin was yet standing in her living room. A few copper cash soon relaxed her stern attitude, and she freely permitted us to visit the sacred shrine with the one reserve that we do not photograph the altar and the image, lest we carry away his spirit. No persuasion or offer of money would induce her to grant us that liberty.

To Chang Taoling is attributed the honor of having invented the charms which in all parts of China are seen posted on door lintels, and are believed to drive away demons and all invisible malevolent beings. A proof of the dominating idea of popular Taoism throughout the land.

But the most renowned temple is about five miles northeast of this mountain, near to Shan-sing-kung, the town where the pope has his palace. Here, in a beautiful amphitheater-shaped valley, is a large group of temples. In these temple grounds are numerous stone tablets bearing inscriptions of ancient writers. These descriptions, however, are so defaced by the tooth of time that the deciphering of them is almost impossible. The center of this group is the Chief Hall, containing a colossal image of Yu Hwang-ti--the Pearly Emperor. He is emperor of all immortals. All the power of heaven and earth are supposed to be in his hands. Nothing is said of the time when he was on earth. His birthday and heaven's birthday are the same. To the Taoist worshiper he is the Supreme Ruler of the Universe. Dethrone him and

[p. 100]

[paragraph continues] Taoist image worship is demolished. To him and before his altar all the popes of the Taoist religion have prostrated and done homage.

In February, 1910, it was my privilege to visit this modern Wizard Chang Tientsze, the Heavenly teacher, who is a direct descendant of Chang Taoling, and who can boast of an unbroken lineage of sixty-two generations. To reach this mountain retreat the Poyang Lake had to be crossed as far as Yao Chou-foo, a distance of about ninety miles. This was done in a little steam yacht. One of our theological students served me as photographer. At Hu Keo, the Mouth of the Lake, an official joined us in our little compartment. We soon became acquainted with each other. When he had learned that we came from William Nast College, he became interested in our object of traveling at this unfriendly season. I told him because it was New Year's vacation, and that I had long since had a desire to see the Pope of the Taoist Religion, the man who is believed to have such magical power to exorcise demons and malevolent spirits. A forced smile flit across his stoical face when he replied, "In former years we did believe that he could do this, but very few people believe this now." "However," he continued after a little thought, "there is something remarkably strange about this man; he can control the lightning and thunder." Strange combination of doubt and faith. The only explanation seems that the educated official, as a Confucianist, is a materialist, and as such does not want to admit belief in the absurd popular idea of evil spirits wandering through the air disturbing the public tranquillity, but does not hesitate to admit his belief in the power of nature and the Pope's ability to subdue and control it. His unbelief in the one and his belief in the other did not, however, lessen my curiosity to meet the great Magician, the Chief of one of the great religions of the world. Upon my arrival after four days of traveling, on the evening before the last day of the year, I sent my card to the Papal Residence,

[p. 101]

Click to enlarge
TEMPLE OF THE PEARLY EMPEROR,
 To whom is entrusted the superintendency of the world.

Click to enlarge
STONE TABLETS WITH INSCRIPTIONS OF ANCIENT TIMES.

[p. 102]

and asked for an interview the next day. Inquiry was made as to the purpose of my visit and my official relation. I replied that I was holding no official relation to my country, and had no official business, but was a humble missionary and had come from a far country, and it being the last day of the year I wished to see the great man and offer him my New Year's congratulations. That seemed quite sufficient reason to admit a stranger from a strange land, and arrangements were made for the interview on the next morning. In due time I made my appearance, when the center doors, dividing the departments, were thrown open wide, the doorkeeper walking ahead holding my card in his outstretched hand. Having passed through four divisions we reached the official palace. Here we were ushered into a well-furnished reception room where, in a few moments, his excellency appeared. He is a tall, handsome middle-aged man, was dressed in the ordinary costume of a high-class Chinese scholar, and most pleasant and congenial; well-informed in all things that were of vital interest to the Asiatic people; by no means a recluse. He is the husband of two wives, and father of one daughter and three sons. By all the Taoist priests throughout the land he is recognized as the Commander-in-chief of the Taoist religion, wielding an immense spiritual power in the entire Empire. His name is on every lip, and he is believed to be the vicegerent on earth of the Pearly Emperor in heaven, and as such he has power to expel demons from haunted houses. To accomplish this he wields the sword that is said to have come down to him as a priceless heirloom from his ancestors of the Han Dynasty. All demons fear this sword, and when the great magician wields it he can catch them and put them into jars which he seals with a charm. It is said that somewhere on the Dragon-Tiger Mountain there are many rows of such jars, holding incarcerated evil spirits. Personally I did not find these jars. The efficacy of a charm is supposed to be greatly increased by the magical gift of the

[p. 103]

Click to enlarge
A BAMBOO GROVE NEAR CHANG TAOLING'S TEMPLE.
 

[p. 104]

pope from whom it is obtained, hence to secure his service is very expensive. His title Chen-ren, that is "the, ideal," "the true," "the perfect man," means a man who has the power to rule over himself and over nature. Being the chief official on earth representing the Pearly Emperor in heaven, he has the privilege to address memorials to him. His dwelling is denominated as the Chen-ren-foo. The ideal man's home.

Having learned that I was a missionary, he seemed the more delighted to see me. In speaking of our Church, he made a rather ambiguous remark. "I do not see," said he, "why your people and our people should not live together in pleasant harmony, for our aim is the same; we are working for the same end." At the time I could not understand his remark, and being his guest I did not pretend to question his well-meant assertion of our common aim in life. When I returned to the Home of the China Inland Mission, where a native Christian woman was doing effective evangelistic work, I told her what Chang Tientsze had said about our relation to each other. She immediately understood what influenced him to make this remark, and told me the following story:

A few months before a rich Cantonese woman, accompanied by a great retinue, came to the Pope for treatment. She was ailing of an incurable malady, supposed to be demon possession. The Pope soon took in the situation, and pronounced her case very difficult of treatment. So serious did he claim it to be, that nothing less than Tls. 3,000, which is equal to $1,100 United States currency, would suffice to undertake the cure. When the bargain was concluded, the treatment was begun. In the meantime a poor woman came to be treated who was suffering of insomnia. When the Pope heard of her presence he sent word that he was too busily engaged in fulfilling a contract with another person, he had no time to spare. The poor woman, however, had entered the first door and found shelter under a little roof by the side wall. The Christian Evangelist woman, having heard of the

[p. 105]

pitiable condition of the poor woman, came to see her, but being known as an evangelist worker, was not permitted to enter there and do that kind of work. The poor woman receiving no help here under the roof of the Perfect Man, went to the Temple where the Pearly Emperor had his shrine. Having received no mercy from the Vicegerent, she hoped to move the compassion of the Ruler of Heaven himself. The, evangelist woman also found her there and saw her kneeling before the great image worshiping. Approaching her with the tenderness of a mother, she said to her, "What is your trouble, and why are you here in agony?" The poor woman told the sad story of her life, her ailment, and her disappointment at the Heavenly Teacher's palace. The evangelist woman said, "Whatever you may ask of this renowned image, be assured you ask in vain; it is only wood as other wood, and can not help you. We worship the true God, the Creator of all, and His Son Christ our 'Savior, the Redeemer of all. Believe in Him and you shall be saved. I know not your ailment, but He is mighty to save and present everywhere." The woman remained in the temple and began to pray to the unknown God, of whom she had heard for the first time. That night she slept like a child, the first sleep she had had for years, sleeplessness having been her ailment. The following day the evangelist again went to the temple and found the woman calm and at rest. She invited her to the chapel, where she heard more of the Savior who had saved her and given her rest. She was healed. The Pope heard of this, and was not a little discomfited, thinking the evangelist woman had learned his art of exorcising the evil spirits, and thus healed the woman who in vain appealed to him for help because she had brought him no earthly goods. Hence he inferred that our work and his must be the same. Now I understood his remarks.

In the conversation I told him of our educational work at William Nast College in Kiukiang, and the advantage of

[p. 106]

such a learning to the young men of China. When he heard that non-adherents to the Christian religion were admitted, he concluded that one of his boys must have a Western learning. Of course we can hardly expect that the eldest son would be given this privilege, for he will be the future Pope, and a Taoist Pope with a Christian education would be like a combination of darkness and light. However, we shall consider it as a divine guidance if we succeed in getting either of the younger boys. Before we left the town a distant relative decided to go with us as a student to the college. Thus a little beginning is made to break into this stronghold of spiritual darkness. A little light ignited here may work wonders to a benighted people.

According to Oriental custom, he returned my call on the following day. Upon this occasion he was clad in the garment of a high official of State. His Canonical robes, made of the finest gold and silver embroidery, are only worn when engaged in the functions of his official duties as the great Magician.

    
Sacred Places in China, by Carl F. Kupfer, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 107]

  

Conclusions.

THE places described in this little volume represent the centers of religious life among the three religions of the great Imperial Kingdom. The time spent in visiting these places gives one an entirely new view of the relation of the religious systems of China to each other, and the hold they have upon the people. Strange as it may be, we find them opposing each other, and yet closely interlocked in silent partnership, of which even the Government is not excluded. Of course, in an Imperial Kingdom which numbers its inhabitants by hundreds of millions, with dialects, temperament, endeavors, and beliefs so different and varied, it is expected to find the greatest possible religious tolerance. And this is here true in-as-far as the principles of the different religious systems are in harmony with the statutes of the Government. For example, the reigning dynasty gave to the religious systems which they found in vogue, when they conquered the Mings, full and complete liberty in all things that pertained to religion. That this policy depended more upon the force of circumstances than their liberality and the exalted opinions they held regarding the Mings, can not be questioned; for the Manchus, being a rough, uncultured race, with no definite belief, they accepted the existing religious systems of China. Their Emperor was made Chief Priest of Confucianism, which was the State religion of the conquered provinces, and the Buddhists, Taoists, Mohammedans, and Jesuits were all recognized and tolerated. In the first instance this tolerance doubtless was due to the indifference towards all systems of faith. They found the Chinese a quiet, industrious people, and as long as they were loyal and obedient they were permitted

[p. 108]

to believe what they pleased and worship whom they chose; but whenever the Imperial Government discovered combinations in any religious system that might threaten the peace and welfare of the throne, then the Emperor meted out the cruelest vengeance upon the supposed transgressors.

This religious indifference upon the part of the Government has not existed without showing signs of weakness and . Notice, for example, the policy pursued by the most enlightened and energetic Emperor of the present dynasty, Kang Hsi. As Emperor he was the nation's High Priest, and worshiped Shangti--the High Ruler, at the Altar of Heaven. And in his sacred edicts he pronounced the Buddhists and Taoists as dangerous heretics, while at the same time he had Buddhist and Taoist temples renovated and repaired at his own cost, and worshiped in them. Such examples of duplicity upon the part of Emperors have not been without effect upon the nation. The inevitable result of trying to adhere to three opposing systems of religion is seen in the gradual decay of all religious life among the higher classes. The constant interchanging has produced spiritual stagnation in high places. To-day the great mass of the people choose at will of these systems, and when they have made their choice they little think of the admixture of their temporary elective system. Ask an ordinary Chinese to which of the three religions he adheres, and he will be unable to give an intelligent answer. If he has had some education and considers himself a scholar, then he will at once reply that he is a Confucianist; but it is quite possible that the next day you will find this gentleman burning incense in a Buddhist or Taoist temple, or you may find a priest at his home reading mass for some departed member of the family. Even among the officials, who are all supposed to be strictly Confucianists, there are many who in their official costume enter the temples and worship the idols.

With such lack of conviction, is it strange that Confucianism

[p. 109]

Click to enlarge
THE FOUNDERS OF THREE RELIGIONS.
 LAOTSZ,    CONFUCIUS,    BUDDHA,
 ONCE ANTAGONISTIC, NOW SILENT PARTNERS.

[p. 110]

and its opposing systems, Buddhism and Taoism, have long since passed their zenith and are rapidly approaching their dissolution? The unpalatable principles of the "Great Wise Man of China," however beautiful and good, and however much good they may have been to the generations of past ages, they can not change the heart of their people nor satisfy their present aspirations. Confucianism has been tested for twenty-five centuries, during which time it has added nothing to the spiritual life of the Chinese people; while its opponent systems, which had some semblance of spiritual life in their beginning, have always been a thorn in the flesh to the highly cultured Mandarin, and often a ridicule to the people. But even in the face of all this decay and the obvious advancement of Western ideas, there are no signs of uneasiness noticeable upon the part of these religions about the wonderful progress of Christianity. And we believe it quite safe to say that no serious obstacle will be placed in its way as long as its propagation gives no cause of suspicion through political interference. No thought is of greater importance to-day in the propagation of the Christian religion than the maintenance of the integrity of the Imperial Kingdom, and carefully avoiding all interference with political questions. The stigma that once rested upon the missionaries has been removed. The Protestant missionaries are no longer looked upon as emissaries of their governments. The officials have come to see that the dominant desire of the missionary is to see the cause of Christ advanced and order and loyalty promoted.

It is indeed pathetic to see such a great mass of human beings so wholly absorbed in things temporal and yet unable to rise from the crushing burden of poverty and misery. If hard labor and diligence could have brought relief they long since would have risen to wealth and happiness. But vastly more pathetic is it to see them in their efforts to satisfy the soul's longing, and in their penury spend millions of dollars

[p. 111]

in making pilgrimages to far distant shrines, bringing sacrifices to the dumb idols, involving self-sacrifice of which in Christian lands we have no conception. It must be terrible to be so poor that life no longer is life, but only an existence; but infinitely more terrible to be fettered down by superstition to gods that need to be appeased by such sacrifices, and yet bring no blessing. It is hard to be a heathen! Surely, if God could be found by mere searching for blessings and bringing sacrifice, these people would long since have found Him and rejoice in Him. But their systems to which they trusted, and now hoary with age, have not lifted them upward nor led them to the truth, but estranged them farther and farther away from the truth, and led deeper and deeper into superstition and misery. The only joy these visits brought to me was the convictions of thereby becoming better prepared to guide some of these wandering millions to find the way to Him who is the Light of the world and rejoice in the living God.

 

 

 

 

    
